 A T roubling of the W aters
 
  SOMETIMES THEY’RE REALL Y DEAD
 W ilmington, colony of North Carolina
 July 1776
 
T HE PIR A TE’S H EAD had disappeared. W illiam heard
the speculations  from a group of idlers on the quay nearby ,
wondering whether it would be seen again.
“Na, him be go ne for good,” s aid a ragged man of mixed
blood, s haking his head. “De ally-gator don’ take him, de
water will.”
A backwoodsman shifted his tobacco and spat into the water
in disagreement.
“No, he’ s good for another day—two, maybe. Them gristly
bits what holds the head on, they dry out in the sun. T ighten up
like iron. Seen it many a time with deer carcasses.”
W illiam saw Mrs. MacKenzie glance quickly at the harbor ,
then away . She looked pale, he thought, and maneuvered
himself slightly  so as to block her view of the men and the
brown flood of high tide, though since it was  high , th e corpse
tied to its stake was naturally not visible. The stake was,
though—a stark reminder of the price of crime. The pirate had
been staked to d rown on the mudflats several days before, the
persistence of his decaying corp se an ongoing topic of public
conversation.
“Jem!” Mr . MacKenzie called sharply , and lunged past
W illiam in pursuit of his son. Th e little boy , red-haired like his
mother , had wandered away to  listen to the men’ s talk, and
was now leaning perilously out  over the water , clinging to a
bollard in an attempt to see the dead pirate.
Mr . Mac Kenzie snatched the boy by the collar , pulled him
in, and swept h im up in his arms, though the boy struggled,
craning back toward the swampish harbor .
“I want to see the wallygator eat the pirate, Daddy!”The idlers laughed, and even MacKenzie smiled a little,
though the smile disappeared when he glanced at his wife. He
was at her side in an instant, one hand beneath her elbow .
“I think  we must be going,” MacKenzie said, shifting his
son’ s weight in order better to support his wife, whose distress
was ap parent. “Lieutenant R ansom—Lord Ellesmere, I
mean”—he corr ected with an apologetic smile at W illiam
—”will have other engagements, I’m sure.”
This was true; W illiam was engaged to meet his father for
supper . Still, his father had arranged to meet him at the tavern
just acro ss the quay; there was no risk of missing him. W illiam
said as much, and ur ged them to  stay , for he was enjoying their
company—Mrs. MacKenzie’ s, particularly—but she smiled
regretfully , though her color was better , and patted the capped
head of the baby in her arms.
“No, we  do have to be going.” She glanced at her son, still
struggling to get down, and W illiam saw her eyes flicker
toward the harbor and the stark pole that stood above the
flood. She resolutely looked away , fixing her eyes upon
W illiam’ s face instead. “The baby’ s waking up; she’ll be
wanting food. It was so lovely t o meet you, though. I wish we
might ta lk long er .” She said th is with the greatest sincerity ,
and touched his arm lightly , giving him a pleasant sensation in
the pit of the stomach.
The idlers were now placing wagers on the reappearance of
the drowned pirate, though by the looks of things, none of
them had two groats to rub together .
“T wo to one he’ s still there when the tide goes out.”
“Five to one th e body’ s still th ere, but the head’ s gone. I
don’ t care what you say about t he gristly bits, Lem, that there
head wa s just a-hangin’ by a thread when this last tide come
in. Next un’ll take it, sure.”
Hoping to drown this conversation out, W illiam embarked
on an elaborate farewell, go ing so far as to kiss Mrs.
MacKenzie’ s hand with his best court manner—and, seized byinspiration, kiss ed the baby girl’ s hand, too, making them all
laugh. M r . MacKenzie gave him rather an odd look, but didn’ t
seem of fended,  and shook his hand in a most republican
manner—playing out the joke by setting down his son and
making the little boy shake hands as well.
“Have you kilt anybody?” the boy inquired with interest,
looking at W illiam’ s dress sword.
“No, not yet,” W illiam replied, smiling.
“My grandsire’ s kilt two dozen men!”
“Jemmy!” Both  parents spoke at once, and the little boy’ s
shoulders went up around his ears.
“W ell, he has! ”
“I’m su re he is a bold and blo ody man, your grandsire,”
W illiam assured the little boy gravely . “The King always has
need of such men.”
“My gra ndda says the King c an kiss his arse,” the boy
replied matter -of-factly .
“JEMMY!”
Mr . Ma cKenzie clapped a hand over his outspoken
of fspring’ s mouth.
“Y ou know  you r grandda didn’ t say that!” Mrs. MacKenzie
said. Th e little boy nodded agreeably , and his father removed
the muf fling hand.
“No. Grannie did, though.”
“W ell, that’ s somewhat more likely ,” Mr . MacKenzie
murmured, obvi ously trying not to laugh. “But we still don’ t
say things like that to soldiers—they work for the King.”
“Oh,” sa id Jemmy , clearly losing interest. “Is the tide going
out now?” he asked hopefully , craning his neck toward the
harbor once more.
“No,” Mr . MacKenzie said firmly . “Not for hours. Y ou’ll be
in bed.”Mrs. MacKenzie smiled at W illiam in apology , her cheeks
charmingly flushed with embar rassment, and the family took
its leave with some haste, leaving W illiam struggling between
laughter and dismay .
“Oy , Ransom!”
He turned at hi s name, to find Harry Dobson and Colin
Osborn, two second lieutenants from his regiment, evidently
escaped from duty and eager to sample the fleshpots of
W ilmington—such as they were.
“Who’ s that?” Dobson looked after the departing group,
interested.
“A Mr . and Mrs. MacKenzie. Friends of my father ’ s.”
“Oh, ma rried, is  she?” Dobson sucked in his cheeks, still
watching the woman. “W ell, m ake it a bit harder , I suppose,
but what’ s life without a challenge?”
“Challenge?” W illiam gave his diminutive friend a
jaundiced look. “Her husband’ s roughly three times your size,
if you hadn’ t noticed.”
Osborn laughed, going red in the face.
“She’ s twice  his size! She’d crush you, Dobby .”
“And what makes you think I mean to be on the bottom?”
Dobson inquired with dignity . Osborn hooted.
“What’ s this obsession of yours with giantesses?” W illiam
demanded. He glanced at the li ttle family , now nearly out of
sight at the end of the street. “T hat woman’ s nearly as tall as I
am!”
“Oh, rub  it in, w hy don’ t you?” Osborn, who was taller than
Dobson’ s five feet, but still a head shorter than W illiam, aimed
a mock kick at his knee. W illiam dodged it and cuf fed Osborn,
who ducked and shoved him into Dobson.
“Gennelmen!” T he menacing cockney tones of Ser geant
Cutter brought them up sharp. They might outrank the
ser geant, but not one of them would have the nerve to pointthis out.  The entire battalion w ent in fear of Ser geant Cutter ,
who was older than God and approximately Dobson’ s height,
but who contained within his diminutive physique the sheer
fury of a full-sized volcano on the boil.
“Ser geant!” Lieu tenant W illiam  Ransom, Earl of Ellesmere
and senior of the group, drew himself up straight, chin pressed
back into his stock. Osborn and  Dobson hastily followed his
lead, quaking in their boots.
Cutter strode back and forth in f ront of them, in the manner
of a  stalking leopard. Y ou coul d just see the lashing tail and
the preliminary licking of chops, W illiam thought. W aiting for
the bite was almost worse than getting it in the arse.
“And where’ s your troops, then?” Cutter snarled. “Sirs?”
Osborn and Dobson at once began sputtering explanations,
but Lieutenant Ransom—for once—walked on the side of the
angels.
“My men are guarding the Governor ’ s Palace, under
Lieutenant Colso n. I’m given le ave, Ser geant, to dine with my
father ,” he said respectfully . “By Sir Peter .”
Sir Pete r Packer ’ s was a name to conjure with, and Cutter
abated in mid-spew . Rather to W illiam’ s surprise, though, it
wasn’ t Sir Peter ’ s name that had produced this reaction.
“Y our father?” Cutter said, squinting. “That’ s Lord John
Grey , is it?”
“Er … yes,” W i lliam replied cautiously . “Do you … know
him?”
Before Cutter could reply , the door of a nearby tavern
opened, and W illiam’ s father came out. W illiam smiled in
delight a t this timely appearance, but quickly erased the smile
as the ser geant’ s gimlet gaze fixed on him.
“Don’ t you be a-grinnin’ at me  like an ‘airy ape,” the
ser geant began, in dangerous tones, but was interrupted by
Lord John’ s clapping him familiarly on the shoulder—something none of the three young lieutenants would have
done if of fered significant money .
“Cutter!” Lord John said, smiling warmly . “I heard those
dulcet tones and said to myse lf, why damn me if it isn’ t
Ser geant Aloysius Cutter! There can’ t be another man alive
who sou nds so much like a bull dog that’ s swallowed a cat and
lived to tell about it.”
“Aloysius?”  Dobson mouthed at W illiam, but W illiam
merely grunted briefly in response, unable to shrug, as his
father had now turned his attention in his direction.
“W illiam,” he said, with a cordial nod. “How very punctual
you are. My ap ologies for being so late; I was detained.”
Before W illiam could say anything or introduce the others,
though, Lord John had embarked upon a lengthy reminiscence
with Ser geant Cutter , reliving h igh old times on the Plains of
Abraham with General W olfe.
This allowed the three young of ficers to relax slightly ,
which, in Dobson’ s case, meant a return to his earlier train of
thought.
“Y ou said that red-haired poppet’ s a friend of your
father ’ s?” he whispered to W illiam. “Find out from him where
she’ s staying, eh?”
“Idiot,” hissed Osborn. “She isn’ t even pretty! She’ s long-
nosed as—as—as W illie!”
“Didn’ t see as high as her face,” Dobson said, smirking.
“Her tits were right at eye-level, though, and those … ”
“Ass!”
“Shh!” Osborn stamped on Dob son’ s foot to shut him up as
Lord John turned back to the young men.
“W ill you introduce me to your friends, W illiam?” Lord
John inquired politely . Rather red in the face—he had reason
to know that his father had acute hearing, despite his artillery
experiences—W illiam did so, and Osborn and Dobson both
bowed, looking rather awed. They hadn’ t realized who hisfather was, and W illiam was at once proud that they were
impressed, and mildly dismayed that they’d discovered Lord
John’ s identity—it would be all over the battalion before
supper t omorrow . Not that Sir Peter didn’ t know , of course,
but—
He gath ered his wits, realizing that his father was taking
leave for them both, and returned Ser geant Cutter ’ s salute,
hastily but in good form, bef ore hurrying after his father ,
leaving Dobby and Osborn to their fate.
“I saw you speaking to Mr . an d Mrs. MacKenzie,” Lord
John sai d casually . “I trust they  are well?” He glanced down
the q uay , but the  MacKenzies had long since disappeared from
view .
“Seemed so,” W illie said. He was not  going to ask where
they stayed, but the impression t he young woman had made on
him ling ered. He  couldn’ t say if she was pretty or not; her eyes
had struck him, though—a wonderful deep blue with long
auburn l ashes, and fixed on him  with a flattering intensity that
had warmed the cockles of h is heart. Grotesquely tall, of
course, but—what was he thinking? The woman was married
—with children! And red-haired, to boot.
“Y ou’ve—er—known them long?” he asked, thinking of the
startlingly perverse political sentiments that evidently
flourished in the family .
“Quite some time. She is the da ughter of one of my oldest
friends, Mr . James Fraser . Do you recall him, by chance?”
W illiam frowned, not placing the name—his father had
thousands of friends, how should he …
“Oh!” he said. “ Not an English friend, you don’ t mean. W as
it no t a Mr . Fras er that we visit ed in the mountains, that time
when you fell si ck of the—of th e measle?” The bottom of his
stomach droppe d a little, remem bering the sheer terror of that
time. He had traveled through the mountains in a daze of
misery; his mother had died only a month before. Then Lord
John had caught the measle, an d W illiam had been sure thathis fathe r was about to die like wise, leaving him completely
alone in  the wilderness. There hadn’ t been room for anything
in his mind but fear and grief, and he retained only a jumble of
confused impressions from the visit. He had some dim
recollection that Mr . Fraser had taken him fishing and been
kind to him.
“Y es,” his father said, with a sidelong smile. “I’m touched,
W illie. I should have thought you might recall that visit more
because of your own misadventure than mine.”
“Mis—” Memor y rushed over him, succeeded by a flood of
heat, ho tter than  the humid sum mer air . “Thanks very much!
I’d managed to expunge that from my memory , until you
mentioned it!”
His father was l aughing, and making no attempt to hide it.
In fact, he was convulsed.
“I’m sorry , W illie,” he said, ga sping and wiping his eyes
with a corner of his handkerchief. “I can’ t help it; it was the
most—the most—oh, God, I’ll never for get what you looked
like when we pulled you out of that privy!”
“Y ou know  it was an accident,” W illiam said stif fly . His
cheeks burned with remembered mortification. At least
Fraser ’ s daughter hadn’ t been present to witness his
humiliation at the time.
“Y es, of course. But—” His father pressed the handkerchief
to his mouth, his shoulders shaking silently .
“Feel fr ee to stop cackling at any point,” W illiam said
coldly . “Where the devil are we going, anyway?” They’d
reached the end of the quay , and  his father was leading them—
still snorting like a grampus—into one of the quiet, tree-lined
streets, away from the taverns and inns near the harbor .
“W e’re dining with a Captain Richardson,” his father said,
controlling himself with an obvious ef fort. He coughed, blew
his nose , and put away the handkerchief. “At the house of a
Mr . Bell.”Mr . Bel l’ s house was whitewashed, neat, and prosperous,
without being ostentatious. Capt ain Richardson gave much the
same sort of impression: of middle age, well-groomed and
well-tailored, bu t without any notable style, and with a face
you couldn’ t pick out of a crowd two minutes after seeing it.
The two Misses Bell made a much stronger impression,
particularly the younger , Miriam, who had honey-colored curls
peeping out of her cap, and big, round eyes that remained
fixed on W illiam throughout dinner . She was seated too far
away fo r him to be able to converse with her directly , but he
fancied that the language of the eyes was suf ficient to indicate
to h er that the fascination was mutual, and if an opportunity
for m ore personal communicat ion should of fer later … ? A
smile, and a demure lowering of honey-colored lashes,
followed by a q uick glance toward a door that stood open to
the side porch, for air . He smiled back.
“Do you think so, W illiam?” hi s father said, loudly enough
to indicate that it was the second time of asking.
“Oh, cer tainly . Um … think wh at?” he asked, since it was
after all Papa, and not his commander . His father gave him the
look tha t meant he would have rolled his eyes had they not
been in public, but replied patiently .
“Mr . Be ll was asking whether Sir Peter intends to remain
long in W ilming ton.” Mr . Bell, a t the head of the table, bowed
graciously—though W illiam observed a certain narrowing of
his eyes  in Miriam’ s direction. P erhaps he’d best come back to
call tomorrow , he thought, when  Mr . Bell might be at his place
of business.
“Oh. I believe w e’ll remain here for only a short time, sir ,”
he sa id respectfully to Mr . Bell. “I collect that the chief trouble
is in the backc ountry , and so we will no doubt move to
suppress it without delay .”
Mr . Bell looked pleased, though  from the corner of his eye,
W illiam saw Miriam pout prettily at the suggestion of his
imminent departure.“Good, good,” Bell said jovially . “No doubt hundreds of
Loyalists will flock to join you along your march.”
“Doubtless so, sir ,” W illiam murmured, taking another
spoonful of soup. He doubted t hat Mr . Bell would be among
them. Not really the marching type, to look at. And not that the
assistance of a l ot of untrained p rovincials armed with shovels
would be helpful in any case, but he could hardly say so.
W illiam, trying to see Miriam without looking directly at
her , instead intercepted the flicker of a glance that traveled
between his father and Captain Richardson, and for the first
time, began to w onder . His father had distinctly said they were
dining with Captain Richardson—meaning that a meeting with
the captain was the point of the evening. Why?
Then he  caught a look from Miss Lillian Bell, who was
seated across from him, next his father , and ceased thinking
about Captain Richardson. Dark-eyed, taller and more slender
than her sister—but really quite a handsome girl, now he
noticed.
Still, when Mrs. Bell and her d aughters rose and the men
retired to the porch after dinner , W illiam was not surprised to
find him self at one end with C aptain Richardson, while his
father en gaged Mr . Bell at the other in a spirited discussion of
tar prices. Papa could talk to anyone about anything.
“I have a proposition to put before you, Lieutenant,”
Richardson sai d, after the usual cordialities had been
exchanged.
“Y es, sir ,” W illiam said respectfully . His curiosity had
begun to rise. Richardson was a captain of light dragoons, but
not pres ently with his regiment; that much he had revealed
over dinner , saying casually that he was on detached duty .
Detached to do what?
“I d o not kno w how much your father has told you
regarding my mission?”
“Nothing, sir .”“Ah. I am char g ed with the gat hering of intelligence in the
Southern Department. Not tha t I am in command of such
operations, you understand”—the captain smiled modestly
—”but a small part of them.”
“I …  appreciate the great value of such operations, sir ,”
W illiam said, groping for diplomacy , “but I—for myself, that
is to say—”
“Y ou have no interest in spying . No, of course not.” It was
dark on the por ch, but the dryn ess of the captain’ s tone was
evident. “Few men who regard themselves as soldiers do.”
“I meant no of fense, sir .”
“None t aken. I am not, howeve r , recruiting you as a spy—
that is a delicate  occupation, and one involving some danger—
but rather as a messenger . Though should you find opportunity
to act the intelli gencer along your way … well, that would be
an additional contribution, and much appreciated.”
W illiam felt the blood rise in his  face at the implication that
he w as capable neither of deli cacy nor danger , but kept his
temper , saying only , “Oh?”
The cap tain, it seemed, had gath ered significant information
regarding local conditions in the Carolinas, and now required
to send this to the commander of the Northern Department—
General Howe, presently in Halifax.
“I w ill of course be sending more than one messenger ,”
Richardson said. “It is naturally somewhat quicker by ship—
but I desire to have at least one messenger travel overland,
both for safety’ s sake and for th e sake of making observations
en r oute . Y our father speaks very highly of your abilities,
Lieutenant”—did he detect a hint of amusement in that dry-as-
sawdust voice?—”and I coll ect that you have traveled
extensively in North Carolina a nd V ir ginia. That is a valuable
attribute. Y ou will appreciate that I do not wish my messenger
to disappear into the Dismal Swamp, never to be seen again.”
“Ha-ha,” said W illiam, politely , perceiving this to be meant
as a jest. Clearly , Captain Richardson had never been near theGreat D ismal; W illiam had, though he didn’ t think anyone in
his right mind would go that way a-purpose, save to hunt.
He als o had severe doubts regarding Richardson’ s
suggestion—though even as he told himself that he shouldn’ t
consider leaving  his men, his regiment … he was already
seeing a romantic vision of himself, alone in the vast
wilderness, bearing important news through storm and danger .
More of  a consideration, though, was what he might expect
at the other end of the journey .
Richardson anticipated his question, answering before he
could speak.
“Once in the north, you would—it being agreeable—join
General Howe’ s staf f.”
W ell, no w , he thought. Here was the apple, and a juicy red
one, too. He was aware that Richardson meant “it being
agreeable” to General Howe, rather than to W illiam—but he
had some confidence in his own capabilities, and rather
thought he might prove himself useful.
He h ad b een in North Carolina only a few days, but that was
quite lo ng enough for him to have made an accurate
assessment of the relative chances for advancement between
the No rthern D epartment and the Southern. The entire
Continental army was with W ashington in the north; the
southern rebellion appeared to consist of troublesome pockets
of backwoodsmen and impromptu militia—hardly a threat.
And as for the re lative status of Sir Peter and General Howe as
commanders …
“I w ould like to think on your o f fer , if I might, Captain,” he
said, hoping eagerness didn’ t sh ow in his voice. “May I give
my answer tomorrow?”
“Certainly . I imagine you will wish to discuss the prospects
with your father—you may do so.”
The cap tain then deliberately changed the subject, and
within a few moments, Lord John and Mr . Bell had joined
them, the conversation becoming general.W illiam paid little heed to what was said, his own attention
distracted by the sight of two slender white figures that
hovered ghostlike among the bushes at the outer edge of the
yard. T wo capped white heads drew together , then apart. Now
and then, one tu rned briefly toward the porch in what looked
like speculation.
” ‘And for his vesture, they cast lots,’ ” his father
murmured, shaking his head.
“Eh?”
“Never mind.” His father smiled, and turned toward Captain
Richardson, who had just said something about the weather .
Fireflies lit the yard, drifting like green sparks among the
damp, lush growth of plants. It was good to see fireflies again;
he h ad missed them, in England —and that peculiar softness of
the s outhern air that molded his linen to his body and made the
blood throb in his fingertips. Cri ckets were chirping all around
them, a nd for an instant, their  song seemed to drown out
everything save the sound of his pulse.
“Cof fee’ s ready , gen’mun.” The soft voice of the Bells’
slave cu t through the small ferm ent of his blood, though, and
he went in with the other men, with no more than a glance
toward the yard. The white figures had disappeared, but a
sense of promise lingered in the soft, warm air .
An hour later , he found himse lf walking back toward his
billet, th oughts in a pleasant muddle, his father strolling silent
by his side.
Miss Lil lian Bell had granted hi m a kiss among the fireflies
at the end of the evening, chas te and fleeting, but upon the
lips, and  the thick summer air seemed to taste of cof fee and
ripe strawberries, despite the pervasive dank smell of the
harbor .
“Captain Richar dson told me of the proposal he made to
you,” Lord John said casually . “Are you inclined?”
“Don’ t know ,” W illiam replied, with equal casualness. “I
should m iss my men, of course, but …” Mrs. Bell had pressedhim to come to tea, later in the week.
“Little permanen ce in a military life,” his father said, with a
brief shake of the head. “I did warn you.”
W illiam gave a brief grunt of assent, not really listening.
“A good opportunity for advancement,” his father was
saying, adding of fhandedly , “though of course there is some
danger to the proposition.”
“What?” W illiam scof fed, hearing this. “Riding from
W ilmington to take ship at New  Y ork? There’ s a road, nearly
all the way!”
“And quite a n umber of Continentals on it,” Lord John
pointed out. “General W ashington’ s entire army lies this side
of Philadelphia, if the news I hear be correct.”
W illiam shrugged.
“Richardson said he wanted me because I knew the country .
I can make my way well enough without roads.”
“Are you sure? Y ou have not been in V ir ginia for nearly
four years.”
The dubious tone of this annoyed W illiam.
“Do you think me incapable of finding my way?”
“No, no t at all,” his father said, still with that note of doubt
in his voice. “But there is no little risk  to this proposition; I
should not like to see you undertake it without due thought.”
“W ell, I have  thought,” said W illiam, stung. “I’ll do it.”
Lord John walked in silence fo r a few steps, then nodded,
reluctantly .
“It’ s yo ur decision, W illie,” he said softly . “I should be
personally obliged if you would take care, though.”
W illiam’ s annoyance melted at once.
“Course I will,” he said gruf fly . They walked on beneath the
dark can opy of maple and hickory , not talking, close enough
that their shoulders brushed now and then.At t he inn, W ill iam bade Lord John good night, but didn’ t
return at  once to his own lodgings. Instead, he wandered out
along the quay , restless, unready for sleep.
The tide  had turned and was we ll out, he saw; the smell of
dead fish and decaying seaweed was stronger , though a
smooth sheet of water still cove red the mudflats, quiet in the
light of a quarter -moon.
It to ok a moment to locate the stake. For an instant, he
thought it had gone, but no— there it was, a thin dark line
against the glimmer of the water . Empty .
The stak e no longer stood upright, but leaned sharply , as
though a bout to  fall, and a thin loop of rope trailed from it,
floating like a hangman’ s noose on the waning tide. W illiam
was conscious of some visceral uneasiness; the tide alone
would not have taken the whol e body . Some said there were
crocodiles or alligators here, th ough he had not yet seen one
himself. He glanced down involuntarily , as though one of
these reptiles might suddenly lu nge from the water at his feet.
The air was still warm, but a small shiver went through him.
He shoo k this of f, and turned away toward his lodgings.
There w ould be  a day or two b efore he must go, he thought,
and wondered whether he might see the blue-eyed Mrs.
MacKenzie again before he left.
 
LORD J OHN LINGERED for a moment on the porch of
the inn, watchin g his son vanis h into the shadows under the
trees. He had so me qualms; the matter had been arranged with
more haste than he would have liked—but he did have
confidence in W illiam’ s abilitie s. And while the arrangement
clearly h ad its risks, that was the nature of a soldier ’ s life.
Some situations were riskier than others, though.
He hesitated, hearing the buzz of talk from the taproom
inside, b ut he had had enough of company for the night, and
the t hought of t ossing to and fr o under the low ceiling of hisroom, stifling in the day’ s trapped heat, determined him to
walk about until bodily exhaustion should ensure sleep.
It wasn’ t just the heat, he reflected, stepping of f the porch
and setting of f i n the opposite d irection to the one W illie had
taken. He knew himself well enough to realize that even the
apparent succes s of his plan would not prevent his lying
awake, worrying at it like a dog with a bone, testing for
weaknesses, seeking for ways of improvement. After all,
W illiam would not depart imme diately; there was a little time
to consider , to make alterations, should that be necessary .
General Howe, for instance. Ha d that been the best choice?
Perhaps Clinton … but no. He nry Clinton was a fussy old
woman, unwilling to stir a foot without orders in triplicate.
The Howe brothers—one a gen eral, one an admiral—were
famously uncouth, both having the manners, aspect, and
general aroma of boars in rut.  Neither of them was stupid,
though—God k new they weren’ t timid—and Grey thought
W illie fully capable of surviving rough manners and harsh
words. And a commander given to spitting on the floor—
Richard Howe had once spat on  Grey himself, though this was
lar gely accidental, the wind having changed unexpectedly—
was possibly easier for a young subaltern to deal with than the
quirks of some other military gentlemen of Grey’ s
acquaintance.
Though even the most peculiar of the brotherhood of the
blade wa s preferable to the diplomats. He wondered idly what
the t erm of venery might be for a collection of diplomats. If
writers formed the brotherhood of the quill, and a group of
foxes be  termed a skulk … a stab of diplomats, perhaps?
Brothers of the stiletto? No, he  decided. Much too direct. An
opiate of diplomats, more like. Brotherhood of the boring.
Though the ones who were not boring could be dangerous, on
occasion.
Sir Geor ge Germain was one of  the rarer sorts: boring and
dangerous.He walked up and down the streets of the town for some
time, in hopes of exhausting himself before going back to his
small, s tuf fy room. The sky w as low and sullen, with heat
lightning flickering among the clouds, and the atmosphere was
damp as  a bath sponge. He should have been in Albany by
now—no less humid and bug-ridden, but somewhat cooler ,
and near the sweet dark forests of the Adirondacks.
Still, he didn’ t regret his hasty journey to W ilmington.
W illie was sorted; that was the important thing. And W illie’ s
sister , Brianna—he stopped dead for a moment, eyes closed,
reliving the moment of transcendence and heartbreak he had
experienced that afternoon, seeing the two of them together for
what would be their only meet ing, ever . He’d scarcely been
able to breathe,  his eyes fixed on the two tall figures, those
handsome, bold faces, so alike—and both so like the man who
had stoo d beside him, unmoving, but by contrast with Grey ,
taking i n great tearing gulps of air , as though he feared he
might never breathe again.
Grey rubbed idly at his left ring finger , not yet accustomed
to fi nding it bar e. He and Jamie  Fraser had done the best they
could to safeguard those they loved, and despite his
melancholy , he was comforted at the thought that they were
united in that kinship of responsibility .
W ould he ever meet Brianna Fraser MacKenzie again? he
wondered. She had said not—and seemed as saddened by that
fact as he was.
“God bless you, child,” he mur mured, shaking his head as
he turned back toward the harbor . He would miss her very
much—but as with W illie, his relief that she would soon be
out of W ilmington and out of danger overwhelmed his
personal sense of loss.
He g lanced involuntarily at the  water as he came out onto
the quay , and drew a deep sigh of relief at seeing the empty
stake, aslant in the tide. He hadn’ t understood her reasons for
doing w hat she’d done, but he’d known her father—and her
brother , for that matter—far too long to mistake the stubbornconviction he’d seen in those catlike blue eyes. So he’d got her
the small boat she’d asked for , and stood on the quay with his
heart in his throat, ready to create a distraction if needed, as
her husband had rowed her out toward the bound pirate.
He’d seen men die in great numbers, usually unwillingly ,
occasionally with resignation. He’d never seen one go with
such passionate gratitude in his eyes. Grey had no more than a
passing acquain tance with Roger MacKenzie, but suspected
him to be a remarkable man , having not only survived
marriage to that fabulous and dangerous creature but actually
having sired children upon her .
He s hook his he ad and turned, heading back toward the inn.
He could safely wait another t wo weeks, he thought, before
replying to Germain’ s letter—which he had deftly magicked
out of the diplomatic pouch wh en he’d seen W illiam’ s name
upon it— at which time he cou ld truthfully say that, alas, by
the time the letter had been received, Lord Ellesmere was
somewhere in the wilderness between North Carolina and
New Y ork, and thus could not be informed that he was recalled
to England, though he (Grey) was positive that Ellesmere
would g reatly regret the loss o f his opportunity to join Sir
Geor ge’ s staf f, when he learned of it—several months hence.
T oo bad.
He b egan to whi stle “Lillibulero,” and strode back to the inn
in good spirits.
He p aused in the  taproom, and a sked for a bottle of wine to
be sent up—on ly to be inform ed by the barmaid that “the
gentleman” had already taken a bottle upstairs with him.
“And two glasses,” she added, dimpling at him. “So I don’ t
s’pose he meant to drink it all himself.”
Grey felt something like a centipede skitter up his spine.
“I beg your pardon,” he said. “Did you say that there is a
gentleman in my room?”
“Y es, sir ,” she assured him. “He said as he’ s an old friend of
yours…. Now , he did tell me his  name …” Her brow furrowedfor a n instant, th en cleared. “Bow-shaw , he said, or summat of
the kind. Frenchy kind of name,” she clarified. “And a
Frenchy kind of gentleman, too . W ill you be wanting food at
all, sir?”
“No, I thank you.” He waved her of f, and went up the stairs,
thinking rapidly  whether he had left anything in his room that
he shouldn’ t have.
A Frenchman, named Bow-shaw … Beauchamp . The name
flashed in his mind like the flicker of heat lightning. He
stopped dead for an instant in th e middle of the staircase, then
resumed his climb, more slowly .
Surely n ot … but who else migh t it be? When he had ceased
active se rvice, some years before, he had begun diplomatic life
as a member of England’ s Black Chamber , that shadowy
or ganization of persons char ge d with the interception and
decoding of of ficial diplomatic  mail—and much less of ficial
messages—that flowed between the governments of Europe.
Every one of those governments possessed its own Black
Chamber , and it was not unusu al for the inhabitants of one
such chamber to be aware of their opposite numbers—never
met, but known by their signatures, their initials, their
unsigned mar ginal notes.
Beauchamp had been one of the most active French agents;
Grey ha d run across his trail several times in the intervening
years, even though his own day s in the Black Chamber were
well behind him. If he knew Beauchamp by name, it was
entirely reasona ble that the man knew him as well—but their
invisible associa tion had been y ears ago. They had never met
in person, and fo r such a meeting to occur her e …  He touched
the s ecret pocket in his coat, and was reassured by the muf fled
crackle of paper .
He h esitated at the top of the stair , but there was no point in
furtiveness; clea rly , he was expected. W ith a firm step, he
walked down the hall and turned the white china knob of his
door , the porcelain smooth and cool beneath his fingers.A wave of heat engulfed him and he gasped for air ,
involuntarily . Just as well, as it prevented his uttering the
blasphemy that had sprung to his lips.
The gentleman occupying the room’ s only chair was indeed
“Frenchy”—his very well-cut suit set of f by cascades of
snowy l ace at throat and cuf f, h is shoes buckled with a silver
that matched the hair at his temples.
“Mr . Beauchamp,” Grey said, and slowly closed the door
behind him. His damp linen clung to him, and he could feel his
pulse thumping in his own temples. “I fear you take me at
something of a disadvantage.”
Perseverance W ainwright smiled, very slightly .
“I’m glad to see you, John,” he said.
 
GREY BIT HIS T ONGUE  to forestall anything
injudicious—which description covered just about anything he
might say , he thought, with the exception of “Good evening.”
“Good evening,”  he said. He lifted an eyebrow in question.
“Monsieur  Beauchamp?”
“Oh, yes .” Percy got his feet under him, making to rise, but
Grey waved him back and turn ed to fetch a stool, hoping the
seconds gained by the movement would allow him to regain
his composure. Finding that they didn’ t, he took another
moment to open the window , and stood for a couple of
lungfuls of the thick, dank air , before turning back and taking
his own seat.
“How d id that happen?” he asked, af fecting casualness.
“Beauchamp, I mean. Or is it merely a nom de guerr e ?”
“Oh, no.” Percy took up his lace-trimmed handkerchief and
dabbed sweat delicately from  his hairline—which was
beginning to recede, Grey noted. “I married one of the sisters
of the Baron Amandine. The f amily name is Beauchamp; I
adopted it. The relationship provided a certain entr ee  topolitical circles, from which …” He shrugged charmingly and
made a gracefu l gesture that encompassed his career in the
Black C hamber—and doubtless elsewhere, Grey thought
grimly .
“My congratulations on your marriage,” Grey said, not
bothering to keep the irony out  of his voice. “Which one are
you sleeping with, the baron or his sister?”
Percy looked amused.
“Both, on occasion.”
“T ogether?”
The smi le widened. His teeth were still good, Grey saw ,
though somewhat stained by wine.
“Occasionally . T hough Cecile—my wife—really prefers the
attentions of her cousin Lucianne, and I myself prefer the
attentions of the sub-gardener . Lovely man named Emile; he
reminds me of you … in your y ounger years. Slender , blond,
muscular , and brutal.”
T o his dismay , Grey found that he wanted to laugh.
“It sounds extremely French,” he said dryly , instead. “I’m
sure it suits you. What do you want?”
“More a matter of what you  want, I think.” Percy had not
yet drunk any of the wine; he took up the bottle and poured
carefully , red liquid purling dark against the glasses. “Or
perhaps I should say—what England wants.” He held out a
glass to Grey , smiling. “For o ne can hardly separate your
interests from those of your country , can one? In fact, I confess
that you have always seemed to me to be  England, John.”
Grey wished to forbid him the use of his Christian name,
but to do so would merely emphasize the memory of their
intimacy—which was, of cour se, what Percy intended. He
chose to ignore it, and took a sip of his wine, which was good.
He wondered whether he was paying for it—and if so, how .
“What England wants,” he repeated, skeptical. “And what is
your impression of what England wants?”Percy took a swallow of the wine and held it in his mouth,
evidently savoring it, before finally swallowing.
“Hardly a secret, my dear , is it?”
Grey sighed, and stared pointedly at him.
“Y ou’ve seen this ‘Declaration of Independency’ issued by
the s o-called Continental Congr ess?” Percy asked. He turned
and, rea ching in to a leather bag  he had slung over the back of
the c hair , withdrew a folded she af of papers, which he handed
to Grey .
Grey ha d not in fact seen the do cument in question, though
he’d cer tainly heard about it. It had been printed only two
weeks previous, in Philadelphia, yet copies had spread like
wind-borne weeds through the Colonies. Raising a brow at
Percy , he unfolded the paper and skimmed it rapidly .
“The King is a tyrant?” he said, half-laughing at the
outrageousness of some of the document’ s more extreme
sentiments. He folded the sheets back together and tossed
them on the table.
“And if I am England, I suppose you are the embodiment of
France, for the purposes of this conversation?”
“I represent certain interests there,” Percy replied blandly .
“And in Canada.”
That  ran g small ala rm bells. Grey had fought in Canada
with W olfe, and was well aware  that while the French had lost
much o f their North American holdings in that war , they
remained ferociously entrenched in the northern regions, from
the Ohio V alley to Quebec. C lose enough to cause trouble
now? He thought not—but wouldn’ t put anything past the
French. Or Percy .
“England wants  a quick end to this nonsense, plainly .” A
long, knob-jointed hand wav ed toward the paper . “The
Continental army—so-called—is a flimsy association of men
with no  experience and conflicting notions. What if I were
prepared to provide you with information that might be used to… separate one of W ashington’ s chief of ficers from his
allegiance?”
“What if you w ere?” Grey replied, making no ef fort to
conceal the skepticism in his voice. “How would this benefit
France—or your  own interests, which I take leave to think are
possibly not entirely identical?”
“I see that time has not softe ned your natural cynicism,
John. On e of your less attractive traits—I don’ t know whether
I ever mentioned that to you.”
Grey widened his stare slightly , and Percy sighed.
“Land, t hen,” he  said. “The Nor thwest T erritory . W e want it
back.”
Grey uttered a short laugh.
“I daresay you do.” The territory in question, a lar ge tract
northwest of the Ohio River V a lley , had been ceded to Great
Britain from France at the end of the French and Indian W ar .
Britain had not occupied the territory , though, and had
prevented the colonists’ expansion into it, owing to armed
resistance from the natives and the ongoing negotiation of
treaties with them. The colonists weren’ t pleased about it, he
understood. Gr ey had encountered some of said natives
himself, and was inclined to think the British government’ s
position both reasonable and honorable.
“French traders had extensive ties with the aboriginals in
that area; you have none.”
“The fur -trading merchants being some of the … interests
… you represent?”
Percy smiled openly at that.
“Not the major interests. But some.”
Grey didn’ t bother asking why Percy was approaching him
—an ost ensibly retired diplomat  of no particular influence—in
the matter . Percy knew the power of Grey’ s family and
connections from  the days of their personal association—and
“Monsieur Beauchamp” knew a great deal more about hispresent personal connections from the nexus of information
that fed the Blac k Chambers of Europe. Grey could not act in
the m atter , of co urse. But he wa s well placed to bring the of fer
quietly to the attention of those who could.
He felt as thoug h every hair on  his body was standing on
end like an insect’ s antennae, alert for danger .
“W e would require something more than the suggestion, of
course,” he said, very cool. “The name of the of ficer in
question, for example.”
“Not mi ne to share, at the moment. But once a negotiation
in good faith is opened …”
Grey wa s alread y wondering to whom he should take this
of fer . Not  Sir Geor ge Germain. Lord N orth’ s of fice? That
could wait, though.
“And yo ur personal interests?” he asked, with an edge. He
knew Pe rcy W ai nwright well enough to know that there would
be some aspect of the af fair to Percy’ s personal benefit.
“Ah, that.” Percy sipped at his wine, then lowered the glass
and gazed limpidly at Grey across it. “V ery simple, really . I am
commissioned to find a man. Do you know a Scottish
gentleman named James Fraser?”
Grey fel t the stem of his glass crack. He went on holding it,
though, and sipped the wine carefully , thanking God, firstly ,
that he had never told Percy  Jamie Fraser ’ s name and,
secondly , that Fraser had left W ilmington that afternoon.
“No,” he said c almly . “What do you want with this Mr .
Fraser?”
Percy shrugged, and smiled.
“Only a question or two.”
Grey could feel blood seeping from his lacerated palm.
Holding the cracked glass carefully together , he drank the rest
of his wine. Percy was quiet, drinking with him.“My con dolences upon the loss of your wife,” Percy said
quietly . “I know that she—”
“Y ou kn ow nothing,” Grey said roughly . He leaned over and
set the broken g lass on the tabl e; the bowl rolled crazily , the
lees of wine w ashing the glass. “Not one thing. About my
wife, or  about me.”
Percy lifted his shoulders in the faintest of Gallic shrugs. As
you like , i t said. And y et his eyes—they were still beautiful,
damn him, dark and soft—reste d on Grey with what seemed a
genuine sympathy .
Grey sighed. Doubtless it was  genuine. Percy could not be
trusted—not ever—but what he’d done had been done from
weakness, not from malice, or even lack of feeling.
“What do you want?” he repeated.
“Y our son—” Percy began, and Grey turned suddenly on
him. He  gripped  Percy’ s shoulder , hard enough that the man
gave a little gasp and stif fened. Grey leaned down, looking
into W ainwright’ s—sorry , Beauchamp’ s— face, so close that he
felt the warmth of the man’ s breath on his cheek and smelled
his cologne. He was getting blood on W ainwright’ s coat.
“The las t time I saw you,” Grey  said, very quietly , “I came
within an inch of putting a bu llet through your head. Don’ t
give me cause to regret my restraint.”
He let go and stood up.
“Stay away from my son—stay  away from me. And if you
will take a well-meant bit of advice—go back to France.
Quickly .”
T urning on his heel, he went out, shutting the door firmly
behind him. He was halfway down the street before he realized
that he had left Percy in his own room.
“The devil with it,” he muttered, and stamped of f to beg a
billet for the ni ght from Ser geant Cutter . In the morning, he
would make sure that the Frase r family and W illiam were all
safely out of W ilmington. AND SOMETIMES THEY AREN’T
 Lallybroch
 Inverness-shire, Scotland
 September 1980
 
W E A RE ALIVE,” Brianna Mac Kenzie repeated, her
voice tremulous. She looked up at Roger , the paper pressed to
her ches t with both hands. Her face streamed with tears, but a
glorious light glowed in her blue eyes. “Alive!”
“Let me  see.” His heart was ham mering so hard in his chest
that he could barely hear his o wn words. He reached out a
hand, and reluctantly she surrendered the paper to him, coming
at on ce to press  herself against him, clinging to his arm as he
read, unable to take her eyes of f the bit of ancient paper .
It was pleasantly rough under his fingers, handmade paper
with the  ghosts of leaves and flowers pressed into its fibers.
Y ellowed with age, but still tough and surprisingly flexible.
Bree had made it herself—more than two hundred years
before.
Roger became aware that his hands were trembling, the
paper sh aking so that the sprawl ing, dif ficult hand was hard to
read, faded as the ink was.
December 31, 1776
My dear daughter ,
As y ou will see if ever you r eceive this, we ar e alive
…
 
His own eyes b lurred, and he wiped the back of his hand
across th em, even as he told himself that it didn’ t matter , for
they we re surely dead now , Jam ie Fraser and his wife, Claire
—but he  felt such joy at those w ords on the page that it was as
though the two of them stood smiling before him.It was  t he two  of them, too, he discovered. While the letter
began in Jamie’ s hand—and voice—the second page took up
in Claire’ s crisply slanted writing.
Y our father ’ s hand won’ t stand much mor e. And it’ s a
bloody long story . He’ s been ch opping wood all day , and
can bar ely uncurl his fingers—but he insisted on telling
you him self that we haven’ t—yet—been burnt to ashes.
Not but what we may be at any moment; ther e ar e
fourteen people crammed into the old cabin, and I’m
writing this mor e or less sitting  in the hearth, with old
Grannie MacLeod wheezing away on her pallet by my
feet so that if sh e suddenly begins to die, I can pour mor e
whisky down her thr oat.
 
“My God, I can hear  her ,” he said, amazed.
“So can I.” T ears were still coursing down Bree’ s face, but it
was a sun-show er; she wiped a t them, laughing and snif fing.
“Read m ore. Why are they in our cabin? What’ s happened to
the Big House?”
Roger ran his f inger down the page to find his place and
resumed reading.
“Oh, Jesus!” he said.
Y ou r ecall that idiot, Donner?
 
Gooseflesh ran up his arms at the name. A time-traveler ,
Donner . And one of the most feckless individuals he’d ever
met or heard of—but nonetheless dangerous for that.
W ell, he surpassed himself by getting together a gang
of th ugs fr om Br ownsville to co me and steal the tr easur e
in ge ms he’d co nvinced them we had. Only we hadn’ t, of
course.
 They hadn’ t—b ecause he, Brianna, Jemmy , and Amanda
had taken the small hoard of remaining gemstones to
safeguard their flight through the stones.
They held us hostage and rubbished the house, damn
them—br eaking, amongst other things, the carboy of
ether in my sur g ery . The fumes nearly gassed all of us on
the spot …
 
He read rapidly through the rest of the letter , Brianna
peering over his shoulder and m aking small squeaks of alarm
and dismay . Finished, he laid t he pages down and turned to
her , his insides quivering.
“So you  did it,” he said , aware that he shouldn’ t say it, but
unable n ot to, unable not to snor t with laughter . “Y ou and your
bloody matches —you  burned the house down!”
Her face was a study , features shifting between horror ,
indignation—and, yes, a hysterical hilarity that matched his
own.
“Oh, it was not ! It was Mama’ s ether . Any kind of spark
could have set of f the explosion—”
“But it wasn’ t an y kind of spark ,” Roger pointed out. “Y our
cousin Ian lit one of your matches.”
“W ell, so it was Ian’ s fault, then!”
“No, it was you and your mother . Scientific women,” Roger
said, sh aking his head. “The eighteenth century is lucky to
have survived you.”
She huf fed a little.
“W ell, the whole thing would never have happened if it
weren’ t for that bozo Donner!”
“T rue,” Roger conceded. “But he was a troublemaker from
the future, too, wasn’ t he? Though admittedly neither a woman
nor very scientific.”“Hmph.” She took the letter , handling it gently , but unable
to fo rbear rubbing the pages b etween her fingers. “W ell, he
didn’ t su rvive th e eighteenth century , did he?” Her eyes were
downcast, their lids still reddened.
“Y ou a ren’ t fe eling sorry  for him, are you?” Roger
demanded, incredulous.
She shook her head, but her fingers still moved lightly over
the thick, soft page.
“Not … him , so much. It’ s just—the idea of anybody dying
like that. Alone, I mean. So far from home.”
No, it wasn’ t D onner she was thinking of. He put an arm
round her and laid his head against her own. She smelled of
Prell sha mpoo and fresh cabbages; she’d been in the kailyard.
The wor ds on the page faded and strengthened with the dip of
the p en that had  written them, but nonetheless were sharp and
clear—a sur geon’ s writing.
“She isn ’ t alone ,” he whispered, and putting out a finger ,
traced the postscript, again in Jamie’ s sprawling hand.
“Neither of them is. And whether they’ve a roof above their
heads or not—both of them are home.”
 
I PUT BY THE LETTER. T ime enough to finish it later , I
thought. I’d been working on it as time allowed over the last
few days; not as though there was any rush to catch the
outgoing mail, after all. I smiled a little at that, and folded the
sheets carefully , putting them in my new workbag for
safekeeping. I wiped the quill an d put it aside, then rubbed my
aching f ingers, savoring for a l ittle longer the sweet sense of
connection the writing gave me. I could write much more
easily than Jamie could, but fles h and blood had its limits, and
it had been a very long day .
I loo ked over at the pallet on the  far side of the fire, as I had
been doing every few minutes, but she was still quiet. I could
hear her breath, a wheezing gur gle that came at intervals solong tha t I could swear she had died between each one. She
hadn’ t, though, and from my est imation wouldn’ t for a while. I
was hoping that she would, b efore my limited supply of
laudanum gave out.
I did n’ t know ho w old she was; she looked a hundred or so,
but might be younger than I. Her two grandsons, boys in their
teens, had brought her in two  days before. They had been
traveling down from the mountains, meaning to take their
grandmother to relatives in Cross Creek before heading to
W ilmington to join the militia t here, but the grandmother had
“been to ok bad,” as they put it, and someone had told them
there was a con jure-woman on the Ridge nearby . So they had
brought her to me.
Grannie MacLeod—I had no other name for her; the boys
had not thought to tell me befor e departing, and she was in no
condition to do so herself—almost certainly was in the
terminal stages of a cancer o f some kind. Her flesh had
wasted, her face pinched with pain even while unconscious,
and I could see it in the grayness of her skin.
The fire was burning low; I should stir it, and add another
stick of pine. J amie’ s head was resting against my knee,
though. Could I reach the woodpile without disturbing him? I
put a light hand on his shoulder for balance and stretched, just
getting m y fing ers on the end of a small log. I wiggled this
gently fr ee, teeth set in my lower lip, and managed by leaning
to poke it into the hearth, breaking up the drifts of red-black
embers and raising clouds of sparks.
Jamie stirred under my hand and murmured something
unintelligible, bu t when I thrust the log into the freshened fire
and sat back in my chair , he sighed, resettled himself, and fell
back into sleep.
I gla nced at the  door , listening, but heard nothing save the
rustle of  trees in the wind. Of course, I thought, I would  hear
nothing, given that it was Y oung Ian I was waiting for .
He a nd J amie ha d been taking it  in turns to watch, hiding in
the t rees above t he burnt ruins o f the Big House. Ian had beenout for more than two hours; it was nearly time for him to
come in for food and a turn at the fire.
“Someone’ s been trying to kill the white sow ,” he’d
announced at breakfast three days ago, looking bemused.
“What?” I handed him a bowl o f porridge, garnished with a
lump of  melting butter and a drizzle of honey—luckily my
kegs of honey and boxes of honeycomb had been in the
springhouse when the fire happened. “Are you sure?”
He nod ded, taking the bowl and inhaling its steam in
beatific fashion.
“A ye, sh e’ s got a slash in her flank. Not deep, and it’ s
healing, Auntie,” he added, with a nod in my direction,
evidently feeling that I would regard the sow’ s medical well-
being w ith the same interest as t hat of any other resident of the
Ridge.
“Oh? Good,” I said—though there was precious little I
could have done if she weren’ t healing. I could—and did—
doctor horses, cows, goats, stoats, and even the occasional
non-laying chicken, but that particular pig was on her own.
Amy Higgins crossed herself at mention of the sow .
“Likely ‘twas a bear ,” she said.  “Nothing else would dare.
Aidan, m ind what Mr . Ian says,  here! Dinna be wandering far
from the place, and mind your brother outside.”
“Bears sleep in winter , Mam,” Aidan said absently . His
attention was fixed on a new  top that Bobby , his new
stepfather , had carved for him, and which he hadn’ t yet got to
spin properly . Giving it a cross-eyed glare, he set it gingerly on
the table , held the string for a br eathless moment, and yanked.
The top shot across the table, ricocheted of f the honey jar with
a sharp crack! , and headed for the milk at a high rate of speed.
Ian reached out and snatched the top in the nick of time.
Chewing toast, he motioned to Aidan for the string, rewound
it, an d w ith a practiced flick of t he wrist, sent the top whizzing
straight down the center of t he table. Aidan watched it,openmouthed, th en dived under the table as the top fell of f the
end.
“No, it wasna a n animal,” Ian said, finally succeeding in
swallowing. “It was a clean slas h. Someone went for her wi’ a
knife or a sword.”
Jamie lo oked up from the burnt piece of toast he had been
examining.
“Did ye find his body?”
Ian grinned briefly , but shook his head.
“Nay , if  she killed him, she ate him—and I didna find any
leavings.”
“Pigs are messy eaters,” Jamie observed. He essayed a
cautious bite of the burnt toast, grimaced, and ate it anyway .
“An Indian, d’ye think?” Bobby asked. Little Orrie was
struggling to get down from Bo bby’ s lap; his new stepfather
obligingly set him down in his favorite spot under the table.
Jamie and Ian exchanged glances, and I felt a slight stirring
of the hair at the back of my neck.
“No,” Ia n answered. “The Cherokee near here all ken her
weel, and wouldna touch her with a ten-foot pole. They think
she’ s a demon, aye?”
“And traveling Indians from the  north would have arrows or
tomahawks,” Jamie finished.
“Y e’re sure it wasna a panther?” Amy asked, dubious.
“They hunt in the winter , no?”
“They d o,” Jamie assured her . “ I saw pug-marks up by the
Green Spring yesterday . D’ye hear me there?” he said, bending
to speak to the boys under the table. “Go canny , aye?
“But no,” he added, straightening up. “Ian kens the
dif ference between claw marks and a knife slash, I think.” He
gave Ian a grin. Ian politely refrained from rolling his eyes,
and merely nodded, eyes fixed dubiously on the toast basket.No one suggested that any res ident of the Ridge or from
Brownsville might have been hunting the white sow . The local
Presbyterians w ould not have seen eye-to-eye with the
Cherokee on any other spiritual matter you might name, but
they were in decided agreement on the sow’ s demonic
character .
Personally , I wasn’ t sure they weren’ t right. The thing had
survived even the burning of the Big House unscathed,
emer ging from her den beneath its foundations amid a shower
of b urnt wood, followed by h er latest litter of half-grown
piglets.
“Moby Dick!” I now said aloud, inspired.
Rollo raised his head with a st artled “W uf f?,” gave me a
yellow-eyed look and laid it down again, sighing.
“Dick w ho?” sa id Jamie, drowsy . He sat up, stretching and
groaning, then rubbed a hand over his face and blinked at me.
“I j ust thought what it is that sow reminds me of,” I
explained. “Long story . About a whale. I’ll tell you
tomorrow .”
“If I live that long,” he said,  with a yawn that nearly
dislocated his jaw . “Where’ s th e whisky—or d’ye need it for
yon poor woman?” He nodded at Grannie MacLeod’ s blanket-
wrapped form.
“Not yet. Here.” I bent and rummaged in the basket beneath
my chair , coming up with a corked bottle.
He pulle d the cork and drank, the color gradually coming
back to his fa ce. Between spending his days hunting or
chopping wood and half the nigh ts lurking in a freezing forest,
even Jamie’ s great vitality was showing signs of flagging.
“How long will you keep this u p?” I asked, low-voiced so
as n ot to rouse  the Higginses—Bobby , Amy , the two little
boys, and Amy’ s two sisters-in-law from her first marriage,
who had come for the wedding held a few days before,
accompanied by  a total of five c hildren under the age of ten—
all a sleep in the small bedroom. The departure of the MacLeodboys had eased the congestion in the cabin slightly , but with
Jamie, me, Ian, Ian’ s dog, Rollo, and the old woman sleeping
on th e fl oor of the main room, a nd such possessions as we had
managed to salvage from the f ire stacked round the walls, I
sometimes felt a distinct sur ge of claustrophobia. Little
wonder if Jamie and Ian were patrolling the woods, as much to
get a breath o f air as from a conviction that there was
something out there.
“No mu ch longe r ,” he assured m e, shuddering slightly as a
lar ge swallow of whisky went down. “If we dinna see anything
tonight, we’ll—” He broke of f, his head turning abruptly
toward the door .
I ha dn’ t heard anything, but sa w the latch move, and an
instant later , a freezing gust of air rolled into the room, poking
frigid fingers under my skirts and stirring up a shower of
sparks from the fire.
I hastily  seized a rag and beat these out before they could
set Gran nie Mac Leod’ s hair or bedding on fire. By the time I
had the fire back  under control, Jamie was putting pistol, shot
bag, and powder horn on his belt, talking low-voiced with Ian
by the door . Ian himself was red -cheeked with cold and clearly
excited about something. Rollo  was up, too, nosing at Ian’ s
legs, tail wagging in anticipation of an icy adventure.
“Best ye stay , a cu,”  Ian told him, rubbing his ears with cold
fingers. “Sheas.”
Rollo made a d isgruntled noise in his throat and tried to
push pas t Ian, but was deftly blocked by a leg. Jamie turned,
shrugging on his coat, bent, and kissed me hastily .
“Bolt th e door , a nighean,”  he whi spered. “Dinna open to
anyone save me or Ian.”
“What—” I began, but they were gone.
 
THE NIGHT W AS COLD and pure. Jamie breathed deep
and shivered, letting the cold en ter him, strip away the warmthof wife,  the smoke and smel l of his hearth. Ice crystals
shimmered in his lungs, sharp in  his blood. He turned his head
to and fro like a wolf scenting, breathing the night. There was
little wind, but t he air moved from the east, bringing the bitter
smell of ashes from the ruins of the Big House … and a faint
tang he thought was blood.
He looked to hi s nephew , question in the cock of his head,
and saw Ian nod, dark against the lavender glow of the sky .
“There’ s a dead pig, just beyond Auntie’ s garden,” the lad
said, low-voiced.
“Oh, aye? Not the white sow , ye don’ t mean?” His heart
misgave him for an instant at the thought, and he wondered
whether he’d mourn the thing o r dance on its bones. But no.
Ian shook his head, the movement felt rather than seen.
“Nay , not that w ily beast. A young one, maybe last year ’ s
farrowing. Some one’ s butchered it, but taken nay more than a
collop or two from the haunch. And a good bit of what they
did  take, they scattered in chunks down the trail.”
Jamie glanced round, surprised.
“What?”
Ian shrugged.
“A ye. One more thing, Uncle. ‘T was killed and butchered
with an ax.”
The ice crystals  in his blood solidified with a suddenness
that nearly stopped his heart.
“Jesus,” he said, but it was not so much shock as it was
unwilling admission of someth ing he had known for a long
time. “It’ s him, then.”
“A ye.” Both of them had know n it, though neither one had
been wi lling to speak of it. W it hout consultation, they moved
away from the cabin, into the trees.
“A ye, well.” Jamie took a long, deep breath and sighed, the
mist of it white in the darkness. He’d hoped the man had takenhis g old and his wife and left the  Ridge—but it had never been
more tha n a hope. Arch Bug w as a Grant by blood, and clan
Grant were a vengeful lot.
The Frasers of Glenhelm had caught Arch Bug on their
lands some fifty years before, a nd given him the choice: lose
an e ye o r the first two fingers of his right hand. The man had
come to  terms with his crippled hand, turning from the bow he
could no  longer  draw to the use of an ax, which he wielded
and threw with a skill equal to any Mohawk’ s, despite his age.
What he  had not come to term s with was the loss of the
Stuart cause and the loss of the Jacobite gold, sent too late
from France, rescued—or stolen, depending on your view of
things—by Hector Cameron, who had brought one third of it
to North Carolina, this share then stolen—or retrieved—from
Cameron’ s widow in turn by Arch Bug.
Nor had Arch Bug come to terms with Jamie Fraser .
“Is it threat, d’y e think?” Ian as ked. They had moved away
from the cabin, but kept to the tr ees, circling the lar ge clearing
where th e Big House had been. The chimney and half a wall
still stood, charred and bleak against the dirty snow .
“I ca nna think s o. If it was threat he meant, why wait until
now?” Still, he gave silent tha nks that his daughter and her
weans were safely gone. There w ere worse threats than a dead
pig, and he tho ught Arch Bug would not hesitate to make
them.
“Perhaps he left,” Ian suggested. “T o see his wife settled,
and he’ s only now come back.”
It was a reasona ble thought—if  there was one thing in the
world A rch Bug loved, it was his wife, Murdina, his helpmate
of more than fifty years.
“Perhaps,” Jami e said. And yet …  And yet he’d felt eyes on
his b ack more th an once in the weeks since the Bugs had left.
Felt silence in the forest that was not the silence of the trees
and rocks.He d idn’ t ask whether Ian had looked for the ax-wielder ’ s
track; if one could be found, Ian would have found it. But it
hadn’ t s nowed i n more than a week, and what was left on the
ground was patchy and trodden by the feet of innumerable
people. He looked up at the sky; snow again, and soon.
He m ade his way up a small out crop, careful among the ice;
the s now was m elting in the da y , but the water froze again at
night, hanging from the cabin’ s eaves and from every branch
in g littering icicles that filled th e forest with the light of blue
dawn, then dripped gold and dia monds in the rising sun. Now
they were colorless, tinkling lik e glass as his sleeve brushed
the t wigs of an ice-covered bush. He stopped, crouching at the
top of the outcrop, looking down across the clearing.
All right. The certainty that Arch Bug was here had set of f a
chain of half-conscious deducti ons, the conclusion of which
now floated to the top of his mind.
“He’d come again for one of tw o reasons,” he said to Ian.
“T o do me harm—or to get the gold. All of it.”
He’d giv en Bug a chunk of gold when he’d sent the man
and his wife aw ay , upon the dis covery of the Bugs’ treachery .
Half a French in got, it would have allowed an elderly couple
to li ve th e rest of their lives in modest comfort. But Arch Bug
was not a modes t man. He’d once been tacksman to the Grant
of Grant, and while he’d hidden  his pride for a time, it was not
the nature of pride to stay buried.
Ian glanced at him, interested.
“All of it,” he repeated. “So ye think he hid it here—but
somewhere he couldna get it easily when ye made him go.”
Jamie lifted one shoulder , watching the clearing. W ith the
house no w gone , he could see the steep trail that led up behind
it, to ward the p lace where his wife’ s garden had once stood,
safe behind its d eer -proof palisades. Some of the palisades still
stood, black against the patchy  snow . He would make her a
new garden one day , God willing.“If his purpose was only harm, he’ s had the chance.” He
could see the butchered pig fro m here, a dark shape on the
path, shadowed by a wide pool of blood.
He push ed away a sudden thought of Malva Christie, and
forced himself back to his reasoning.
“A ye, he’ s hidden it here,” he re peated, more confident now .
“If h e ha d it all, he’d be long gone. He’ s been waiting, trying
for a way to get to it. But he ha sna been able to do it secretly
—so now he’ s trying something else.”
“A ye, but what? That—” Ian nodded toward the amorphous
shape on the path. “I thought it might be a snare or a trap of
some kind, but it’ s not. I looked.”
“A l ure, maybe?” The smell of  blood was evident even to
him; it would b e a plain call to any predator . Even as he
thought this, his eye caught movement near the pig, and he put
a hand on Ian’ s arm.
A tentative flicker of movement, then a small, sinuous shape
darted in, disappearing behind the pig’ s body .
“Fox,” both men said together , then laughed, quietly .
“There’ s that panther in the wood above the Green Spring,”
Ian said dubiously . “I saw the tracks yesterday . Can he mean to
draw it wi’ the pig, in hopes th at we should rush out to deal
with it and he could reach the gold whilst we were occupied?”
Jamie fr owned at that, and glanc ed toward the cabin. T rue, a
panther might draw the men out—but not the women and
children. And where might he  have put the gold in such a
densely inhabite d space? His e ye fell on the long, humped
shape of Brianna’ s kiln, lying  some way from the cabin,
unused since her departure, an d a spurt of excitement drew
him upri ght. That would be—but no; Arch had stolen the gold
from Jocasta Cameron one bar at a time, conveying it secretly
to the Ridge, and had begun his theft long before Brianna had
gone. But maybe …
Ian stif fened suddenly , and Jamie turned his head sharp to
see wha t the matter was. He couldn’ t see anything, but thencaught t he soun d that Ian had heard. A deep, piggish grunt, a
rustle, a  crack. Then there was  a visible stirring among the
blackened timb ers of the ruin ed house, and a great light
dawned.
“Jesus!” he said, and gripped I an’ s arm so tightly that his
nephew yelped, startled. “It’ s under the Big House!”
The white sow emer ged from h er den beneath the ruins, a
massive cream- colored blotch upon the night, and stood
swaying her head to and fro, sc enting the air . Then she began
to move, a ponderous menace sur ging purposefully up the hill.
Jamie wanted to laugh at the sheer beauty of it.
Arch Bug had cannily hidden his gold beneath the
foundations of the Big House, choosing his times when the
sow was  out about her business . No one would have dreamed
of invad ing the sow’ s domain; she was the perfect guardian—
and dou btless he’d meant to retrieve the gold in the same way
when he was ready to go: carefully , one ingot at a time.
But then the house had burned, the timbers collapsing into
the foundation, rendering the gold unreachable without a great
deal of  work and trouble—w hich would certainly draw
attention. It was only now , wh en the men had cleared away
most of the rubb le—and spread  soot and charcoal all over the
clearing in the process—that a nyone might be able to reach
something hidden under it without attracting notice.
But it was winte r , and the white  sow , while not hibernating
like a bear , kept strictly to her cozy den—save when there was
something to eat.
Ian made a small exclamation of disgust, hearing slobbering
and crunching from the path.
“Pigs havena got much delicacy of feeling,” Jamie
murmured. “If it’ s dead, they’ll eat it.”
“A ye, but it’ s likely her own of fspring!”
“She eats her y oung alive now and then; I doubt she’d
boggle at eating them dead.”“Hst!”
He hush ed at once, eyes fixed on the blackened smear that
had once been the finest house in the county . Sure enough, a
dark figure emer ged from beh ind the springhouse, sidling
cautiously on the slippery path. The pig, busy with her grisly
feast, ig nored th e man, who see med to be clad in a dark cloak
and carrying something like a sack.
 
I D IDN’ T BOL T THE DOOR a t once, but stepped out to
breathe fresh air for a moment,  shutting Rollo in behind me.
W ithin moments, Jamie and Ian had vanished into the trees. I
glanced uneasily  round the clearing, looked across to the black
mass of  the forest, but could see nothing amiss. Nothing
moved, and the night was sou ndless; I wondered what Ian
might have found. Unfamiliar tracks, perhaps? That would
account for his sense of ur gency; it was clearly about to snow .
No m oon was visible, but the sky was a deep pinkish gray ,
and the ground, though trodden and patchy , was still covered
with old snow . T he result was a strange, milky glow in which
objects seemed to float as though painted on glass,
dimensionless and dim. The burnt remains of the Big House
stood at the far side of the clearing, no more at this distance
than a smudge, as though a giant, sooty thumb had pressed
down th ere. I could feel the heaviness of impending snow in
the air , hear it in the muf fled sough of the pines.
The MacLeod boys had come o ver the mountain with their
grandmother; they’d said it was very hard going through the
high passes. Another big storm would likely seal us in until
March or even April.
Thus rem inded o f my patient, I took one last look round the
clearing and set my hand on the latch. Rollo was whining,
scratching at the door , and I pu shed a knee unceremoniously
into his face as I opened it.“Stay , do g,” I said. “Don’ t worr y , they’ll be back soon.” He
made a high, anxious noise in his throat, and cast to and fro,
nudging at my legs, seeking to get out.
“No,”  I said, pushing him away in order to bolt the door .
The bolt dropped into place with a reassuring thunk , and I
turned toward the fire, rubbing my hands. Rollo put back his
head and  gave a low , mournful h owl that raised the hair on the
back of my neck.
“What?” I said, alarmed. “Hush !” The noise had made one
of th e small chi ldren in the bedroom wake and cry; I heard
rustling bedclothes and sleepy maternal murmurs, and I knelt
quickly and grabbed Rollo’ s muzzle before he could howl
again.
“Shhhhh,” I said, and looked to  see whether the sound had
disturbed Grannie MacLeod. She lay still, waxen-faced, her
eyes closed. I waited, automatically counting the seconds
before the next shallow rise of her chest.
… six … seven … “ Oh, bloody hell,” I said, realizing.
Hastily crossing  myself, I shuf fled over to her on my knees,
but closer inspection told me n othing I hadn’ t seen already .
Self-ef facing to  the last, she had seized my moment of
distraction to die inconspicuously .
Rollo was shifting to and fro, no longer howling, but
uneasy . I laid a hand gently on the sunken chest. Not seeking
diagnosis or of fering aid, not a ny longer . Just … a necessary
acknowledgment of the passing of a woman whose first name
I didn’ t know .
“W ell … God rest your soul, poor thing,” I said softly , and
sat back on my heels, trying to think what to do next.
Proper Highland protocol held that the door must be opened
at once after a death, to allow the soul to leave. I rubbed a
knuckle dubiously over my lips; might the soul have made a
quick dash when I opened the door to come in? Probably not.
One wo uld think that in a climate as inhospitable as
Scotland’ s, there  would be a bit of climatological leeway insuch ma tters, but I knew that wasn’ t the case. Rain, snow ,
sleet, wi nd—Highlanders always did  ope n the door and leave
it op en for hours, both eager to free the departing soul and
anxious lest the spirit, impeded in its exit, might turn and take
up p ermanent residence as a gho st. Most crofts were too small
to make that a tolerable prospect.
Little Orrie was awake now; I could hear him singing
happily to himself, a song consisting of his stepfather ’ s name.
“Baaaaah-by , baaah-by , BAAAH-by …”
I heard a low , sleepy chuckle, and Bobby’ s murmur in reply .
“There’ s my wee man. Y ou need the pot, acooshla ?” The
Gaelic endearment— a chuisle , “my heart’ s blood”—made me
smile, b oth at the word and at  the oddness of it in Bobby’ s
Dorset accent. Rollo made an uneasy noise in his throat,
though, bringing back to me the need for some action.
If th e Higginses and in-laws ros e in a few hours to discover
a co rpse on the  floor , they’d all be disturbed, their sense of
rightness af fronted—and agitated at thought of a dead stranger
possibly clinging to their hearth. A very bad omen for the new
marriage and the new year . At the same time, her presence was
undeniably agitating Rollo, and the prospect of his rousing
them all in the next few moments was agitating me.
“Right,” I said under my breath. “Come on, dog.” There
were, as  always, bits of harnes s needing mending on a peg
near the door . I disentangled a sound length of rein and
fashioned a makeshift come-along with which I lassoed Rollo.
He w as more than happy to go o utside with me, lunging ahead
as I opened the  door , though s omewhat less delighted to be
dragged to the lean-to pantry , where I wrapped the makeshift
leash ha stily round a shelf upright, before returning to the
cabin for Grannie MacLeod’ s body .
I looked about carefully before venturing out again, Jamie’ s
admonitions in mind, but the n ight was as still as a church;
even the trees had fallen silent.The poor woman couldn’ t weigh more than seventy pounds,
I tho ught; her c ollarbones pok ed through her skin, and her
fingers were frail as dried twigs. Still, seventy pounds of literal
dead we ight was a bit more than I could manage to lift, and I
was obliged to unfold the blanket wrapped round her and use it
as a n impromptu sledge, on which I dragged her outside,
murmuring mingled prayers and apologies under my breath.
Despite the cold, I was panting and damp with sweat by the
time I’d got her into the pantry .
“W ell, a t least your soul’ s had plenty of time to make a
getaway ,” I muttered, kneeling to check the body before
resettling it in its hasty shroud. “And I shouldn’ t imagine you
want to hang about haunting a pantry , in any case.”
Her eyelids were not quite closed, a sliver of white showing,
as thoug h she had tried to open  them for one last glimpse of
the world—or perhaps in search of a familiar face.
“Benedicite,” I  whispered, and gently shut her eyes,
wondering as I d id so whether one day some stranger might do
the same for me. The odds of it were good. Unless …
Jamie ha d declared his intention to return to Scotland, fetch
his print ing press, and then come back to fight. But what , said
a small,  coward ly voice inside me, if we didn’ t come back?
What if we went to Lallybroch and stayed there?
Even as I thoug ht of that prospe ct—with its rosy visions of
being en folded b y family , able to  live in peace, to grow slowly
old without the constant fear of disruption, starvation, and
violence—I knew it wouldn’ t work.
I did n’ t know w hether Thomas W olfe had been right about
not being able to go home again—well, I wouldn’ t  know about
that, I thought, a  little bitterly; I  hadn’ t had one to go back to
—but I did know Jamie. Idealism quite aside—and he did have
some, though of a very pragmatic sort—the simple fact was
that he was a proper man, and thus required to have proper
work. N ot just labor; not jus t making a living. W ork. I
understood the dif ference.And while I was  sure that Jamie’ s family would receive him
with joy—the nature of my ow n reception was in somewhat
more doubt, but I supposed th ey wouldn’ t actually call the
priest an d try to have me exorcised—the fact was that Jamie
was no longer laird of Lallybroch, and never would be.
” ‘…  an d his place shall know h im no more,’ ” I murmured,
wiping the old woman’ s intimate parts—surprisingly
unwithered; perhaps she had been younger than I thought—
with a damp clo th. She hadn’ t ea ten anything in days; even the
relaxation of death hadn’ t ha d much ef fect—but anyone
deserved to go clean to their grave.
I paused. That was a thought. W ould we be able to bury her?
Or might she ju st rest peacefully under the huckleberry jam
and the sacks of dried beans until spring?
I tidied her clothes, breathing out, openmouthed, trying to
judge the temperature from th e steam of my breath. This
would b e only the second major snowfall of the winter , and we
had not yet had a really hard fr eeze; that usually happened in
mid to late January . If the ground had not yet frozen, we could
probably bury her—provided the men were willing to shovel
away the snow .
Rollo had lain down, resigned, while I went about my
business, but at this point, his head jerked upright, ears
pointed.
“What?” I said, startled, and tu rned round on my knees to
look out the open pantry door . “What’ s happening?”
 
“SHALL WE T AKE HIM NOW?” Ian murmured. He
had his bow ove r one shoulder; h e let his arm fall, and the bow
dropped silently into his hand, ready .
“No. Let him find it first.” Jamie spoke slowly , trying to
make up his m ind what was r ight to do with the man, so
suddenly reappeared before him.Not kill him; he and his wife had made a good deal of
trouble with their treachery , aye, but hadn’ t intended harm to
his fami ly—not to start, at leas t. W as Arch Bug even truly a
thief, by  his own lights? Surely  Jamie’ s aunt Jocasta had no
greater—if no lesser—claim to the gold than he did.
He sigh ed and put a hand to his belt, where his dirk and
pistol hung. Still, he couldn’ t al low Bug to make of f with the
gold, no r could he merely drive him of f and leave him free to
make m ore trou ble. As to what in God’ s name to do with him
once cau ght … it would be like  having a snake in a sack. But
naught t o do now save catch hi m, and worry later what to do
with the sack. Perhaps some bar gain might be struck …
The figu re had reached the black smear of the foundations
and was climbing awkwardly among the stones and the
charred timbers that remained, the dark cloak lifting and
billowing as the air shifted.
Snow began to fall, sudden and  silent, big, lazy flakes that
seemed not so m uch to fall from  the sky as simply to appear ,
whirling out of the air . They br ushed his face and stuck thick
in his lashes; he wiped them away , and motioned to Ian.
“Go beh ind,” he whispered. “If he runs, send a shaft past his
nose to stop him. And keep well back, aye?”
“Y ou  keep well back,  Uncle,” Ian wh ispered back. “If ye get
within d ecent pi stol shot o’ the man, he can brain ye with his
ax. And I’m no going to explain that  to Auntie Claire.”
Jamie snorted briefly and nudge d Ian away . He loaded and
primed his pistol, then walked firmly out through the falling
snow toward the ruin of his house.
He’d seen Arch fell a turkey with his ax at twenty feet. And
it was true that  most pistols w eren’ t accurate at much more
than tha t. But he didn’ t mean t o shoot the man, after all. He
drew the pistol, holding it clear in his hand.
“Arch!” he called. The figure had its back to him, bent over
as it  roo ted about in the ashes. At his call, it seemed to stif fen,
still crouched.“Arch Bug!” he shouted. “Come out o’ there, man. I’d
speak with ye!”
In a nswer , the f igure drew itself up abruptly , turned, and a
spurt of  flame lit the falling snow . In the same instant, the
flame seared his thigh, and he staggered.
He was conscious mostly of surprise; he’d never known
Arch Bug to use a pistol, and was impressed that he could aim
so well with his left—
He’d go ne to one knee in the snow , but even as he brought
his own  weapon up to bear , he realized two things: the black
figure was aiming a second pistol at him—but not with the left
hand. Which meant—
“Jesus! Ian!” But Ian had seen him fall, and seen the second
pistol, to o. Jamie didn’ t hear the  arrow’ s flight, above the rush
of wind and snow; it appeared as though by magic, stuck in the
figure’ s back. The figure went s traight and stif f, then fell in a
heap. A lmost before it hit the ground, he was running,
hobbling, his right leg buckling under him with every step.
“God, no, God, no,” he was s aying, and it sounded like
someone else’ s voice.
A voice came through snow and night, calling out in
desperation. Then Rollo was bounding past him, a blur—who
had let him out?—and a rifle cracked from the trees. Ian
bellowed, somewhere near , calling the dog, but Jamie had no
time to look, was scrambling heedless over the blackened
stones, slipping on the skim of fresh snow , stumbling, his leg
was cold and hot at once, but no matter , oh, God , please, no …
He r eached the black figure and  flung himself on his knees
beside i t, grappling. He knew a t once; he’d known from the
moment he realized the pistol ha d been held in her right hand.
Arch, with his missing fingers, couldn’ t fire a pistol right-
handed. But, oh, God, no …
He’d got her over , feeling the short, heavy body limp and
unwieldy as a fresh-killed deer . Pushed back the hood of the
cloak, and passed his hand, g entle, helpless, over the softround face of Murdina Bug. She breathed against his hand—
perhaps … but he felt the shaft  of the arrow , too, against his
hand. It had com e through her neck, and her breath bubbled
wet; his hand was wet, too, and warm.
“Arch?” she said hoarsely . “I want Arch.” And died. LIFE FOR LIFE
 
I  T O OK JAMIE into the pantry . It was dark, and cold,
particularly for a man with no br eeches on, but I didn’ t want to
risk any of the  Higginses being wakened. God, not now .
They’d all erupt from their san ctum like a flight of panicked
quail—and I quailed myself at thought of having to deal with
them be fore I had to. It would be suf ficiently horrible to tell
them w hat had happened by daylight; I couldn’ t face the
prospect now .
For lack  of any better alternati ve, Jamie and Ian had laid
Mrs. Bug in the pantry alongside Grannie MacLeod, tucked
under the lowest shelf, her clo ak drawn up over her face. I
could see her fe et sticking out, with their cracked, worn boots
and strip ed stockings. I had a sudden vision of the W icked
W itch o f the W est, and clapped a hand to my mouth before
anything truly hysterical could escape.
Jamie turned his head toward m e, but his gaze was inward,
his face  haggard, deep-lined in the glow of the candle he
carried.
“Eh?” he said vaguely .
“Nothing,” I said, my voice trembling. “Nothing at all. Sit—
sit d own.” I put  down the stool  and my medical kit, took the
candle and tin of hot water from him, and tried to think of
absolutely nothing but the job before me. Not feet. Not, for
God’ s sake, Arch Bug.
Jamie had a blanket wrapped round his shoulders, but his
legs were necessarily bare, and I could feel the hairs bristling
with gooseflesh as my hand bru shed them. The bottom of his
shirt wa s soaked  with half-dried blood; it stuck to his leg, but
he made no sound when I pulled it loose and nudged his legs
apart.He had been moving like a man in a bad dream, but the
approach of a lighted candle to his balls roused him.
“Y e’ll take care wi’ that candle , Sassenach, aye?” he said,
putting a protective hand over his genitals.
Seeing h is point , I gave him the candle to hold, and with a
brief admonition to beware of dripping hot wax, returned to
my inspection.
The wound was oozing blood, but plainly minor , and I
plunged a cloth into the hot wate r and began to work. His flesh
was chilled, and the cold damped even the pungent odors of
the pantry , but I could still smell him, his usual dry musk
tainted with blood and frantic sweat.
It wa s a deep go uge that ran fou r inches through the flesh of
his thigh, high up. Clean, though.
“A John  W ayne special,” I said, trying for a light, dry tone.
Jamie’ s eyes, which had been fixed on the candle flame,
changed focus and fixed on me.
“What?” he said hoarsely .
“Nothing serious,” I said. “The ball just grazed you. Y ou
may wa lk a little oddly for a da y or two, but the hero lives to
fight another day .” The ball had  in fact gone between his legs,
deeply creasing the inside of his thigh, near both to his
testicles and his femoral artery . One inch to the right, and he’d
be dead. One inch higher …
“Not a great he lp, Sassenach,” he said, but the ghost of a
smile touched his eyes.
“No,” I agreed. “But some?”
“Some,” he said, and briefly tou ched my face. His hand was
very cold, and t rembled; hot wax ran over the knuckles of his
other ha nd, but he didn’ t seem t o feel it. I took the candlestick
gently from him and set it on the shelf.
I c ould feel the  grief and self-r eproach coming of f him in
waves, and fought to keep it at bay . I couldn’ t help him if Igave in to the e normity of the s ituation. I wasn’ t sure I could
help him in any case, but I’d try .
“Oh, Jesus,” he said, so softly I barely heard him. “Why did
I no t let him take it? What did it matter?” He struck a fist on
his knee, soundless. “God , why did I not just let him take it!?”
“Y ou didn’ t know who it was, or what they meant to do,” I
said, just as softly , putting a hand on his shoulder . “It was an
accident.” His muscles were bunched, hard with anguish. I felt
it, too, a hard knot of protest and denial —No, it  can’ t be true, it
can’ t have happened!— in my throat, but there was work to be
done. I’d deal with the inescapable later .
He p ut a  hand over his face, sha king his head slowly to and
fro, and neither spoke nor move d while I finished the cleaning
and bandaging of the wound.
“Can ye  do aught for Ian?” he said, when I’d finished. He
took his  hand away and looked  up at me as I stood, his face
drawn in exhausted misery , but calm again. “He’ s …” He
swallowed, and glanced at the door . “He’ s badly , Sassenach.”
I gla nced at the  whisky I’d brought: a quarter of a bottle.
Jamie followed the direction of my gaze and shook his head.
“Not enough.”
“Y ou drink it, then.” He shook his head, but I put the bottle
in his hand and pressed his fingers round it.
“Orders,” I said, soft but very firm. “Shock.” He resisted,
made to put the bottle back, and I tightened my hand on his.
“I know ,” I said. “Jamie—I know . But you can’ t give in. Not
now .”
He looked up a t me for a moment, but then he nodded,
accepting it because he had to, the muscles of his arm relaxing.
My own fingers were stif f, chilled from water and frigid air ,
but still warmer  than his. I folded both hands round his free
one, and held it, hard.
“There’ s a reason why the hero never dies, you know ,” I
said, and attempted a smile, though my face felt stif f and false.“When the worst happens, some one still has to decide what to
do. Go into the house now , and g et warm.” I glanced out at the
night, lavender -skied and wild with swirling snow . “I’ll …
find Ian.”
 
WHERE WOULD HE have gone? Not far , not in this
weather . Given his state of mind  when he and Jamie had come
back wi th Mrs. Bug’ s body , he might , I thought, simply have
walked of f into the woods, not caring where he went or what
happened to him—but he’d had the dog with him. No matter
what he felt like, he wouldn’ t take Rollo of f into a howling
blizzard.
And a blizzard w as what it was shaping up to be. I made my
way slowly uphill toward the  outbuildings, sheltering my
lantern under a fold of my cloak. It came to me suddenly to
wonder whether Arch Bug might have taken shelter in the
springhouse or the smoke shed. And … oh, God—did he
know?  I st opped dead  on the path for an instant, letting the
thickly falling snow settle lik e a veil on my head and
shoulders.
I h ad been so sh ocked by what had happened that I hadn’ t
thought to wonder whether Arch Bug knew that his wife was
dead. Ja mie said that he had called out, called for Arch to
come, as soon as he realized—but there had been no answer .
Perhaps Arch had suspected a trick; perhaps he had simply
fled, seeing Jamie and Ian an d assuming that they would
certainly not harm his wife. In which case …
“Oh, bloody  hell,” I said under my breath, appalled. But
there wa s nothing I could do about that. I hoped there was
something I could do about Ian. I rubbed a forearm over my
face, blinked snow from my las hes, and went on, slowly , the
light from the lantern swallow ed in the vortex of whirling
snow . W ere I to find Arch … My fingers clenched on the
lantern’ s handle. I’d have to tell him, bring him back to the
cabin, let him se e … Oh, dear . If I came back with Arch, couldJamie and Ian occupy him long enough for me to remove Mrs.
Bug from the pa ntry and display her in more seemly fashion? I
hadn’ t had time to remove the jutting arrow or lay out the
body decently . I dug the finger nails of my free hand into the
palm, trying to get a grip of myself.
“Jesus, don’ t let me find him,” I said under my breath.
“Please don’ t let me find him.”
But spri nghouse, smoke shed, and corncrib were all—thank
God—empty , and no one could have hidden in the chicken
coop without the chickens making a fuss about it; they were
silent, sl eeping out the storm. T he sight of the coop brought
Mrs. Bug suddenly to mind, though—the vision of her
scattering corn from her apron, crooning to the silly things.
She’d named them all. I didn’ t bloody care whether we were
eating Is obeail or Alasdair for s upper , but just at the moment,
the fact that no one now would ever be able to tell one from
another , or rejoice in the fact that Elspeth had hatched ten
chicks, seemed unspeakably heartrending.
I f ound Ian at last in the barn, a dark form huddled in the
straw by the feet of Clarence the mule, whose ears pricked up
at my appearance. He brayed ecstatically at the prospect of
more company , and the goats blatted hysterically , thinking I
was a wolf. The  horses, surprised, tossed their heads, snorting
and nickering in question. Rollo , nestled in the hay next to his
master , gave a short, sharp bark of displeasure at the racket.
“Ruddy Noah’ s Ark in here,” I remarked, shaking snow of f
my c loak and ha nging the lantern on a hook. “All we need is a
pair of elephants. Hush, Clarence!”
Ian turned his f ace toward me, but I could see from his
blank expression that he hadn’ t taken in what I’d said.
I squ atted next t o him and cuppe d a hand round his cheek; it
was cold, bristled with young beard.
“It wasn’ t your fault,” I said gently .
“I know ,” he said, and swallow ed. “But I dinna see how I
can live.” He wasn’ t dramatic about it at all; his voice wassimply b ewildered. Rollo licked  his hand, and his fingers sank
into the dog’ s ruf f, as though for support.
“What can I d o, Auntie?” He looked at me, helpless.
“There’ s nothing, is there? I canna take it back, or undo it. And
yet I keep looking for some way that I can. Something I can do
to make things right. But there’ s … nothing.”
I s at down in the hay next to him and put an arm round his
shoulder , pressing his head toward me. He came, reluctantly ,
though I felt sm all constant shudders of exhaustion and grief
running through him like a chill.
“I loved her ,” he said, so low I could barely hear him. “She
was like my grandmother . And I—”
“She lov ed you,” I whispered. “She wouldn’ t blame you.” I
had been  holding on to my own emotions like grim death, in
order to do wha t had to be done. But now … Ian was right.
There w as noth ing, and in shee r helplessness, tears began to
roll down my f ace. I wasn’ t crying. Grief and shock simply
overflowed; I could not contain them.
Whether he felt the tears on his  skin or only the vibrations
of m y gr ief, I couldn’ t tell, but q uite suddenly Ian gave way as
well, and he wept in my arms, shaking.
I w ished  with all my heart that h e was a small boy , and that
the storm of gri ef could wash away his guilt and leave him
cleansed, at peace. But he was f ar beyond such simple things;
all I could do was hold him, and stroke his back, making
small, helpless noises myself. Then Clarence of fered his own
support, breathing heavily on Ian’ s head and nibbling
thoughtfully on a lock of his hai r . Ian jerked away , slapping at
the mule’ s nose.
“Och, awa’ wi’ ye!”
He chok ed, laughed in a shock ed way , wept a little more,
and then straightened up and wi ped his nose on his sleeve. He
sat s till f or a little while, gathering the pieces of himself, and I
let him be.“When I  killed that man in Edinbur gh,” he said at last, his
voice thick but controlled, “Uncle Jamie took me to
confession, and  told me the prayer that ye say when ye’ve
killed someone. T o commend them to God. W ill ye say it with
me, Auntie?”
I hadn’ t  thought of—let alone said—”Soul Leading” in
many years, and stumbled awkwardly through the words. Ian
spoke it without hesitation, thou gh, and I wondered how often
he had used it through those years.
The words seemed puny and powerless, swallowed among
the s ounds of ha y rustling and b easts chewing. But I felt a tiny
bit of comfort for having said them. Perhaps it was only that
the sense of reaching out to something lar ger than yourself
gives you some feeling that there is  something lar ger—and
there rea lly has to be, because plainly you  aren ’ t s uf ficient to
the situation. I surely wasn’ t.
Ian sat for a tim e, eyes closed. Finally , he opened them and
looked at me, h is eyes black with knowledge, face very pale
under the stubble of his beard.
“And then, he said, ye live with it,” he said softly .
He rubbed a hand across his face.
“But I dinna think I can.” It was a simple statement of fact,
and scared me badly . I had no m ore tears, but felt as though I
looked into a black, bottomless hole—and couldn’ t look away .
I dre w a deep breath, trying to think of something to say ,
then pulled a handkerchief from my pocket and gave it to him.
“Are you breathing, Ian?”
His mouth twitched a little.
“A ye, I think so.”
“That’ s all you have to do, for now .” I got up, brushed hay
from my  skirts, and held out a hand to him. “Come along. W e
need to go back to the cabin before we’re snowed in here.”The sno w was thicker now , and a gust of wind put out the
candle in my lan tern. It didn’ t m atter; I could have found the
cabin blindfolded. Ian went ahead of me without comment,
breaking a trail through the fresh-fallen snow . His head was
bent against the storm, his narrow shoulders hunched.
I ho ped the prayer had helped  him, at least a little, and
wondered whether the Mohawk had any better means of
dealing with unjust death than did the Catholic Church.
Then I realized t hat I knew exactly what the Mohawk would
do in such a case. So did Ian; he’d done it. I pulled the cloak
tighter round me, feeling as tho ugh I had swallowed a lar ge
ball of ice. NOT YET A WHILE
 
A FTER A GOOD DEAL of discussion, the two corpses
were carried gently outside and  laid at the edge of the porch.
There simply was no room to lay them out properly inside, and
given the circumstances …
“W e can na let auld Arch be in doubt any longer than he
must,” Jamie had said, putting a n end to the ar guments. “If the
body’ s in plain sight, maybe he ’ll come out and maybe he’ll
not—but he’ll ken his wife’ s dead.”
“He will,” Bobby Higgins said, with an uneasy look toward
the trees. “And what d’ye think he’ll do then?”
Jamie stood for a moment, look ing toward the wood, then
shook his head.
“Grieve,” he said quietly . “And  in the morning, we’ll see
what’ s to do.”
It wasn’ t the normal sort of wak e, but it was conducted with
what cer emony we could manage. Amy had donated her own
shroud—made after her first wedding, and carefully kept by—
for Mrs.  Bug, and Grannie Mac Leod was clad in the remnants
of my spare che mise and a cou ple of aprons, hastily stitched
up in to respectability . They wer e laid one on either side of the
porch, foot to foot, with a small saucer of salt and a slice of
bread on the ch est of each corpse, though no sin-eater was
available. I had packed a small clay firepot with coals and set
this near the bod ies, and it was agreed that we would all take it
in turns through the night to sit over the deceased, as the porch
would hold no more than two or three people.
“The moon on the br east of the new-fallen snow/Gave the
lustr e of mid-day to objects below ,”  I said softly . It did; the
storm ha d blown over and the three-quarter moon cast a pure,
cold light that m ade each snow-covered tree stand out, starkand delicate as a painting in Japanese ink. And in the distant
ruins of the Big House, the jackstraw of charred timbers hid
whatever lay below .
Jamie and I wer e taking the first watch. No one had ar gued
when Ja mie ann ounced this. No one spoke of it, but the image
of Arch Bug, lurking alone in the forest, was in everyone’ s
mind.
“Y ou thi nk he’ s there?” I asked Jamie, low-voiced. I nodded
toward the dark trees, peaceful in their own soft shrouds.
“If i t we re you lying here, a nighean,”  J am ie s aid, loo king
down at  the still white figures at the edge of the porch, “I
should be beside ye, alive or dead. Come sit down.”
I sat down bes ide him, the f irepot close to our cloak-
wrapped knees.
“Poor th ings,” I said, after a bit. “It’ s a long way from
Scotland.”
“It i s,” he said, and took my hand. His fingers were no
warmer than my own, but the si ze and strength of them were a
comfort, nonetheless. “But they’ll be buried amongst folk who
ken their ways, if not among their own kin.”
“T rue.” Should Grannie MacLeod’ s grandsons ever come
back, at least they would find a marker for her grave and know
she had been tre ated with kindness. Mrs. Bug hadn’ t any kin,
save Arch—no one to come and look for the grave marker . But
she would be among people who’d known and loved her . What
about Arch, though? If he had  kin in Scotland, he’d never
mentioned it. His wife had bee n everything to him, as he to
her .
“Y ou, um, don’ t think that Arch might … do away with
himself?” I asked delicately . “Once he knows?”
Jamie shook his head, definite.
“No,” he said. “It’ s not in him.”
On one level, I was relieved to  hear this. On a lower and
less compassionate level, I couldn’ t help wondering uneasilyjust what a man of Arch’ s passions might do, stricken by this
mortal b low , now bereft of th e woman who had been his
anchor and safe harbor for most of his life.
What would  suc h a man do? I wondered. Run before the
wind un til he hit a reef and sank? Or tie his life to the
makeshift anch or of fury , and take revenge as his new
compass? I’d seen the guilt Jam ie and Ian were bearing; how
much m ore was Arch carrying? Could any man bear such
guilt? O r must he turn it outward, as a matter of simple
survival?
Jamie had said nothing about h is own speculations, but I’d
noticed that he had both pistol and dirk in his belt—and the
pistol was loaded and primed; I could smell the whif f of black
powder under the resinous breat h of spruce and fir . Of course,
it might be  for driving of f a roving wolf or foxes …
W e sat in silen ce for a little while, watching the shifting
glow of the coals in the firepot  and the flicker of light in the
folds of the shrouds.
“Ought we to pray , do you think?” I whispered.
“I havena given over praying since it happened, Sassenach.”
“I kn ow what yo u mean.” I did —the passionate prayer that
it m ight not be, and the desperate prayer for guidance
thereafter; the need to do something, when nothing, really ,
could be  done. And, of course , prayer for the repose of the
recently departed. At least Grannie MacLeod had expected
death—and welcomed it, I thought. Mrs. Bug, on the other
hand, m ust have been terribly startled at being so suddenly
dead. I had a disconcerting visio n of her standing in the snow
just of f the porc h, glaring at he r corpse, hands on stout hips,
lips pursed in annoyance at having been so rudely
disembodied.
“It was  rather a shock,” I said apologetically to her shade.
“A ye, it was that.”
Jamie r eached into his cloak and drew out his flask.
Uncorking this, he leaned forwa rd and carefully poured a fewdrops of  whisky  on the head of each of the dead women, then
lifted the flask in silent toast to Grannie MacLeod, then to
Mrs. Bug.
“Murdina, wife of Archibald, ye  were a great cook,” he said
simply . “ I’ll reca ll your biscuits all my life, and think of ye wi’
my morning parritch.”
“Amen,” I said, my voice trembling between laughter and
tears. I accepted the flask and took a sip; the whisky burned
through the thickness in my throat, and I coughed.
“I know  her receipt for piccalill i. That shouldn’ t be lost; I’ll
write it down.”
The thought of writing reminde d me quite suddenly of the
unfinished letter , still folded up in my workbag. Jamie felt the
slight sti f fening of my posture a nd turned his head toward me
in question.
“I w as only th inking of that letter ,” I said, clearing my
throat. “ I mean, in spite of Roge r and Bree knowing the house
has burnt down, they’ll be happ y to hear that we’re still alive
—always supposing they do eventually get it.”
A ware both of the precarious times and of the uncertain
survival of historical documents, Jamie and Roger had worked
out several schemes for the passage of information, ranging
from the publication of coded messages in various newspapers
to something elaborate involving the Church of Scotland and
the Bank of England. All of these, of course, relied upon the
basic fac t of the MacKenzie family having made the passage
through the stones safely and arrived in more or less the right
time—but I was obliged for my own peace of mind to assume
that they had.
“But I don’ t want to end it by having to tell them—about
this.” I nodded toward the shrouded figures. “They loved Mrs.
Bug—and Bree would be so upset for Ian.”
“A ye, ye’re right,” Jamie said thoughtfully . “And chances
are that Roger Mac would think it all through and realize about
Arch. K nowing, and not able to do anything about it … aye,they’d be worrit, ‘til they found another letter telling them how
it’ s all come out—and God knows how long it may be before
it has all  come out.”
“And if they didn’ t get  t he  next letter …” Or if we didn’ t
survive long enough to write it , I thought.
“A ye, best not tell them. Not yet awhile.”
I m oved  closer , leaning against him, and he put his arm
round m e. W e sat quiet for a bit, still troubled and sorrowful,
but comforted at thought of Roger , Bree, and the children.
I could hear sounds from the cabin behind me; everyone had
been qui et, shoc ked—but normality was fast reasserting itself.
Children couldn’ t be kept quiet long, and I could hear high-
pitched question s, demands for food, the chatter of little ones
excited at being up so late, thei r voices threading through the
clanging and thumps of food preparation. There would be
bannocks and pasties for the next part of the wake; Mrs. Bug
would be pleased. A sudden shower of sparks flew from the
chimney and fell all round the p orch like falling stars, brilliant
against the dark night and the white, fresh snow .
Jamie’ s arm tightened round me, and he made a small sound
of pleasure at the sight.
“That—what ye said about the breast o’ the new-fallen
snow”—the wor d emer ged as “breest” in his soft Highland lilt
—”that’ s a poem, is it?”
“It is. Not rea lly appropriate to a wake—it’ s a comic
Christmas poem called ‘A V isit from Saint Nicholas.’ “
Jamie snorted, his breath white.
“I di nna think the word ‘approp riate’ has much to do wi’ a
proper wake, Sassenach. Give the mourners enough drink, and
they’ll be singing ‘ O thoir a-nall am Botul  ‘ and the weans
dancing ring-a-round-a-rosy in the dooryard by moonlight.”
I did n’ t quite la ugh, but could envision it, all too easily .
There was  eno ugh to drink, too; there was a fresh tub of beer
just brew ed in the pantry , and Bobby had fetched down theemer gency keg of whisky from its hiding place in the barn. I
lifted Jamie’ s hand and kissed the cold knuckles. The shock
and sense of dis location had begun to fade with the growing
awareness of the pulse of life  behind us. The cabin was a
small, v ibrant is land of life, aflo at in the cold of the black and
white night.
“No man is an island, entir e of itself,”  J amie said softly ,
picking up my unspoken thought.
“Now , th at one is  appropriate,” I said, a little dryl y . “Maybe
too appropriate.”
“A ye? How so?”
“Never send to know for whom  the bell tolls, it tolls for
thee?  I never hear No man is an island  without that last line
tolling right behind it.”
“Mmphm. Ken the whole of it, do ye?” Not waiting for my
reply , h e leaned forward and s tirred the coals with a stick,
sending up a tiny drift of silent sparks. “It isna really a poem,
ken—or the man didna mean it to be one.”
“No?” I said, surprised. “What is it? Or was it?”
“A med itation—something atwixt a sermon and a prayer .
John Do nne wrote it as part of his ‘Devotions upon Emer gent
Occasions.’ Tha t’ s suf ficiently appropriate, no?” he added,
with a hint of wry humor .
“They don’ t get much more emer gent than this, no. What
am I missing, then?”
“Mmm.” He pulled me closer , and bent his head to rest on
mine. “Let me c all what I can to mind. I’ll not have all of it,
but t here are bits  that struck me,  so I remember those.” I could
hear his breathing, slow and easy , concentrating.
“All mankind is of one author ,”  he said slowly , ” and is one
volume. When one man dies, one chapter is not torn out of the
book, bu t transla ted into a bette r language; and every chapter
must be so translated . Then there are bits I havena got by
heart, bu t I liked this one: The bell  doth toll for him that th inksit doth “—and h is hand squeezed mine gently—” and though it
intermit again, yet fr om that minute that that occasion wr ought
upon him, he is united to God.”
“Hmm.” I thought about that fo r a bit. “Y ou’re right; that’ s
less poetic, but a bit more … hopeful?”
I felt him smile.
“I’ve always found it so, aye.”
“Where did you get that?”
“John Grey lent me a wee book of Donne’ s writing, when I
was prisoner at Helwater . That was in it.”
“A v ery literate gentleman,” I sa id, somewhat piqued at this
reminder of the substantial chunk of Jamie’ s life that John
Grey ha d shared and I had not—but grudgingly glad that he
had had  a friend through that  time of trial. How often, I
wondered suddenly , had Jamie heard that tolling bell?
I sat up, reached  for the flask, and took a cleansing swallow .
The sm ell of baking, of onion and simmered meat, was
seeping through the door , and my stomach rumbled in an
unseemly manner . Jamie didn’ t notice; he was squinting
thoughtfully of f  toward the w est, where the bulk of the
mountain lay hidden by cloud.
“The MacLeod lads said the passes were already hip-deep in
snow wh en they  came down,” he  said. “If there’ s a foot of new
snow on the gro und here, there are three in the high passes.
W e’re going nowhere ‘til the spring thaw , Sassenach. T ime
enough to carve proper grave markers, at least,” he added,
with a glance at our quiet guests.
“Y ou do still mean to go to Scotland, then?” He’d said so,
after the Big Ho use burned, but hadn’ t mentioned it since then.
I wasn’ t sure whether he’d m eant it or had merely been
reacting to the pressure of events at the time.
“A ye, I do. W e c anna be staying here, I think,” he said, with
some regret. “Come the spring, the backcountry will be boiling
again. W e’ve come close enough to the fire.” He lifted his chinin the direction of the Big House’ s charred remains. “I’ve no
mind to be roasted, next time.”
“W ell … yes.” He was right, I knew . W e could build another
house—but it was unlikely we would be allowed to live
peaceably in it. Among other things, Jamie was—or at least
had been —a col onel of militia. Short of physical incapacity or
simple a bsence, he couldn’ t relinquish that responsibility . And
sentiment in the mountains was by no means all in favor of
rebellion. I knew a number of people who had been beaten,
burnt out, and driven into the  woods or swamps, or killed
outright as the direct result of injudiciously expressed political
sentiments.
The weather prevented our leav ing, but it also put a stopper
on the movement of militias—or roving bands of brigands.
The thou ght of that sent a sudde n bolt of cold through me, and
I shivered.
“Shall ye go in, a nighean ?” J amie asked, noticing. “I can
bear watch alone for a bit.”
“Right. And we’ll come out wi th the bannocks and honey
and find  you stretched out beside the old ladies with an ax in
your head. I’m fine.” I took another sip of whisky , and handed
him the flask.
“W e wouldn’ t necessarily have to go to Scotland, though,” I
said, wa tching him drink. “W e could go to New Bern. Y ou
could join Fer gus in the printin g business there.” That’ s what
he’d said he me ant to do: go to Scotland, fetch the printing
press he  had left in Edinbur gh, then come back to join the
fight, armed with lead in the fo rm of type slugs, rather than
musket balls. I wasn’ t sure whi ch method might be the more
dangerous.
“Y e dinna suppose your presenc e would stop Arch trying to
brain m e, if that’ s what he’ s got in mind?” Jamie smiled
briefly at that, slanted eyes creasing into triangles. “No—
Fer gus has a right to put himself in danger , and he wants to.
But I’ve no right to drag him and his family into my own.”“Which tells me all I need to know about what sort of
printing you have in mind to do . And my presence might not
stop Arc h going  for you, but I c ould at least shout ‘Look out!’
if I saw him creeping up behind you.”
“I s hould always want ye at my back, Sassenach,” he
assured me gravely . “Y e kent already what I mean to do,
surely?”
“Y es,” I said wit h a sigh. “Occasionally I have the vain hope
that I’m wrong about you—but I never am.”
That made him laugh outright.
“No, ye’re not,” he agreed. “Bu t ye’re still here, aye?” He
lifted th e flask in salute to me,  and drank from it. “Good to
know someone will miss me, when I fall.”
“I did not miss that ‘when,’ rather than ‘if,’ ” I said coldly .
“It’ s always been ‘when,’ Sassenach,” he said gently .
“ Every chapter must be so translated . A ye?”
I t ook a deep br eath and watched it drift out in a plume of
mist.
“I sincer ely hope I’m not going to have to do it,” I said, “but
should the question arise—would you want to be buried here?
Or taken back to Scotland?” I was thinking of a granite
marriage stone in the graveyard  at St. Kilda, with his name on
it, and mine, too . The bloody th ing had nearly given me heart
failure when I saw it, and I wasn’ t sure I had for given Frank
for it, even though it had accomplished what he’d meant it to.
Jamie made a small snorting noise, not quite a laugh.
“I sh all be lucky  to be buried at all, Sassenach. Much more
likely I shall b e drowned, burnt, or left to rot on some
battlefield. Dinna fash yourself. If ye’ve got to dispose of my
carcass, just leave it out for the crows.”
“I’ll make a note of that,” I said.
“W ill ye mind going to Scotland?” he asked, eyebrows
raised.I sig hed. Despite my knowing that he wasn’ t going to lie
under that particular gravestone, I couldn’ t quite rid myself of
the notion that he would at some point die there.
“No. I’ll mind leaving the mountains. I’ll mind watching
you turn green and puke your guts out on the ship, and I may
well mind whatever happens on  the way to  said ship, but …
Edinbur gh and printing presse s aside, you want to go to
Lallybroch, don’ t you?”
He nodded, eyes on the glowing coals. The light from the
firepot was faint but warm on the ruddy arch of his brows, a
line of gilding down the long, straight bridge of his nose.
“I p romised, aye?” he said simp ly . “I said I’d bring Y oung
Ian back to his mother . And after this … best he goes.”
I no dded silently . Three thousand miles of ocean might not
be e nough for Ian to escape h is memories—but it couldn’ t
hurt. An d perhaps the joy of seeing his parents, his brothers
and sisters, the Highlands … perhaps it would help heal him.
Jamie coughed, and rubbed a knuckle over his lips.
“There’ s the one other thing,” h e said, a little shy . “Another
promise, ye might say .”
“What’ s that?”
He t urned his he ad then, and me t my eyes, his own dark and
serious.
“I’ve sw orn to myself,” he said, “that I shallna ever face my
son across the barrel of a gun.”
I t ook a deep bre ath and nodded. After a moment’ s silence, I
looked up from my contemplation of the shrouded women.
“Y ou didn’ t ask what I want done with my  bod y .” I ’d mean t
it at  least half in jest, to light en his mood, but his fingers
curled so abruptly over mine that I gasped.
“No,” he said softly . “And I never will.” He wasn’ t looking
at me but at the whiteness before us. “I canna think of ye dead,
Claire. Anything else—but not that. I can’ t.”He s tood abruptly . The rattle of wood, the clang of a falling
pewter dish, and voices raised in adjuration inside saved me
from reply . I sim ply nodded and let him lift me to my feet, as
the door opened, spilling light.
 
THE M ORNING DA WNED clear and bright, with a
scant foot of fresh snow on the ground. By noon, the icicles
that hung from t he cabin’ s eaves had begun to loose their hold,
dropping like random daggers with muf fled, intermittent
thunks . Jamie a nd Ian had gone up the hill to the small burying
ground, with spades, to see whe ther the ground might be dug
deep enough for two decent graves.
“T ake A idan and  one or two of t he other boys with you,” I’d
said at breakfast. “They need to be gotten out from underfoot.”
Jamie ha d given  me a sharp glance, but nodded. He knew very
well what I was thinking. If Arch Bug didn’ t yet  know that his
wife wa s dead, he’d certainly start drawing conclusions if he
saw a grave being dug.
“Best if he’ll com e and speak to me,” Jamie had said quietly
to me, under co ver of the nois e made by the boys readying
themselves to go, their mothers  packing lunch to be taken up
the hill, and the smaller childre n playing ring-a-round-a-rosy
in the back room.
“Y es,” I said, “a nd the boys wo n’ t stop him doing that. But
if he doesn’ t  choose to come  out and speak to you …” Ian had
told me that he’ d heard a rifle fired during the encounter the
night before; Arch Bug was no particular marksman, though,
and would presumably hesitate t o fire on a group that included
young children.
Jamie h ad nodded, silent, and s ent Aidan to fetch his two
eldest cousins.
Bobby a nd Clarence the mule h ad gone up with the grave-
digging party . There was a stoc k of freshly sawn pine boards
at the site higher up on the mountainside, where Jamie haddeclared our new house would o ne day rise; if graves could be
dug, Bobby would bring back some of the boards to make
cof fins.
From my viewpoint on the front  porch, I could see Clarence
now , heavily laden, but mincing downhill with ballerina grace,
ears pointed delicately to eith er side as though to aid his
balance. I caught a glimpse of B obby walking on the far side
of the mule, reaching up now and then to keep the load from
slipping; he saw me and waved , smiling. The M branded on
his c heek was v isible even at this distance, livid against the
cold-chapped ruddiness of his skin.
I wa ved back an d turned in to the house, to tell the women
that we would indeed have a funeral.
 
WE MA DE OUR W A Y up the winding trail to the small
graveyard next  morning. The two old ladies, unlikely
companions in death, lay side by side in their cof fins on a
sledge, p ulled by  Clarence and o ne of the McCallum women’ s
mules, a little black jenny called Puddin’.
W e were  not dressed in our bes t; no one had  a “best, ” with
the exce ption of Amy McCallum Higgins, who had worn her
lace-trimmed we dding kerchief as a sign of respect. W e were
mostly c lean, though, and the adults at least were sober in
aspect, and watchful. V ery watchful.
“Which will be the new guardian, Mam?” Aidan asked his
mother , eyeing the two cof fins as the sledge creaked slowly
uphill ahead of us. “Which died first?”
“Why …  I dinna ken, Aidan,” Amy replied, looking mildly
taken ab ack. She frowned at th e cof fins, then glanced at me.
“D’ye know that, Mrs. Fraser?”
The question hit me like a thro wn pebble, and I blinked. I
did know , of course, but—with some ef fort, I refrained from
glancing into the trees that lined the trail. I had no idea exactly
where A rch Bug was, but he was near; I had no doubt of thatat all. And if  he were nea r enough to overhear this
conversation …
Highland supers tition held that the last person to be buried
in a graveyard b ecame the guardian and must defend the souls
who rested there from any evil , until another should die and
take the guardia n’ s place—whereupon the earlier guardian was
released and might go on to heaven. I didn’ t think Arch would
be a t all happy about the notion of his wife trapped on earth to
guard the graves of Presbyterians and sinners like Malva
Christie.
I fel t a small chill in the heart at thought of Malva—who
was, now I thou ght of it, presumably the graveyard’ s present
guardian. “Presu mably ,” because while other people had died
on the Ridge since her own de ath, she was the last to have
been buried in the graveyard p roper . Her brother , Allan, was
buried nearby , a little way i nto the forest, in a secret,
unmarked grave ; I didn’ t know whether that was near enough
to count. And her father …
I c oughe d into my fist, and clearing my throat said, “Oh,
Mrs. MacLeod. She was dead w hen we came back to the cabin
with Mrs. Bug.” Which was strictly true; the fact that she’d
been dead when I left  the cabin seemed better suppressed.
I had  be en looki ng at Amy whe n I spoke. I turned my head
back to the trail, and there he w as, right in front of me. Arch
Bug, in his rus ty black cloak, white head bared and bent,
following the sledge through the snow , slow as an earthbound
raven. A faint shudder ran through the mourners.
He turned his head then, and saw me.
“W ill ye sing, M rs. Fraser?” he asked, his voice quiet and
courtly . “I’d have her taken to her rest wi’ the proper
observances.”
“I—yes, of course.” Enormously flustered, I groped for
something suita ble. I simply w asn’ t up to the challenge of
composing a proper caithris , a lame nt for the dead—let aloneproviding the formal wailing that a truly first-class Highland
funeral would have.
I s ettled  hastily for a Gaelic psalm that Roger had taught
me, “Is e Dia fein  a’ s buachaill dhomh.”  It was a line chant,
each line  meant to be sung by a precentor , then echoed line by
line by the congregation. It was simple, though, and while my
voice seemed thin and insubstantial on the mountainside, those
around m e were able to take it up, and by the time we reached
the burying ground, we had ac hieved a respectable level of
fervor and volume.
The sled ge stop ped at the edge of the pine-circled clearing.
A fe w wooden crosses and cairns were visible through the
half-melted snow , and the two fresh graves gaped in the center ,
muddy and brutal. The sight of them stopped the singing as
abruptly as a pail of cold water .
The sun shone p ale and bright through the trees, and there
was a gang of nuthatches conversing in the branches at the
edge of the clearing, incongruously cheerful. Jamie had been
leading the mules, and had not glanced back at Arch’ s
appearance. Now , though, he turned to Arch and with a small
gesture at the nearer cof fin, as ked in a low voice, “W ill ye
look upon your wife once more?”
It was only as A rch nodded and moved to the side of the
sledge, that I rea lized that while the men had nailed down the
lid of Mrs. Mac Leod’ s cof fin, they had left Mrs. Bug’ s lying
loose. Bobby and Ian lifted it of f, their eyes on the ground.
Arch ha d unbou nd his hair as a sign of grief; I had never
seen it loose b efore. It was thin, pure white, and wavered
about hi s face like wisps of smo ke as he bent and gently lifted
the shroud from Murdina’ s face.
I swallowed hard, clenching my hands. I’d removed the
arrow—not a pleasant business—and had then wrapped her
throat carefully in a clean bandage before combing her hair .
She looked all right, though ter ribly unfamiliar; I didn’ t think
I’d e ver seen her without her cap, and the bandage across her
full thro at gave her the sternly  formal air of a Presbyterianminister . I saw Arch flinch, just slightly , and his own throat
move. He got control of his face almost at once, but I saw the
lines that ran fro m nose to chin  like gullies through wet clay ,
and the way in which he opened and closed his hands, over
and over , seeking a grip on something that wasn’ t there.
He gaze d into the cof fin for a long moment, then reached
into his sporran and drew out something. I saw when he put
back his  cloak that his belt was empty; he had come without
weapons.
The thin g in his hand was small and glittering. He leaned
down and tried to fix it to the shroud, but could not, with his
missing fingers. He fumbled, said something under his breath
in Gaeli c, then looked up at me, with something near panic in
his e yes. I went at once to him, and took the thing from his
hand.
It was a brooch,  a small, beautif ully made thing in the shape
of a  flying swa llow . Made of gold, and very new-looking. I
took it from him and, turning back the shroud, pinned it to
Mrs. Bug’ s kerchief. I’d never seen the brooch before, either
on M rs. Bug or among her things, and it came to me that Arch
had likely had it made from the gold he had taken from Jocasta
Cameron—perhaps when he began to take the ingots, one by
one; perhaps later . A promise made to his wife—that their
years of  penury  and dependence were over . W ell … indeed
they wer e. I glanced at Arch, an d at his nod, pulled the shroud
gently up over his wife’ s cold face.
I pu t out  a hand impulsively to touch him, take his arm, but
he d rew away and stood back, watching impassively as Bobby
nailed down the lid. At one po int, his gaze rose and passed
slowly over Jamie, then Ian, in turn.
I pre ssed my lip s tight, glancing at Jamie as I came back to
his side,  seeing the trouble etch ed so plainly on his face. So
much gu ilt! Not  that there was n’ t enough and to spare—and
plainly e nough, Arch felt his ow n. Did it not occur to any of
them that Mrs. Bug had had something to do with this, herself?
Had she  not fired at Jamie … but people didn’ t always behaveintelligently , or well, and did the fact that someone had
contributed to their own demise lessen the tragedy of it?
I c aught  sight of the small boulder that marked the grave of
Malva a nd her son, only the top  of it visible through the snow
—rounded, wet, and dark, like the crowning of a baby’ s head
at birth.
Rest in peace , I thought, and felt a small easing of the
tension I’d been under for the last two days. Y ou can go now .
It oc curred to me that whatever  I’d told Amy and Aidan, it
didn’ t alter the truth of which woman really had  died first.
Still, considering Mrs. Bug’ s personality , I rather thought she
might enjoy being in char ge, c lucking and fussing after the
resident souls like her flock of much-loved chickens,
banishing evil spirits with a sharp word and a brandished
sausage.
That tho ught got me through the brief reading from the
Bible, the prayers, the tears—from the women and the
children, most of whom had no  idea why they were crying—
the removal of the cof fins from the sledge, and a rather disjoint
recitation of the Lord’ s Prayer . I missed Roger very much—his
sense of  calm order and genuine compassion in the conducting
of a funeral. An d he would, per haps, have known what to say
in eulogy of Murdina Bug. As it was, no one spoke when the
prayer concluded, and there was a long, awkward pause,
people shifting uneasily from foot to foot—we were standing
in a foot of snow , and the women’ s petticoats were wet to the
knee.
I s aw Jamie shif t his shoulders, as though his coat was too
tight, and glance at the sledge, where the shovels lay under a
blanket. Before he could signa l Ian and Bobby , though, Ian
drew a deep, gasping breath and stepped forward.
He c ame to the side of Mrs. Bug’ s waiting cof fin, opposite
the bereaved husband, and stopped, plainly wanting to speak.
Arch ignored him for a long moment, staring down into the
hole, but finally raised his face, impassive. W aiting.“It was by my hand that this”—Ian swallowed—”that this
woman o f great worth has died. I didna take her life by malice,
or of purpose, and it is sorrow to me. But she died by my
hand.”
Rollo whined softly by Ian’ s side, feeling his master ’ s
distress, but Ian laid a hand on  his head, and he stilled. Ian
drew the knife f rom his belt and  laid it on the cof fin in front of
Arch Bug, then straightened and looked him in the eye.
“Y e swore once to my uncle, in a time of great wrong, and
of fered life for life, for this woman. I swear by my iron, and I
of fer the same.” His lips pressed together for an instant, and
his throa t moved, his eyes dark and sober . “I think ye maybe
didna mean it, sir—but I do.”
I fou nd that I was holding my b reath, and forced myself to
breathe. W as this Jamie’ s plan? I wondered. Ian plainly meant
what he said. Still, the chances o f Arch accepting that of fer on
the s pot and cutting Ian’ s throat  in front of a dozen witnesses
were slim, no matter how exigent his feelings. But if he
publicly declined the of fer—then the possibility of a more
formal and less b loody recompense was opened, yet young Ian
would b e relieved of at least a measure of his guilt. Bloody
Highlander , I thought, glancing up at Jamie—not without a
certain admiration.
I co uld feel small jolts of ener gy running through him,
though, every few seconds, each one suppressed. He wouldn’ t
interfere with Ian’ s attempt at atonement—but neither would
he s ee him injured, if by chance old Arch did  o pt for blood.
And evidently he thought it a possibility . I glanced at Arch,
and thought so, too.
The old man loo ked at Ian for a moment, heavy brows wild
with curling iron-gray old-man hairs—and the eyes beneath
them iron-gray , too, and cold as steel.
“T oo easy , boy ,” he said at last, in a voice like rusty iron.
He looked down at Rollo, who was standing next to Ian,
ears pricked and wolf eyes wary .“W ill ye give me your hound to kill?”
Ian’ s ma sk broke in an instant, shock and horror making
him sud denly young. I heard him  gulp air and steady himself,
but his voice was cracked in reply .
“No,” he said. “He’ s done nothi ng. It’ s my—my crime, not
his.”
Arch sm iled then, very slightly , though it did not touch his
eyes.
“A ye. Y e see, th en. And he’ s no  but a flea-ridden beast. Not
a wife.” “W ife” was spoken in barely a whisper . His throat
worked as he cl eared it. Then h e looked carefully from Ian to
Jamie, and then at me.
“Not a wife,” he said softly . I’d thought my blood ran cold
already; that froze my heart.
In no hurry , Ar ch turned his gaze deliberately upon each
man in turn; Jamie, then Ian, whom he regarded for an instant
that seemed a lifetime.
“When you’ve something worth taking, boy—you’ll see me
again,” h e said quietly , then tur ned upon his heel and walked
into the trees. MORALITY FOR TIME-TRA VELERS
 
T HERE W AS AN electric desk lamp in his study , but
Roger often preferred to work by candlelight in the evening.
He took  a match from the box , and struck it with one soft
scratch. After Claire’ s letter , he didn’ t think he’d ever light a
match again without thinking of  her story of the burning of the
Big House. God, he wished he’d been there.
The match flame shrank as he touched it to the wick, and
the trans lucent wax of the cand le went a dim, unearthly blue
for an instant, then brightene d into its normal glow . He
glanced at Mandy , singing to a collection of stuf fed toys on the
sofa; she ’d had her bath and w as meant to be keeping out of
trouble while Jem had his. Keeping one eye on her , he sat
down at his desk and opened his notebook.
He’d begun it ha lf as a joke. The other half as the only thing
he could think of to combat paralyzing fear .
“Y ou can teach kids not to cross the street alone,” Bree had
pointed out. “Surely you can tea ch them to stay the heck away
from standing stones.”
He’d agreed, but with substantia l mental reservations. Small
kids, yes; you co uld brainwash them into not sticking forks in
the e lectric outlets. But as they b ecame teenagers, with all that
inchoate yearning for self-disco very and things unknown? He
recalled his own teenaged self much too vividly . T ell a
teenaged boy not to stick forks in the outlet, and he’d be of f
rifling the silverware drawer the minute your back was turned.
Girls might be dif ferent, but he doubted it.
He glanced again at the sofa, where Amanda was now lying
on h er back, leg s thrust into the air and a lar ge, ratty-looking
stuf fed b ear balanced on her fe et, to which she was singing
“Frere Jacques.” Mandy had been so young that she wouldn’ tremember . Jem would. He did; Roger could tell, when the little
boy woke up from nightmare s, eyes huge and staring at
nothing, and could not describ e his dream. Thank God, it
didn’ t happen often.
He s till broke ou t in a cold sweat whenever he remembered
it him self. That last passage. He ’d clutched Jemmy to his chest
and step ped into … God, there was no name for it, because
humanity at lar ge had never exp erienced it, and lucky for them
they hadn’ t. It w asn’ t even like  any thing to wh ich it could be
compared.
None of the senses worked there—and at the same time, all
of them did, in such a state of hypersensitivity that you’d die
of it if i t lasted any longer than it did. A howling void, where
sound se emed to  batter you, pul sing through your body , trying
to separa te each cell from the next. Absolute blindness, but the
blindness of looking into the sun. And the impact of …
bodies? Ghosts? Unseen others who brushed past like moth
wings o r seemed to hurtle righ t through you in a colliding
thump of entangling bones. A constant sense of screaming.
Did it smell? He  paused, frowning, trying to remember . Y es,
it da mned well did. And oddly  enough, it was a describable
smell: the scent of air burnt by lightning—ozone.
It smells str ongly of ozone , he wrote, feeling remarkably
relieved to have even this smal l foothold of reference to the
normal world.
This relief disappeared in the ne xt instant, as he returned to
the struggle of memory .
He’d felt as tho ugh nothing save his own will held them
together , nothing but raw determination to survive held him
together . Knowing what to expect hadn’ t helped in the
slightest; it was dif ferent—a nd much worse—than his
previous experiences.
He d id k now no t to look at them. The ghosts, if that’ s what
they were. “Look” wasn’ t the r ight word … pay attention tothem? Again, there wasn’ t a word, and he sighed in
exasperation.
“Sonnez le matines, sonnez le matines …”
“Din dan don,”  he sang  softly with her chorus. “Din dan
don.”
He tappe d the pen on the paper for a minute, thinking, then
shook his head a nd bent over the paper again, trying to explain
his f irst attempt, the occasion o n which he’d come within …
moments? inches? Some unthinkably small degree of
separation of meeting his father—and destruction.
I think you cannot cr oss your ow n lifeline , he wrote slowly .
Both Bree and Claire—the sc ientific women—had assured
him that two ob jects cannot exist in the same space, whether
said objects were subatomic particles or elephants. That being
true, it would ex plain why one couldn’ t exist twice in the same
time period, he supposed.
He a ssumed it w as that phenomenon that had come so close
to ki lling him on  his first attemp t. He had been thinking of his
father w hen he entered the ston es, and—presumably—of his
father as  he, Roger , had known  him. Which was, of course,
during the period of his own life.
He t apped the pe n on the page again, thinking, but could not
bring himself just now to writ e about that encounter . Later .
Instead, he flipped back to the r udimentary outline in the front
of the book.
A Practical Guide for T ime-T ravelers
 
I. Physical Phenomena
1 . Known Locations (Ley Lines?)
2 . Genetic Inheritance
3 . Mortality
4 . The Influence and Pr operties of Gemstones
5 . Blood? 
He’d scratched through that last one, but hesitated, looking
at it. Did he have an obligatio n to tell everything he knew ,
believed, or suspected? Claire thought that the notion of a
blood sacrifice being required  or useful was nonsense—a
pagan superstition without real validity . She might be right;
she was the scie ntist, after all. But he had the uneasy memory
of the night Geillis Duncan had gone through the stones.
Long blond hair , flying in the  rising wind of a fire, the
whipping locks silhouetted for a n instant against the face of a
standing stone. The gagging scent of petrol mingled with
roasting flesh, and the log that was not a log lying charred in
the center of the circle. And Geillis Duncan had gone too far .
“It’ s always two hundr ed year s, in the old fairy tales,”
Claire had told h im. Literal fairy tales; stories of people stolen
by the fairies, “t aken through the stones” of faerie hills. It was
a time, two hund r ed years ago , suc h ta les ofte n began. Or the
people were returned to their own place—but two hundred
years past the time they had left. T wo hundred years.
Claire, Bree, himself—each time they had traveled, the span
of time was th e same: two h undred and two years, close
enough to the two hundred ye ars of the ancient tales. But
Geillis Duncan had gone too far .
W ith great reluctance, he slow ly wrote Blood  again, and
added a parenthetical (Fir e??) , b ut nothing b eneath it. Not
now; later .
For reas surance, he glanced at the spot on the bookshelf
where the letter lay , weighted do wn by a small snake carved of
cherrywood. W e ar e alive… .
He want ed suddenly to go and fetch the wooden box, pull
out the other let ters, rip them open and read. Curiosity , sure,
but something more—wanting to touch them, Claire and
Jamie, press the evidence of th eir lives against his face, his
heart, erase the space and time between them.He forc ed back the impulse, though. They’d decided—or
rather , Bree had, and they were her parents.
“I don’ t want to  read them all at once,” she’d said, turning
over the  contents of the box with long, gentle fingers. “It’ s …
it’ s like once I ’ve read them all, then they’ll be … r eally
gone.”
He’d understood. As long as one letter remained unread,
they wer e  aliv e. In  spite of his historian’ s curiosity , he shared
her sentiment. Besides …
Brianna’ s parents had not written those letters as journal
entries, meant for the eventual  eyes of a vaguely imagined
posterity . They’d been written with the definite and specific
intent of communication—with Bree, with him . Which meant
that they might well contain uns ettling things; both his in-laws
had a talent for such revelation.
Despite himself,  he rose, took down the letter and unfolded
it, and read the postscript once more, just to assure himself he
hadn’ t been imagining it.
He h adn’ t. W ith the word “blood ” ringing faintly in his ears,
he sat back down. An Italian gentleman . Th at was Charles
Stuart; couldn’ t be anyone else. Christ. After staring of f into
space for a bit— Mandy had now started in on “Jingle Bells”—
he s hook himself, flipped ove r a few pages and started in
again, doggedly .
II. Morality
A. Mur der and W r ongful Death
Naturally , we assume that the killing of someone for
any r ea son sh ort of self-defense, the pr otection of
another , or the legitimate use of for ce in wartime is
completely indefensible .
 
He look ed at that for a moment, muttered, “Pompous ass,”
and ripped the page out of the notebook, crumpling it.
Ignoring Mandy’ s warbling re ndition of “Gingle bells,
Bamman smells, W obin waid enegg!”  h e  scooped up thenotebook and stomped across the hall to Brianna’ s study .
“Who am I to be gassing on about morality?” he demanded.
She looked up from a sheet showing the disassembled
components of a hydroelectric turbine, with the rather blank
look tha t indicated she was aware of being spoken to, but had
not detached her mind suf ficiently from the subject matter as
to r ealize who was speaking or what they were saying.
Familiar with this phenomenon, he waited with mild
impatience for her mind to let go of the turbine and focus on
him.
” … gassing on … ?” she said, frowning. She blinked at him
and her gaze sharpened. “Who are you gassing on to?”
“W ell … ” He  lifted the scribbled notebook, feeling
suddenly shy . “The kids, sort of.”
“Y ou’re suppose d to gas on to your kids about morality ,”
she said reasonably . “Y ou’re their father; it’ s your job.”
“Oh,” he said, rather at a loss. “But—I’ve done  a lot of the
things I ’m tellin g them not to. ” Blood . Y eah, maybe it was
protection of another . Maybe it wasn’ t.
She raised a thick, ruddy brow at him.
“Y ou ne ver hear d of benign hyp ocrisy? I thought they teach
you stuf f like that when you go to minister school. Since you
mention gassing away about morality . That’ s a minister ’ s job,
too, isn’ t it?”
She stared at hi m, blue-eyed and waiting. He took a good,
deep bre ath. T rust Bree, he thou ght wryly , to walk straight up
to the elephant i n the room and grab it by the trunk. She hadn’ t
said a word since their return about his near -ordination, or
what he proposed to do now a bout his calling. Not a word,
during their year in America, Mandy’ s sur gery , their decision
to move to Scotland, the months of renovation after they’d
bought Lallybro ch—not until he’d opened the door . Once
opened, of course, she’d walked straight through it, knocked
him over , and planted a foot on his chest.
“Y eah,” he said evenly . “It is,” and stared back.“Okay .” She smiled, very gently , at him. “So what’ s the
problem?”
“Bree,” he said, and felt his hea rt stick in his scarred throat.
“If I knew , I’d tell you.”
She stoo d up then and put her hand on his arm, but before
either of them c ould say more, the thump of small, bare feet
came hop-skipping down the hall, and Jem’ s voice came from
the door of Roger ’ s study , saying, “Daddy?”
“Here, pal,” he called back, but Brianna was already
moving toward the door . Following, he found Jem—in his blue
Superman pajamas, wet hair standing up in spikes—standing
by his desk, examining the letter with interest.
“What’ s this?” he asked.
“W assis?” Mandy echoed faithfully , rushing over and
scrambling up on the chair to see.
“It’ s a letter from your grandda,” Brianna replied, not
missing a beat. S he put a hand casually on the letter , obscuring
most of the pos tscript, and pointed with the other at the last
paragraph. “He sent you a kiss. See there?”
A huge smile lighted Jem’ s face.
“He said he wouldn’ t for get,” he said, contented.
“Kissy , Grandda ,” Mandy exclaimed, and bending forward
so her mass of black curls fell over her face, planted a loud,
“MW AH!” on the letter .
Caught between horror and laughter , Bree snatched it up
and wiped the m oisture of f it—but the paper , old as it was,
was tough. “No harm done,” she said, and handed the letter
casually to Roger . “Come on,  what story are we reading
tonight?”
“Aminal Nursy T ales!”
“An-i-mal,” Jem said, bending down to speak distinctly into
his sister ’ s face. “An-i-mal Nur -ser -y T ales.”“Okay ,” she said amiably . “Me first!” and scampered madly
out the door , gig gling, followed by her brother in hot pursuit.
Brianna took three seconds to se ize Roger by the ears and kiss
him firm ly on the mouth, then released him and set of f after
their of fspring.
Feeling happier , he sat down, listening to the uproar of
toothbrushing and face-washing above. Sighing, he put the
notebook back in the drawer . Plenty of time, he thought. Y ears
before it might be needed. Y ears and years.
He folded up the  letter with care , and standing on tiptoe, put
it on  the highest  shelf of the bookcase, moving the little snake
to g uard it. He blew out the candle then, and went to join his
family .
 
Postscriptum: I see I am to have  the last W or d—a rar e
T r eat to  a Man living in a House that contains (at last
count) eight W omen. W e pr opose to leave the Ridge so
soon as the Clim ate thaws, and to go to Scotland, ther e to
pr ocur e my printing Pr ess, and  r eturn with it. T ravel in
these times is uncertain, and I cannot pr edict when—or if
—it wil l be possible to write again. (Nor do I know
whether you will r eceive this Letter at all, but I pr oceed
in necessary Faith that you will.)
I wished to tell you of the Disposition of the Pr operty
which w as once held in trust by the Camer ons for an
Italian Gentleman. I think it unwise to carry this with us,
and have ther efor e r emoved it to a Place of safety . Jem
knows the Place. If you should a t some T ime have need of
this Pr operty , tell him the Span iar d guar ds it. If so, be
sur e to have it blessed by a Priest; ther e is Blood upon it .
Sometimes I wish that I might  see the Futur e; much
mor e often, I give thanks to God that I cannot. But I will
always see your Faces. Kiss the Childr en for me .
Y our loving father ,
 JF 
 
THE CHILDRE N W ASHED, toothbrushed, kissed, and
put to bed, their parents return ed to the library , a dram of
whisky , and the letter .
“An Italian gentleman?” Bree looked at Roger , one brow
raised in  a way that brought Jamie Fraser so immediately to
mind that Roger glanced invol untarily at the sheet of paper .
“Does he mean—”
“Charles Stuart? He can’ t mean anyone else.”
She picked the letter up and read the postscript for perhaps
the dozenth time.
“And if he does mean  Charles Stuart, then the property …”
“He’ s fo und the gold. And Jem  knows where it is?” Roger
couldn’ t help this last taking on the tone of a question, as he
cast his eyes tow ard the ceiling, above which his children were
presumably asleep, wrapped in virtue and cartoon pajamas.
Bree frowned.
“Does h e? That isn’ t exactly w hat Da said—and if he did
know …  that ’ s an awfully big secret to ask an eight-year -old
boy to keep.”
“T rue.” Eight or not, Jem was very good at keeping secrets,
Roger thought. But Bree was right—her father would never
burden anyone with dangerou s information, let alone his
beloved grandson. Certainly not without a good reason, and
his posts cript made it clear that this information was provided
only as a contingency in case of need.
“Y ou’re right. Jem doesn’ t know anything about the gold—
just about this Spaniard, whate ver that may be. He’ s never
mentioned anything like that to you?”
She sho ok her head, then turne d as a sudden puf f of wind
from the open window blew through the curtains, breathingimmanent rain. Bree got up and went hastily to close it, then
trotted upstairs to close the wind ows there, waving at Roger to
see to those on the ground floor . Lallybroch was a lar ge house,
and unusually well provided wit h windows—the children kept
trying to count t hem, but never came up with the same number
twice.
Roger supposed he could go a nd count them himself one
day and  settle the matter , but was reluctant to do this. The
house, like most old houses, had a distinct personality .
Lallybroch was welcoming, a ll right; lar ge and gracious,
comfortably rather than grandly built, with the echoes of
generations murmuring in its walls. But it was a place that had
its secrets, too, no doubt of that. And hiding the number of its
windows was quite in keeping with the sense he had of the
house as being rather playful.
The windows in the kitchen—n ow equipped with modern
refrigerator , Aga cooker , and decent plumbing, but still with its
ancient granite counters stained with the juice of currants, the
blood of game and poultry—were all closed, but he went
through it nonetheless, and through the scullery . The light in
the back  hall was of f, but he co uld see the grating in the floor
near the wall that gave air to the priest’ s hole below .
His father -in-law had hidden there briefly , during the days
after the Rising, before being imprisoned at Ardsmuir . Roger
had gone down there once— also briefly—when they had
bought t he hous e, and had come  up out of the dank, fetid little
space with a com plete understanding of why Jamie Fraser had
chosen to live in  a wilderness on a remote mountaintop, where
there was no constraint in any direction.
Y ears of hiding, of duress, of imprisonment … Jamie Fraser
was not a political creature, and he knew better than most what
the true cost of war was, whate ver its presumed purpose. But
Roger h ad seen his father -in-law now and then rub absently at
his wrists, where the marks of fetters had long since faded—
but the memory of their weigh t had not. Roger had not the
slightest doubt that Jamie Frase r would live free, or die. Andwished for an instant, with a longing that gnawed his bones,
that he might be there, to fight by his father -in-law’ s side.
The rain  had started; he could hear the patter of it on the
slate roo fs of the outbuildings, then the rush as it came on in
earnest, wrapping the house in mist and water .
“For ourselves … and our po sterity ,” he said aloud, but
quietly .
It w as a bar gain made betw een men—unspoken, but
understood com pletely . Nothing mattered but that the family
be preserved, the children protected. And whether the cost of it
was paid in blood, sweat, or soul—it would be paid.
“Oidche mhath,”  he said, with a brief nod in the direction
of the priest’ s hole. Good night, then.
He stood a mo ment longer in the old kitchen, though,
feeling t he emb race of the hou se, its solid protection against
the s torm. The kitchen had alwa ys been the heart of the house,
he t hought, and found the war mth of the cooker as much a
comfort as the fire on the now-empty hearth had once been.
He m et Brianna at the foot of t he stairs; she’d changed for
bed—as opposed to sleep. The air in the house was always
cool, and the temperature had dropped several degrees with
the onset of rai n. She wasn’ t wearing her woolies, though;
rather , a thin nightgown of white cotton, deceptively innocent-
looking, with a small red ribbon threaded through it. The white
cloth clu ng to the shape of her breasts like cloud to a mountain
peak.
He said as much , and she laughed—but made no objection
when he cupped his hands aroun d them, her nipples against his
palms round as beach pebbles through the thin cloth.
“Upstairs?” she whispered, and leaning in, ran the tip of her
tongue along his lower lip.
“No,” he  said, and kissed her solidly , quelling the tickle of
the touch. “In the kitchen. W e haven’ t done it there, yet.”He had  her , bent over the ancient counter with its
mysterious stains, the sound of her small grunts a punctuation
to the rush of wind and rain on the ancient shutters. Felt her
shiver an d liquefy and let go, too, his knees trembling with it,
so he fell slowl y forward, clutched her by the shoulders, his
face pre ssed into the shampoo-fragrant waves of her hair , the
old granite smooth and cool beneath his cheek. His heart was
beating slow and hard, steady as a bass drum.
He was naked, and a cold draft from somewhere raised
gooseflesh down his back and legs. Brianna felt him shiver
and turned her face to his.
“Cold?” she whispered. She wasn’ t; she glowed like a live
coal, and he wanted nothing mo re than to slide into bed beside
her and ride out the storm in snug warmth.
“I’m fine.” He bent and scoo ped up the clothes he had
thrown on the floor . “Let’ s go to bed.”
The rain was louder upstairs.
“Oh, the animals went in two b y two,”  Bree sang softly , as
they climbed the stairs, “the elephants and the kangar oos …”
Roger sm iled. Y ou could  imagine the house an ark, floating
on a roaring wo rld of water—but all snug within. T wo by two
—two parents, two kids … may be more, someday . There was
plenty of room, after all.
W ith th e lamp put out and the beating of rain on the
shutters, Roger lingered on th e edge of sleep, reluctant to
surrender the pleasure of the moment.
“W e won’ t ask him, will we?” Bree whispered. Her voice
was drowsy , her soft weight w arm all down the side of his
body . “Jem?”
“Oh? No. Of course not. No need.”
He f elt the prick of curiosity—w ho was the Spaniard? And
the noti on of buried treasure was always a lure—but they
didn’ t need it; th ey had enough money for the present. Alwaysassuming the gold was still whe rever Jamie had put it, which
was a long shot in itself.
Nor had he for gotten the last injunction of Jamie’ s
postscript.
Have it blessed by a priest; ther e is blood upon it . The
words melted as he thought th em, and what he saw on the
inside of his eyelids was not gold ingots but the old granite
counter in the ki tchen, dark stains sunk so far into the stone as
to h ave become part of it, inera dicable by the most vigorous
scrubbing, let alone an invocation.
But it didn’ t matter . The Spani ard, whoever he was, could
keep his gold. The family was safe.P AR T  T WO Blood, Sweat, and Pickles
 
  LONG ISLAND
 
ON JUL Y 4, 1776, the Declaration of Independence was
signed in Philadelphia.
ON JUL Y 24, Lieutenant Gen eral Sir W illiam Howe
arrived on Staten Island, where he set up field headquarters at
the Rose and Crown T avern in New Dorp.
ON AUGUST  13, Lieutenant General Geor ge
W ashington arrived in New Y ork to reinforce the fortifications
of the city , which the Americans held.
ON AUGUST 21, W illiam R ansom, Lieutenant Lord
Ellesmere, arriv ed at the Rose and Crown in New Dorp,
reporting—somewhat late—for duty as the newest and most
junior member of General Howe’ s staf f.
ON AUGUST 22 …
 
L IEUTENANT EDW ARD MARKHAM, Marquis of
Clarewell, peere d searchingly into W illiam’ s face, of fering
him an unappetizingly close view of a juicy pimple—just
ready to burst—on the former ’ s forehead.
“Y ou all right, Ellesmere?”
“Fine.” W illiam managed the word between clenched teeth.
“Only , you look rather … green.” Clarewell, looking
concerned, reached into his pocket. “W ant a suck of my
pickle?”
W illiam just about made it to th e rail in time. There was a
certain amount of jocularity going on behind him regarding
Clarewell’ s pickle, who might suck it, and how much its
owner would be obliged to pay for said service. This,interspersed wi th Clarewell’ s protestations that his aged
grandmother sw ore by a sour pickle for the prevention of
seasickness, and  plainly it work ed, for look at him, solid as a
rock …
W illiam blinked watering eyes and fixed his vision on the
approaching sh ore. The water wasn’ t particularly rough,
though the weather was brewin g, no doubt about it. It didn’ t
matter , though; even the gentlest of up-and-down motions on
water , the briefest of journeys, a nd his stomach promptly tried
to turn itself inside out. Every damned time!
It was still trying, but as there  was nothing left in it, he
could pretend it wasn’ t. He wip ed his mouth, feeling clammy
despite the heat of the day , and straightened his shoulders.
They would drop anchor any minute; time he was going
below and badgering the companies under his command into
some kind of order before they went into the boats. He risked a
brief glance over the rail, and saw the River  and the Phoenix
just astern. The Phoenix  was  Ad miral Ho we’ s flagship, and his
brother the general was aboar d. W ould they have to wait,
bobbing like corks on the increasingly choppy waves, until
General Howe and Captain Pic kering, his aide-de-camp, got
ashore? God, he hoped not.
In the event, th e men were allo wed to disembark at once.
“W ith A LL POS SIBLE SPEED , gennelmun!” Ser geant Cutter
informed them at the top of his voice. “W e’re going to catch
the rebel whoresons on the ‘op, so we are! And WOE BETIDE
any man  what I see lollygaggin’! YOU, there … !” He strode
of f, forceful as a plug of black t obacco, to apply the spurs to a
delinquent sec ond lieutenant, leaving W illiam feeling
somewhat better . Surely nothing truly terrible could happen in
a world containing Ser geant Cutter .
He follo wed his men down the  ladder and into the boats,
for getting his stomach entirely in the rush of excitement. His
first real battle was waiting to be fought, somewhere on the
plains of Long Island.
 
EIGHTY -EIGHT FRIGA TES. That’ s what he’d heard
Admiral Howe had brought, and he didn’ t doubt it. A forest of
sails filled Gravesend Bay , and  the water was choked with
small boats, ferrying troops ashore. W illiam was half choked
himself, with anticipation. He could feel it gathering among
the m en, as the corporals collec ted their companies from the
boats and marched of f in good order , making room for the next
wave of arrivals.
The of ficers’ horses were being swum ashore, rather than
rowed, t he distance not being great. W illiam ducked aside as
one big bay su r ged up out of the surf nearby and shook
himself in a shower of salt spray that drenched everyone
within ten feet. The stable-lad clinging to his bridle looked like
a drown ed rat, but shook himse lf of f likewise and grinned at
W illiam, his face blanched with cold but vivid with
excitement.
W illiam had a horse, too—somewhere. Captain Griswold, a
senior member of Howe’ s staf f, was lending him a mount,
there having been no time to  or ganize anything else. He
supposed whoever was minding the horse would find him,
though he didn’ t see how .
Or ganized confusion reigned. The shore here was a tidal
flat, and coveys of red coats sw armed amongst the sea wrack
like flocks of shorebirds, the bellowing of ser geants a
counterpoint to the shrieking of gulls overhead.
W ith some dif ficulty , as he’d been introduced to the
corporals only that morning and  did not have their faces firmly
fixed in memory yet, W illiam lo cated his four companies and
marched them up the shore into  sand dunes thick with some
sort of wiry gr ass. It was a hot day , sweltering in heavy
uniform and full equipment, and  he let the men take their ease,
drink wa ter or beer from their ca nteens, eat a bit of cheese and
biscuit. They’d be on the move soon.
Where? That was the question preying on his mind at the
moment. A hasty staf f meeting the night before—his first—had reiterated the basics of the invasion plan. From Gravesend
Bay , half the arm y would march inland, turning north toward
the B rooklyn Heights, where th e rebel forces were thought to
be entrenched. The remainder of the troops would spread
outward along the shore to Mon tauk, forming a line of defense
that could move inward across Long Island, forcing the rebels
back into a net, if necessary .
W illiam wanted, with an intensity that knotted his spine, to
be in  the vanguard, attacking. R ealistically , he knew it wasn’ t
likely . H e was completely unfam iliar with his troops, and not
impressed with their looks. No sensible commander would put
such com panies in the front line—unless to serve as cannon
fodder . That thought gave him p ause for a moment, but only a
moment.
Howe w asn’ t a waster of men; he was known to be cautious,
sometimes to a fault. His father had told him that. Lord John
hadn’ t mentioned that that consideration was the major reason
for his consent t o W illiam’ s joining Howe’ s staf f, but W illiam
knew it anyway . He didn’ t care; he’d calculated that his
chances of seeing significant action were still a great deal
better w ith How e than fiddling about in the North Carolina
swamps with Sir Peter Packer .
And after all … he turned slowly , side to side. The sea was a
mass of British ships, the lan d before him crawling with
soldiers. He would never have admitted aloud to being
impressed by the sight—but h is stock was tight across his
throat. He realized he was hold ing his breath and consciously
let it go.
The artillery was coming ashore, floating perilously on flat-
bottomed bar ges, manned by swearing soldiers. The limbers,
the caissons, and the draft hor ses and oxen needed to drag
them were splashing up the beach in a thrashing, sand-
spattered herd, neighing and lowing in protest, having come
ashore farther south. It was the biggest army he had ever seen.
“Sir , sir!” He lo oked down to see a short private soldier ,
perhaps no older than W illiam  himself, plump-cheeked andanxious.
“Y es?”
“Y our spontoon,  sir . And your horse has come,” the private
added, gesturing  at the rangy light bay gelding whose reins he
held. “Captain Griswold’ s compliments, sir .”
W illiam took the spontoon, seven feet long, its burnished
steel hea d gleaming dully even under the clouded sky , and felt
the weight of it thrill through his arm.
“Thank you. And you are … ?”
“Oh. Pe rkins, sir .” The private hastily knuckled his brow in
salute. “Third company , sir; the Hackers, they call us.”
“Do they? W ell, we will ho pe to give you plenty of
opportunity to justify your name.” Perkins looked blank.
“Thank you, Perkins,” W illiam  said, gesturing the private
of f.
He took the brid le of the horse, joy rising in his heart. It was
the biggest army he’d ever seen. And he was part of it.
 
HE W AS  LUCKIER THAN he’d thought he might be, if
not as lucky as he’d hoped. His  companies were to be in the
second wave, following up the vanguard of foot, guarding the
artillery . Not a guarantee of action, but a good chance
nonetheless, if the Americans were half the fighters they were
reputed to be.
It w as past noon before he lifted his spontoon into the air
and shouted, “Forward, march!” The brewing weather had
broken in a spattering rain, a welcome relief from the heat.
Beyond the shore, a fringe of woods gave way to a broad
and beautiful plain. W aving grasses lay before them, flecked
with wil dflowers, the colors rich in the dim, rainy light. Far
ahead, he could see flights of b irds—doves? quail? too far tosee—rising into the air despite the rain, as the marching
soldiers drove them from their cover .
His own companies marched close to the center of the
advancing line, snaking in orderly columns behind him, and he
directed a grateful thought towa rd General Howe. As a junior
staf f of f icer , he should by rights have been delegated to
messenger duty , scampering to and fro among the companies
on the field, r elaying orders  from Howe’ s headquarters,
carrying inform ation to and from the two other generals, Sir
Henry Clinton and Lord Cornwallis.
Given h is late arrival, though, he knew none of the other
of ficers or the army’ s disposition; he was completely ignorant
of w ho was whom, let alone where they should be at any
moment. He would be useless as a messenger . General Howe,
somehow findin g a moment in  the bustle of the oncoming
invasion, had not only welcome d him with great courtesy but
had of fered him the choice: accompany Captain Griswold,
serving in such manner as the captain might direct—or take
command of a few companies orphaned of their own
lieutenant, who had fallen ill of the ague.
He had jumped at the chance, and now sat proud in his
saddle, h is spontoon resting in its loop, leading men to war . He
shifted a  little, enjoying the feel of the new red wool coat on
his shoulders, the orderly club of the queued pigtail on his
neck, th e stif f leather stock ab out his throat, and the small
weight of his of ficer ’ s gor get, that tiny silver remnant of
Roman armor . He’d not worn uniform for nearly two months
and, rai n-damp or not, felt its  resumption to be a glorious
apotheosis.
A comp any of light horse trave led near them; he heard the
shout o f their of ficer and saw  them draw ahead and turn
toward a distant copse of wood. Had they seen something?
No. A tremendous cloud of blackbirds exploded from the
copse, in  a chatter so great that  many of the horses shied and
spooked. The horse soldiers foraged about, weaving through
the trees  with sabers drawn, sla shing at branches, but just forshow . If anyone had been hiding  there, they had gone, and the
light ho rse rode back to rejoin the advance, catcalling each
other .
He relax ed back into his saddl e, releasing his grip on the
spontoon.
No Americans in sight—but they wouldn’ t be. He’d seen
and hear d enough in his intellig encing to know that only real
Continentals were likely to fight in an or ganized fashion. He’d
seen mil itia drilling in village squares, shared food with men
who belonged to such militias. None of them were soldiers—
seen in groups drilling, they w ere laughable, barely able to
march in  a line, let alone in step—but nearly all were skilled
hunters, and he’d seen too many of them shoot wild geese and
turkey on the fly to share the common contempt of most
British soldiers.
No, if there wer e Americans nearby , the first warning of it
was like ly to be men falling dead. He signaled to Perkins, had
him convey orders to the corp orals, to keep the men alert,
weapons loaded and primed. He saw one corporal’ s shoulders
stif fen a t receipt  of this message , which he plainly considered
an insult—but the man did it no netheless, and W illiam’ s sense
of tension eased a bit.
His thoughts returned to his recent journey , and he
wondered when —and where— he might meet with Captain
Richardson, to turn over the results of his intelligencing.
He had committed most of his observations to memory
while on the road, writing down only what he must, and that
coded in a sm all copy of the New T estament that his
grandmother ha d given him. It was still in the pocket of his
civilian coat, back on Staten Is land. Now that he was safely
returned to the b osom of the army , perhaps he ought to write
up his observations, in proper reports? He could—
Something raised him in his st irrups, just in time to catch
the flash and crack of musket fire from the woods on the left.“Hold!” he shouted, seeing hi s men start to lower their
weapons. “W ait!”
It w as too far , and there was another column of infantry ,
closer to the wood. These swung  into firing order and loosed a
volley in to the woods; the first r ank knelt and the second fired
over the ir heads. Return fire came from the wood; he saw one
or two men fall, others stagger , but the line pulled together .
Another two volleys, the sparks  of returning fire, but more
sporadic—from the corner of his eye, he saw movement and
whirled in his s addle, to see a gang of woodsmen in hunting
shirts running from the far side of the copse.
The company in front of him sa w them, too. A shout from
their ser geant, and they fixed ba yonets and ran, though it was
plain to W illiam that they’d never catch the fleeing woodsmen.
This sort of random skirmishing kept up all afternoon, as the
army pre ssed on. The fallen were picked up and carried to the
rear , but they we re few . One of W illiam’ s companies was fired
upon at one poi nt, and he felt godlike as he gave the order to
attack a nd they poured into the  wood like a stream of angry
hornets, bayonets fixed, managing to kill one rebel, whose
body they dragged out onto the  plain. The corporal suggested
hanging it from a tree as disco uragement to the other rebels,
but W illiam firmly declined this suggestion as not honorable
and made them lay the man at th e edge of the wood, where he
could be found by his friends.
T oward evening, orders came along the line of march, from
General Clinton. They would not stop to make camp. A brief
pause for cold rations, and then press on.
There were murmurs of surprise in the ranks, but no
grumbling. They’d come to fight, and the march resumed with
a greater sense of ur gency .
It w as raining sporadically , and the harassment from
skirmishers fade d with the sullen light. It was not cold, and
despite the growing soddenness of his garments, W illiam
preferred the chill and damp to the sultry oppression of the daybefore. At least the rain damp ened the spirits of his horse,
which w as a good thing; it was a nervous, skittish creature,
and he had cause to doubt Captain Griswold’ s goodwill in
lending it to hi m. W orn down by the long day , though, the
gelding ceased shying at windblown branches and jerking at
the reins, and plodded onward with its ears falling sideways in
tired resignation.
It w asn’ t bad for the first several hours of the night march.
After midnigh t, though, the strain of exertion and
sleeplessness be gan to tell on the men. Soldiers began to
stumble and slow , and a sense o f the vast expanse of dark and
ef fort between themselves and dawn settled upon them.
W illiam called Perkins up bes ide him. The soft-cheeked
private showed up yawning and blinking, and paced beside
him, a hand on W illiam’ s stirrup leather as W illiam explained
what he wanted.
“Sing?” Perkins  said doubtfully . “W ell, I s’pose I can sing,
yes, sir . Nobbut hymns, though.”
“Not qu ite what  I had in mind,” W illiam said. “Go and ask
Ser geant … Millikin, is it? The Irishman? Anything he likes,
so lo ng a s it’ s loud and lively .” A fter all, they weren’ t trying to
hide their presence; the Americans knew exactly where they
were.
“Y es, sir ,” Perkins said dubiou sly , and let go the stirrup,
fading at once into the night. W illiam rode for some minutes,
then hea rd Patrick Millikin’ s very loud Irish voice lifted in a
very bawdy song. There was a ripple of laughter through the
men, an d by the time he reach ed the first chorus, a few had
joined in . T wo more verses and  they were all roaring lustily
along, W illiam included.
They couldn’ t keep it up for ho urs while marching at speed
with full equipment, of cours e, but by the time they had
exhausted their favorite songs and grown breathless, everyone
was awake and optimistic once more.Just befo re dawn, W illiam smelled the sea and the rank mud
scent of  a marsh in the rain. The men, already wet, began to
splash through a number of tiny tidal inlets and creeks.
A few minutes later , the boom of cannon broke the night,
and marsh birds rose into the lightening sky with shrieks of
alarm.
 
OVER THE COURSE OF the next two days, W illiam
never ha d any idea where he was. Names such as “Jamaica
Pass,” “Flatbush,” and “Gowan us Creek” occurred now and
then in the dispa tches and hasty messages that passed through
the army , but th ey might as we ll have said “Jupiter” or “the
backside of the moon” for all the meaning they had.
He d id see Continentals, at last.  Hordes of them, swarming
out of the mar shes. The first few clashes were fierce, but
W illiam’ s companies were held to the rear , supporting; only
once we re they close enough t o fire, in order to repulse an
oncoming group of Americans.
Nonetheless, he was in a constan t state of excitement, trying
to he ar and see everything at once, intoxicated by the smell of
powder smoke, even as his fle sh quivered at the report of
cannon. When the firing ceased at sunset, he took a little
biscuit and cheese, but witho ut tasting it, and slept only
briefly , from sheer exhaustion.
In late afternoon of the second day , they found themselves
some little way behind a lar ge st one farmhouse that the British
and some Hessian troops had  taken over as an artillery
emplacement; the barrels of cannon protruded from the upper
windows, shining wet with the constant rain.
W et powder was a problem now; the cartridges were all
right, but if the powder poured into priming pans was left
more tha n a few minutes, it be gan to cake and go dead. The
order to load, then, had to be delayed until the last possiblemoment before firing; W illiam found himself grinding his
teeth in anxiety as to when the order should be given.
On the other ha nd, sometimes there was no doubt at all.
W ith hoarse shouts, a number of  Americans char ged out of the
trees nea r the front of the hous e and made for the doors and
windows. Musket fire from the troops inside got several of
them, bu t some made it as far as the house itself, where they
began to clamber into the shattered windows. W illiam
automatically re ined up and rode to the right, far enough to get
a look at the re ar of the house . Sure enough, a lar ger group
was already at it, a number of them climbing the wall by
means of the ivy that covered the back of the house.
“That way!” he bellowed, wheeling his horse around and
waving his spontoon. “Olson, Je f fries, the back! Load and fire
as soon as you’re in range!”
T wo of his com panies ran, ripping the ends of cartridges
with their teeth, but a party of gr een-coated Hessians was there
before him, seizing Americans by the legs and pulling them
from the ivy to club them on the ground.
He reine d round and dashed the other way , to see what was
happening in front, and came in sight just in time to see a
British artillerym an fly out of one of the open upper windows.
The man  landed on the ground , one leg bent under him, and
lay screaming. One of W illiam’ s men, close enough, darted
forward and grabbed the man’ s  shoulders, only to be shot by
someone within the house. He crumpled and fell, his hat
rolling of f into the bushes.
They spent the r est of that day at the stone farmhouse; four
times, the Americans made fora ys—twice, they succeeded in
overcoming the inhabitants and briefly seizing the guns, but
both times were overrun by fresh waves of British troops and
evicted or killed. W illiam never got closer than two hundred
yards or so to the house itself, b ut once managed to interpose
one of his companies between the house and a sur ge of
desperate Amer icans dressed like Indians and yelling like
banshees. One of them raised a long rifle and fired directly athim, but missed. He drew his sword, intending to ride the man
down, but a shot  from somewhere struck the man and sent him
rolling down the face of a small hillock.
W illiam ur ged his mount closer , to see whether the man was
dead or not—the  man’ s companions had already fled round the
far corner of the house, pursued by British troops. The gelding
wasn’ t having any; trained to the sound of musket fire, it
found artillery unnerving, and the cannon happening to speak
at this particular moment, the gelding laid its ears flat back and
bolted.
W illiam had his sword still in hand, the reins loosely
wrapped round his other hand; the sudden jolt unseated him,
and the horse w hipped to the left, jerking his right foot from
the stirrup and pitching him of f. He had barely presence of
mind to  let go of the sword a s he fell, and landed on one
shoulder , rolling.
Simultaneously thanking God that his left foot hadn’ t been
trapped in its st irrup and cursing the horse, he scrambled up
onto hands and knees, smeared with grass and mud, heart in
his mouth.
The gun s in the house had stopped; the Americans must be
in th ere again, engaged in hand -to-hand fighting with the gun
crews. He spat out mud, and began to make a cautious
withdrawal; he thought he was in range of the upper windows.
T o his left, thou gh, he caught sight of the American who
had tried  to shoot him, still lying in the wet grass. W ith a wary
glance a t the house, he crawled to the man, who was lying on
his face,  unmov ing. He wanted to see the man’ s face, for what
reason he couldn’ t have said. H e rose on his knees and took
the man by both shoulders, pulling him over .
The man  was clearly dead, shot through the head. Mouth
and eyes  sagged half open and his body felt strange, heavy and
flopping. He wore a militia unif orm of sorts; W illiam saw the
wooden buttons, with “PUT” burnt into them. That meant
something, but his dazed mind  made no sense of it. Gentlylaying th e man back in the grass, he rose and went to fetch his
sword. His knees felt peculiar .
Halfway to the s pot where his sword lay , he stopped, turned
round, and came back. Kneeling down, cold-fingered and
hollow-bellied, he closed the man’ s dead eyes against the rain.
 
THEY MADE CAMP that night, to the pleasure of the
men. Camp kitchens were dug,  the cook wagons brought up,
and the scent of roasting meat and fresh bread filled the damp
air . W il liam had just sat dow n to eat when Perkins, that
harbinger of doom, appeared ap ologetically at his side with a
message: report to General Howe’ s field headquarters at once.
Snatching a loaf of bread and a steaming chunk of roast pork
to put in it, he went, chewing.
He found the three generals and all of their staf f of ficers
gathered together , deep in a discussion of the day’ s results.
The generals sat at a small tab le thick with dispatches and
hastily drawn maps. W illiam found a place among the staf f
of ficers, standing respectfully ba ck against the walls of the big
tent.
Sir Hen ry was ar guing for an attack on the Brooklyn
Heights, come morning.
“W e could dislodge them easily ,” Clinton said, waving a
hand at the disp atches. “They’ve lost half their men, if not
more—and weren’ t such a lot of ‘em to start with.”
“Not easily ,” said my lord Cornw allis, pursing fat lips. “Y ou
saw them fight. Y es, we could get them out of there—but at
some cost. What say you, sir?” he added, turning deferentially
to Howe.
Howe’ s lips all but disappeared, only a white line marking
their former existence.
“I can’ t af ford another victory like the last one,” he snapped.
“Or if I could, I don’ t want it.” His eyes left the table and
passed over the juniors standing  against the wall. “I lost everyman on my staf f at that damned hill in Boston,” he said, more
quietly . “T wenty-eight of them. Every one.” His eyes lingered
on W illi am, the youngest of the  junior of ficers present, and he
shook h is head, as though to himself, and turned back to Sir
Henry .
“Stop the fighting,” he said.
Sir Henry wasn’ t pleased, W ill iam could see that, but he
merely nodded.
“Of fer them terms?”
“No,” Howe said shortly . “They’ve lost nearly half their
men, as you said. No one but a madman would go on fighting
without cause. They—you, sir . D id you have an observation to
make?”
W ith a start, W il liam realized that Howe was addressing this
remark to him; those round eyes were boring into his chest like
bird shot.
“I—” he began, but then cau ght himself and drew up
straight. “Y es, sir . It’ s General Putnam in command. There at
the creek. He’ s … perhaps not a madman, sir ,” he added
carefully , “but he has the name of a stubborn man.”
Howe paused, eyes narrowed.
“A stubborn man,” he repeated. “Y es. I should say he is.”
“He was one o f the commanders at Breed’ s Hill, wasn’ t
he?” objected Lord Cornwalli s. “The Americans ran fast
enough away from ther e .”
“Y es, but—” W illiam stopped dead, paralyzed by the fixed
joint stares of three generals. Howe motioned him impatiently
to go on.
“W ith re spect, my lord,” he said, and was glad that his voice
didn’ t shake, “I … hear that the Americans did not run in
Boston until they had exhausted  every scrap of ammunition. I
think …  that is not the case, here. And with regard to General
Putnam—there was no one behind him at Breed’ s Hill.”“And you think that there is now .” It wasn’ t a question.
“Y es, sir .” W illia m tried not to look pointedly at the stack of
dispatches on Sir W illiam’ s tab le. “I’m sure of it, sir . I think
nearly a ll of the Continentals are on the island, sir .” He tried
not to make tha t sound like a question; he’d heard as much
from a passing major the day b efore, but it might not be true.
“If Putnam’ s in command here—”
“How do you know it’ s Put nam, Lieutenant?” Clinton
interrupted, giving W illiam the fish-eye.
“I am lately co me from an—an intelligencing expedition,
sir , whic h took me through Connecticut. I heard there, from
many p eople, that militia were gathering to accompany
General Putnam, who was to join with General W ashington’ s
forces n ear New Y ork. And I saw a button on one of the rebel
dead near the creek this afternoon, sir , with ‘PUT’ carved on
it. That’ s what they call him, sir—General Putnam: ‘Old Put.’
“
General Howe straightened himself before Clinton or
Cornwallis could interject anything further .
“A stubborn man,” he repeated. “W ell, perhaps he is.
Nonetheless … suspend the fighting. He is in an untenable
position, and must know it. Give him a chance to think it over
—to consult with W ashington if he likes. W ashington is
perhaps a more sensible comma nder . And if we might gain the
surrender of the whole Conti nental army without further
bloodshed … I think it worth the risk, gentlemen. But we will
not of fer terms.”
Which meant that if the Americans saw sense, it would be
an unconditional surrender . And if they didn’ t? W illiam had
heard stories about the fight at Breed’ s Hill—granted, stories
told by Americans, and therefo re he took them with several
grains o f salt. But by account, the rebels there had taken the
nails from the fencing of their fortifications—from the very
heels of their sh oes—and fired them at the British when their
shot ran out. They had retreated only when reduced to
throwing stones.“But if Putnam’ s  expecting reinforcement from W ashington,
he’ll only sit an d wait,” Clinton said, frowning. “And then
we’ll have the whole boiling of them. Had we best not—”
“That’ s not what he meant,” Howe interruputed. “W as it,
Ellesmere? Whe n you said there was no one behind him at
Breed’ s Hill?”
“No, sir ,” W illiam said, grate ful. “I meant … he has
something to protect. Behind h im. I don’ t think he’ s waiting
for the rest of the army to c ome to his aid. I think he’ s
covering their retreat.”
Lord Cornwallis’ s hooped brows shot up at that. Clinton
scowled at W illiam, who recal led too late that Clinton had
been the field c ommander at the Pyrrhic victory of Breed’ s
Hill and was likely sensitive on the subject of Israel Putnam.
“And why are we soliciting th e advice of a boy still wet
behind the—have you ever even seen combat, sir?” he
demanded of W illiam, who flushed hotly .
“I’d be fighting now , sir ,” he said, “were I not detained
here!”
Lord Cornwallis laughed, and a brief smile flitted across
Howe’ s face.
“W e shall make certain to have you properly blooded,
Lieutenant,” he said dryly . “But not today . Captain Ramsay?”
He m otioned to one of the senio r staf f, a short man with very
square shoulders, who stepped  forward and saluted. “T ake
Ellesmere here and have him tell you the results of his …
intelligencing. Convey to me anything which strikes you as
being of interest. In the meantim e”—he turned back to his two
generals—”suspend hostilities until further notice.”
 
WILLIAM HEARD NO M ORE of the generals’
deliberations, he being led away by Captain Ramsay .Had he spoken too much out of turn? he wondered. Granted,
General Howe had asked him a  direct question; he had had to
answer . But to put forward his paltry month’ s intelligencing,
against the combined knowled ge of so many experienced
senior of ficers …
He said something of his doubts to Captain Ramsay , who
seemed a quiet sort but friendly enough.
“Oh, you hadn’ t any choice but to speak up,” Ramsay
assured him. “Still …”
W illiam dodged round a pile of mule droppings in order to
keep up with Ramsay .
“Still?” he asked.
Ramsay didn’ t answer for a bit, but led the way through the
encampment, down neat aisles of canvas tents, waving now
and then at men round a fire who called out to him.
At last, they arrived at Ramsay’ s own tent, and he held back
the flap for W illiam, gesturing him in.
“Heard of a lad y called Cassandra?” Ramsay said at last.
“Some sort of Greek, I think. Not very popular .”
 
THE AR MY SL EPT SOUNDL Y after its exertions, and
so did W illiam.
“Y our tea, sir?”
He blinked, disoriented and still wrapped in dreams of
walking through the Duke of Devonshire’ s private zoo, hand
in hand with an orangutan. But it was Private Perkins’ s round
and anxious face, rather than the orangutan’ s, that greeted him.
“What?” he said stupidly . Perkins seemed to swim in a sort
of haze, but this  was not dispel led by blinking, and when he
sat up to take the steaming cup, he discovered the cause of it
was that the air itself was permeated with a heavy mist.All soun d was muf fled; while t he normal noises of a camp
rising were to b e heard, they sounded far away , subdued. No
surprise, then, when he poked his head out of his tent a few
minutes later , to find the ground  blanketed with a drifting fog
that had crept in from the marshes.
It di dn’ t matter much. The army was going nowhere. A
dispatch from Howe’ s headquarters had made the suspension
of h ostilities of ficial; there was nothing to do but wait for the
Americans to see sense and surrender .
The army stretched, yawned, and sought distraction.
W illiam was engaged in a hot g ame of hazard with Corporals
Y arnell and Jef fries when Perkins came up again, breathless.
“Colonel Spencer ’ s compliments, sir , and you’re to report to
General Clinton.”
“Y es? What for?” W illiam demanded. Perkins looked
baf fled; it hadn’ t occurred to h im to ask the messenger what
for .
“Just …  I suppose he wants you ,” he said, in an ef fort to be
helpful.
“Thank you very much, Private Perkins,” W illiam said, with
a sarcasm wasted on Perkins, who beamed in relief and retired
without being dismissed.
“Perkins!” he bellowed, and the private turned, round face
startled. “Which way?”
“What? Er … what, sir , I mean?”
“In which direction does Gen eral Clinton’ s headquarters
lie?” W illiam asked, with elaborate patience.
“Oh! Th e hussar … he came from …” Perkins rotated
slowly , like a weather vane, frowning in concentration. “That
way!” H e pointe d. “I could see that bit of hillock behind him.”
The fog  was still thick near the  ground, but the crests of hills
and tall trees we re now and then visible, and W illiam had no
dif ficulty in spotting the hillock  to which Perkins referred; it
had an odd lumpy look to it.“Thank you, Perkins. Dismissed ,” he added quickly , before
Perkins could make of f again. He watched the private
disappear into the shifting mass of fog and bodies, then shook
his head and went to hand command over to Corporal Evans.
The geld ing didn’ t like the fog. W illiam didn’ t like it, either .
Fog gave him an uneasy feel ing, as though someone was
breathing on the back of his neck.
This wa s a sea fog, though: heavy , dank, and cold, but not
smothering. It thinned and thickened, with a sense of
movement to it. He could see a few feet before him, and could
just make out the dim shape of the hillock Perkins had
indicated, though the top kept appearing and disappearing like
some fantastic conjuration in a fairy tale.
What might Sir Henry want wi th him? he wondered. And
was it only him who’d been se nt for , or was this a meeting
called to apprise the line of ficers of some change of strategy?
Maybe Putnam ’ s men had s urrendered. They should,
certainly; they had no hope of victory in the circumstances,
and that must be plain to them.
But he supposed Putnam would need, perhaps, to consult
with W ashington. During the fighting at the old stone
farmhouse, he’d  seen a small group of horsemen on the crest
of a distant hill, an unfamiliar flag fluttering amongst them;
someone at the time had pointed at it and said, “That’ s him
there, W ashington. Shame we’ve not got a twenty-four in
place—teach him to gawk!” and laughed.
Sense sa id they ’d surrender . But he had an uneasy feeling
that had  nothing  to do with the fog. During his month on the
road, he’d had occasion to listen to a good many Americans.
Most were uneasy themselves , not wanting conflict with
England, particularly not wanting to be anywhere near armed
strife—a very sensible conclusion. But the ones who wer e
decided on revolt … were very decided indeed.
Maybe Ramsay had conveyed some of this to the generals;
he hadn ’ t seemed at all impressed by any of W illiam’ sinformation, let alone his opinions, but perhaps—
The horse stumbled, and he lurched in his saddle,
accidentally jerking the reins. The horse, annoyed, whipped
round its head and bit him, big teeth scraping on his boot.
“Bastard!” He smacked the horse across the nose with the
ends of the reins , and hauled the  gelding’ s head round forcibly ,
until the rolling eyes and curle d lip were nearly in his lap.
Then, his point made, he slowly released the pressure. The
horse snorted and shook his mane violently , but resumed
progress without further ar gument.
He s eemed to h ave been riding for some time. But time as
well as distance  was deceiving in fog. He glanced up at the
hillock t hat was his goal, only to discover that it had vanished
again. W ell, doubtless it would come back.
Only it didn’ t.
The fog continued to shift aro und him, and he heard the
dripping of moisture from the l eaves of the trees that seemed
to come  suddenly out of the mist at him and as suddenly
retreat again. But the hillock stayed stubbornly invisible.
It occurr ed to him that he hadn’ t heard any sounds of men
for some time now .
He should have.
If he were approaching Clinton ’ s headquarters, he should
not only  be hearing all the normal camp sounds, he should
have en countered any number of men, horses, campfires,
wagons, tents …
There was no noise anywhere near him, save the rushing of
water . He’d bloody bypassed the camp.
“Damn you, Perkins,” he said under his breath.
He drew  up for a moment and checked the priming of his
pistol, s nif fing at the powder in  the pan; it smelled dif ferent
when the damp got at it. Still all right, he thought; it smelled
hot a nd nose-prickling, not so m uch of the rotten-egg scent of
sulfur as wet powder had.He kept the pis tol in his hand, though so far he’d seen
nothing threatening. The fog was too heavy to see more than a
few feet  in front of him, though;  someone could come out of it
suddenly , and he’d have to dec ide on the instant whether to
shoot them or not.
It was quiet; their own artillery was silent; there was no
random musket fire like the da y before. The enemy was in
retreat; n o doubt about that. But if he should stumble across a
stray Co ntinental, lost in the f og like himself, ought he to
shoot? T he thought made his h ands sweat, but he thought he
must; the Continental would likely have no hesitation about
shooting him , the instant he saw the red uniform.
He was somewhat more worried about the humiliation of
being shot by hi s own troops tha n about the actual prospect of
death, but was not entirely oblivious to the risk of that, either .
The blo ody fog had got thicker , if anything. He looked in
vain for  the sun, to give some sense of direction, but the sky
was invisible.
He fought back the small quiver of panic that tickled his
tailbone. Right, there were 34,000 British troops on this
bloody i sland; h e had to be within pistol shot of any number of
them at this moment. And you only need be in pistol shot of
one American , he reminded himself, grimly p ushing through a
growth of larches.
He heard rustlings and the cracking of branches nearby; the
wood was inhabited, no doubt about it. But by whom?
The British troops wouldn’ t be moving in this fog, that was
one thing. Curse Perkins! If he heard movement, then, as of a
body of men, he ’d stop and stay hidden. And otherwise … all
he could hope to do was to run across a body of troops, or to
hear something  unmistakably military in nature—shouted
orders, perhaps …
He r ode on slowly for some time, and finally put the pistol
away , finding the weight of it w earisome. God, how long had
he b een out? An  hour? T wo? Ou ght he to turn around? But hehad no way of  knowing what “around” was—he might be
traveling in circles; the ground a ll looked the same, a gray blur
of trees and rocks and grasses. Y esterday , he’d spent every
minute k eyed to fever pitch, re ady for the attack. T oday , his
enthusiasm for fighting had ebbed substantially .
Someone stepped out in front of him and the horse reared,
so abrup tly that W illiam had only the vaguest impression of
the man. Enough to know h e wasn’ t wearing a British
uniform, though, and he would have snatched his pistol out,
were both hands not occupied in trying to control the horse.
The horse, having given way to hysteria, crow-hopped in
mad circ les, jar ring W illiam to the spine with each landing.
His surr oundings spun past in a  blur of gray and green, but he
was hal f conscious of voices, whooping in what might be
either derision or encouragement.
After wh at seem ed an age, but must be only half a minute or
so, W illiam succeeded in bring ing the bloody creature to a
standstill, panting and blowing, still flinging its head around,
the whites of its eyes showing, gleaming wet.
“Y ou fucking piece of cat’ s m eat!” W illiam said to it,
hauling its head round. The hor se’ s breath sank damp and hot
through the doeskin of his breec hes, and its sides heaved under
him.
“Not the  best-tempered horse I ever seen,” a voice agreed,
and a hand came up, seizing the bridle. “Healthy-looking,
though.”
W illiam got a glimpse of a man in hunting dress, stout and
swarthy—and then someone else seized him round the waist
from behind and hauled him bodily of f the horse.
He h it the ground hard and flat on his back, knocking out
his wind, but tried valiantly to get to his pistol. A knee pressed
into his chest, and a lar ge hand  wrestled the pistol out of his
grip. A bearded face grinned down at him.
“Not very sociable,” the man said, reproving. “Thought
you-all was meant to be civilized, you British.”“Y ou let him g et up and at you, Harry , I imagine he’d
civilize you, all right.” This was another man, shorter and
slightly built, with a soft, educated voice like a schoolmaster ,
who peered over the should er of the man kneeling on
W illiam’ s chest. “Y ou could let him breathe, though, I
suppose.”
The pressure on W illiam’ s ch est relaxed, and he got a
whisper of air i nto his lungs. This was promptly driven out
again when the man who had held him down punched him in
the stom ach. Ha nds promptly began to rifle his pockets, and
his gor get was jerked of f over his head, painfully scraping the
underside of his nose. Someone reached round him and
unbuckled his belt, neatly removing it with a whistle of
pleasure at the equipment attached.
“V ery nice,” said the second man, approving. He glanced
down at W illiam, lying on th e ground and gasping like a
landed f ish. “I thank you, sir; we’re much obliged. All right,
Allan?” he called, turning toward the man holding the horse.
“A ye, I’ ve got ‘im,” said a nasal Scottish voice. “Let’ s be
of f!”
The men moved away , and for an instant, W illiam thought
they had left. T hen a meaty hand seized his shoulder and
flipped h im ove r . He writhed up  onto his knees by sheer will,
and the same ha nd seized his pigtail and jerked his head back,
exposing his throat. He caught the gleam of a knife, and the
man’ s broad grin, but had neither breath nor time for prayers
or curses.
The knife slashed down, and he felt a yank at the back of his
head that brought water to his eyes. The man grunted,
displeased, and hacked twice more, finally coming away
triumphant, W illiam’ s pigtail held up in a ham-sized hand.
“Souvenir ,” he said to W illiam, grinning, and whirling on
his heel, made of f after his friends. The horse’ s whinny drifted
back to W illiam through the fog, mocking.
 
HE WISHED, URGENTL Y , that he had managed to kill
at least one of th em. But they’d taken him as easily as a child,
plucked him like a goose and left him lying on the ground like
a f uckin g turd! His rage was so overwhelming that he had to
stop and  punch a tree trunk. The  pain of that left him gasping,
still murderous but breathless.
He clutched the injured hand between his thighs, hissing
between his teeth until the pain  abated. Shock was mingling
with fu ry; he felt more disoriented than ever , his head
spinning. Chest heaving, he rea ched behind his head with his
sound h and, feeling the bristly stumpage left there—and
overcome with fresh rage, kicked the tree with all his strength.
He limped round in circles, swearing, then finally collapsed
onto a rock and put his head down on his knees, panting.
Gradually , his breath slowed, and his ability to think
rationally began to return.
Right. He was still lost in the wilds of Long Island, only
now minus horse, food, or weapons. Or hair . That  made him
sit up straight, fi sts clenched, and he fought back the fury , with
some dif ficulty . Right. He hadn ’ t time to be angry now . If he
ever laid eyes on Harry , Allan, or the little man with the
educated voice  … well, tim e enough for that when it
happened.
For now , the important thing was to locate some part of the
army . H is impulse was to desert on the spot, take ship to
France, and never come back, leaving the army to presume
that he’ d been killed. But he couldn’ t do that for assorted
reasons, not least his father—who’d probably prefer that he
was  killed than run cravenly away .
No h elp for it. He rose resignedly to his feet, trying to feel
grateful that the bandits had at l east left him his coat. The fog
was lifting a little here and there, but still lay damp and chilly
on the ground. Not that he was troubled by that; his own blood
was still boiling.He glared round at the shadowy shapes of rocks and trees.
They looked just like all the oth er fucking rocks and trees he’d
encountered in the course of this misbegotten day .
“Right,” he said aloud, and sta bbed a finger into the air ,
turning as he did so. “Eeny-meeny-miney-mo, catch a Frenchy
by the toe, if he’ s squealing—oh, the hell with it.”
Limping slightly , he set of f. He had no idea where he was
going, but he had to move, or burst.
He entertained himself for some little time in reimagining
the recent encounter , with satisfying visions of himself seizing
the fat man nam ed Harry and w ringing his nose into bloody
pulp before smashing his head on a rock. Grabbing the knife
away fro m him and gutting that supercilious little bastard …
ripping his lungs out … there was a thing called the “blood
eagle” that the savage German  tribes used to do, slitting a
man’ s back and dragging out his lungs through the slits, so
they flapped like wings as he died …
Gradually , he grew calmer , only because it was impossible
to sustain such a level of fury .
His foot felt better; his knuck les were skinned, but not
throbbing as much, and his fanta sies of revenge began to seem
faintly a bsurd to him. W as tha t what the fury of battle was
like? he wondered. Did you w ant not just to shoot and stab
because it was y our duty to kill, but did you like  it ? W ant it
like wanting a woman? And did you feel like a fool after doing
it?
He’d thought about killing in ba ttle. Not all the time, but on
and of f.  He’d made a great ef fort to visualize it when he’d
made up his mind to join the army . And he did realize that
there might be regret attached to the act.
His father had t old him, baldly and with no ef fort at self-
justification, about the circum stances under which he had
killed his first man. Not in b attle, but following one. The
point-blank exec ution of a Scot, wounded and left on the field
at Culloden.“Under orders,” his father had sa id. “No quarter to be given;
those were our written orders, signed by Cumberland.” His
father ’ s eyes had been fixed on his bookshelves during the
telling, but at this point he’d looked at W illiam directly .
“Orders,” he repeated. “Y ou follow orders, of course; you
have to. But there will be times when you have no orders, or
find yourself in a situation whic h has changed suddenly . And
there will be times—there will  be times, W illiam—when your
own honor dictates that you ca nnot follow an order . In such
circumstances, you must follow your own judgment, and be
prepared to live with the consequences.”
W illiam had nodded, solemn. He’d just brought his
commission papers for his father to look over , Lord John’ s
signature being required as his guardian. He’d regarded the
signing as a mer e formality , though; he hadn’ t been expecting
either a confession or a sermon—if that’ s what this was.
“I shouldn’ t have done it,” his father had said abruptly . “I
shouldn’ t have shot him.”
“But—your orders—”
“They didn’ t af fect me, not di rectly . I hadn’ t yet got my
commission; I’d gone with my brother on campaign, but I
wasn’ t a  soldier yet; I wasn’ t under the army’ s authority . I
could have refused.”
“If you had, wouldn’ t someone else have shot him?”
W illiam asked practically .
His father smiled, but without humor .
“Y es, they would. But that’ s not  the point. And it’ s true that
it ne ver occurred to me that I had a choice in the matter—but
that is  the  point. Y ou always have a choice, W illiam. Do
remember that, will you?”
W ithout waiting for an answer , he’d leaned forward and
plucked a quill from the blue-and-white Chinese jar on his
desk, and flipped open his rock-crystal inkwell.“Y ou’re sure?” he’d said, looking seriously at W illiam, and
at th e latter ’ s no d, signed his name with a flourish. Then had
looked up and smiled.
“I’m proud of you, W illiam,” he’d said quietly . “I always
will be.”
W illiam sighed. He didn’ t doubt that his father would
always love him, but as for making him proud … this
particular expedition did not seem likely to cover him in glory .
He’d be  lucky to get back to his own troops before someone
noticed how long he’d been go ne and raised the alarm. God,
how ignominiou s, to get lost and robbed, as his first notable
act!
Still, better than having his first  notable act being killed by
bandits.
He continued to make his way cautiously through the fog-
draped woods. The footing wasn’ t bad, though there were
boggy p laces wh ere the rain had  pooled in low spots. Once, he
heard th e ragged crack of musk et fire and hurried toward it,
but it stopped b efore he came in sight of whoever had been
firing.
He trudg ed grimly along, wondering just how long it might
take to traverse  the whole of the bloody island on foot, and
how close he was to having done so? The ground had risen
sharply; he was climbing now , sweat running freely down his
face. He fancied the fog was thi nning as he climbed, and sure
enough, at one point he emer ged onto a small rocky
promontory and had a brief gl impse of the ground below—
completely cove red in swirling gray fog. The sight gave him
vertigo, and he was obliged to sit down on a rock for a few
moments with his eyes closed before continuing.
T wice, h e heard  the sound of men and horses, but the sound
was subtly wrong; the voices d idn’ t have the rhythms of the
army , an d he turned away , edging cautiously in the opposite
direction.He found the ground change abruptly , becoming a sort of
scrub fo rest, full of stunted trees poking from a light-colored
soil that scrunched under his b oots. Then he heard water—
waves lapping on a beach. The sea! W ell, thank God for that,
he thought, and hastened his steps toward the sound.
As he made his way toward the sound of the waves, though,
he suddenly perceived other sounds.
Boats. The grating of hulls—more than one—on gravel, the
clank of oarlocks, splashing. And voices. Hushed voices, but
agitated. Bloody hell! He ducked under the limb of a runty
pine, hoping for a break in the drifting fog.
A s udden movement sent him lunging sideways, hand
reaching for his pistol. He bare ly remembered that the pistol
was gon e, before realizing that his adversary was a great blue
heron, which eyed him with a yellow glare before launching
itself skyward in a clatter of af front. A cry of alarm came from
the bushes, no more than ten feet away , together with the
boom o f a musket, and the heron exploded in a shower of
feathers, directly over his head. He felt drops of the bird’ s
blood, much warmer than the cold sweat on his face, and sat
down very suddenly , black spots dizzy before his eyes.
He d idn’ t dare m ove, let alone call out. There was a whisper
of v oices from t he bushes, but not loud enough that he could
make out any words. After a few moments, though, he heard a
stealthy rustling that moved gradually away . Making as little
noise as possible, he rolled onto  hands and knees and crawled
for some distance in the other direction, until he felt it safe to
rise to his feet again.
He thought he s till heard voices. He crept closer , moving
slowly , his heart thumping. He smelled tobacco, and froze.
Nothing moved near him, though—he could still hear the
voices, but they were a good way distant. He snif fed,
cautiously , but the scent had vanished; perhaps he was
imagining things. He moved on, toward the sounds.He could hear them clearly now . Ur gent, low-voiced calls,
the rattl e of oarlocks and the s plash of feet in the surf. The
shuf fle and murmur of men, blending—almost—with the
susurrus of sea and grass. He cast one last desperate glance at
the sky , but the sun was still invisible. He had  to be on the
western side of the island; he w as sure of it. Almost sure of it.
And if he was …
If he was, the s ounds he was hearing had to be those of
American troops, fleeing the island for Manhattan.
“Don’ t. Stir .” The whisper behind him coincided exactly
with the  pressure of a gun’ s barrel, jammed hard enough into
his kidney as to freeze him where he stood. It withdrew for an
instant and returned, rammed home with a force that blurred
his eyes . He made a guttural sound and arched his back, but
before he could speak, someone  with horny hands had seized
his wrists and jerked them back.
“No need,” said the voice, deep, cracked, and querulous.
“Stand aside and I’ll shoot him.”
“No, ‘ee won’ t,” said another , ju st as deep but less annoyed.
” ‘e’ s nobbut a youngun. And pretty , too.” One of the horny
hands stroked his cheek and he stif fened, but whoever it was
had already bound his hands tight.
“And if ‘ee mea nt to shoot ‘im,  you’m ‘ve done it already ,
sister ,” the voice added. “T urn y’ self, boy .”
Slowly , he turned round, to see t hat he had been captured by
a pair of old women, short and squat as trolls. One of them, the
one with the gun, was smoking a pipe; it was her tobacco he’d
smelled. Seeing  the shock and disgust on his features, she
lifted on e corner  of a seamed mouth while keeping a firm grip
on the pipestem with the stumps of brown-stained teeth.
” ‘andsome is as ‘andsome does,” she observed, looking
him up and down. “Still, no need to waste shot.”
“Madam,” he said, collecting himself and trying for charm.
“I believe you mistake me. I am a soldier of the King, and—”Both of  them burst into laugh ter , creaking like a pair of
rusty hinges.
“W ouldn’ t never ’ve guessed,” the pipe-smoker said,
grinning round the stem of her pipe. “Thought ‘ee was a
jakesman, sure!”
“Hush up, sonny ,” her sister interrupted his further attempt
to speak. “W e bain’ t going to harm ‘ee, so long as ‘ee stands
still and keeps mum.” She eyed him, taking in the damage.
“Been in the wars, have ‘ee ?” she said, not without
sympathy . Not waiting for an answer , she pushed him down
onto a rock, thi s liberally crusted with mussels and dripping
weed, from which he deduced his closeness to the shore.
He didn ’ t speak.  Not for fear of the old women, but because
there was nothing to say .
He s at, listening to the sounds o f the exodus. No idea how
many m en migh t be involved, a s he had no notion how long it
had been going on. Nothing useful was said; there were only
the breathless half-heard exch anges of men working, the
mutter o f waiting, here and ther e the sort of muf fled laughter
born of nervousness.
The fog was lift ing of f the wate r . He could see them now—
not more than a  hundred yards away , a tiny fleet of rowboats,
dories, here and there a fishing  ketch, moving slowly to and
fro across water smooth as glass—and a steadily dwindling
crowd of men o n shore, keeping their hands on their guns,
glancing continually over their shoulders, alert for pursuit.
Little did they know , he reflected bitterly .
At the moment, he had no conc ern for his own future; the
humiliation of being an impotent witness as the entire
American army escaped unde r his nose—and the further
thought of being obliged to return and recount this occurrence
to G eneral Howe—was so galling that he didn’ t care whether
the old women had it in mind to cook and eat him.
Focused as he was on the scene on the beach, it didn’ t occur
to him at once that if he could now see the Americans, he washimself visible to them. In fact, so intent were the Continentals
and mili tiamen on their retreat that none of them did  notice
him, until one m an turned away from the retreat, seeming to
search the upper reaches of the shore for something.
The man stif fened, then, with a brief glance back at his
oblivious comp anions, came purposefully up across the
shingle, eyes fixed on W illiam.
“What’ s this, Mother?” he asked. He was dressed in the
uniform of a Co ntinental of ficer , built short and wide, much
like the two women, but a good deal bigger , and while his face
was outwardly calm, there were calculations going on behind
his bloodshot eyes.
“Been fishing,” said the pipe-smoker . “Caught this wee
redfish, but we think we’ll throw ‘im back.”
“A ye? Maybe not just yet.”
W illiam had stif fened with the man’ s appearance, and stared
up at him, keeping his own face as grim as possible.
The man glanced up at the shredding fog behind W illiam.
“More like you at home, are there, boy?”
W illiam sat silent. The man sig hed, drew back his fist, and
hit W illiam in t he stomach. He doubled up, fell of f the rock,
and lay retching on the sand. The man grasped him by the
collar and hauled him up, as though he weighed nothing.
“Answer me, lad. I haven’ t mu ch time, and ‘ee don’ t want
me to be hasty in my asking.” He spoke mildly , but touched
the knife at his belt.
W illiam wiped his mouth, as well as he could, on his
shoulder and faced the man, eyes burning. All right , he
thought, and felt a certain calm ness descend on him. If this is
wher e I die, at least I’ll die for something . T he thought was
almost a relief.
The pipe-smoker ’ s sister put paid to the dramatics, though,
poking his interrogator in the ribs with her musket.“If t here was m ore, sister and I’d’a heard ‘em long since,”
she said, mildly disgusted. “They ain’ t quiet, sojers.”
“T rue, that,” the pipe-smoker agreed, and paused to remove
her pipe long enough to spit. “This ‘un’ s only lost, ‘ee can see
as m uch. ‘Ee ca n see he won’ t talk to ‘ee, either .” She grinned
familiarly at W illiam, displaying one remaining yellow
dogtooth. “Rather die than speak, eh, lad?”
W illiam incline d his head a stif f inch, and the women
giggled. No other word for it: they giggled  at him.
“Get on with ‘ee,” the aunt told the man, waving a hand at
the beach behind him. “They’ll leave without ‘ee.”
The man didn’ t look at her— didn’ t take his eyes of f
W illiam’ s. After a moment, though, he nodded briefly and
turned on his heel.
W illiam felt one of the women b ehind him; something sharp
touched his wrist, and the twine they’d bound him with parted.
He wanted to rub his wrists, but didn’ t.
“Go, boy ,” the pipe-smoker sa id, almost gently . “Before
someun else sees ‘ee and gets ideas.”
He left.
At th e to p of the beach, he paus ed and looked back. The old
women had vanished, but the man was sitting in the stern of a
rowboat, drawing rapidly away from the shore, now nearly
empty . The man was staring at him.
W illiam turned away . The sun was finally visible, a pale
orange circle burning through the haze. It was coming down
the sky now , early afternoon. He turned inland and struck
southwest, but felt eyes on his back for a long time after the
shore had fallen out of sight behind him.
His stomach was sore, and the only thought in his mind was
what Captain Ramsay had said to him. Hear d of a lady called
Cassandra? AN UNCER T AIN FUTURE
 Lallybroch
 Inverness-shire, Scotland
 September 1980
 
N OT ALL OF the letters were dated, but some were.
Bree sorted gingerly through the half-dozen on top, and with a
sense of  being poised at the top  of a roller coaster , chose one
with 2 Mar ch, A.D.  1777 written  across the flap.
“I th ink this on e’ s next.” She had trouble taking a full
breath. “It’ s—thin. Short.”
It w as, n o more than a page and  a half, but the reason for its
brevity was clear; her father ha d written the whole of it. His
awkward, determined writing wrung her heart.
“W e are  never letting a teache r try to make Jemmy write
with his right hand,” she said fiercely to Roger . “Never!”
“Right,” he said, surprised and a little amused at her
outburst. “Or left, if you prefer .”
2 Mar ch, Anno Domini 1777
 Fraser ’ s Ridge, colony of North Car olina
My dear est daughter—
W e pr epar e now to r emove to Scotland. Not for ever ,
or even for long. My Life—our Lives—lie her e in
America. And in all Honesty , I should gr eatly pr efer to be
stung to Death by Hornets than set foot on boar d another
Ship; I try not to dwell upon the Pr ospect. But ther e ar e
two chief Concerns which compel me to this Decision .
Had I not the Gift of Knowledge that you and your
Mother and Roger Mac have br ought me, I would likely
think—as the gr eat Majority of People in the Colony do
think—that the Continental Congr ess will not last six
Months, and W ashington’ s Army less than that. I have
spoken myself with a man fr om Cr oss Cr eek, who wasdischar ged (honourably) fr om the Continental army on
account of a festering W ound in the Arm—your Mother
has of course d ealt with this; h e scr eamed a gr eat Deal
and I was pr essed into service to sit upon him—who tells
me that W ashin gton has no mor e than a few thousand
r egular Soldiers , all very poor  in Equipment, Clothes,
and Arms, and all owed Money , which they ar e unlikely to
r eceive. Most of his men ar e Militia, enlisted on short
Contracts of two or thr ee Months, and alr eady melting
away , needing to r eturn Home for the Planting .
But I do know . A t the same T ime , I cannot be sur e how
the Things that I know will come about. Am I meant to be
in so me W ay Part of this? Should I hold back, will that
somehow damage or pr event the Success of our Desir es?
I often wish I could discuss th ese Questions with your
Husband, though Pr esbyterian that he is, I think he would
find them  even mor e unsettling than I do. And in the end,
it do es n ot matte r . I am what God has made me, and must
deal with the T imes in which He has placed me .
While I have n ot yet lost the Faculties of Sight or
Hearing, nor even Contr ol of my Bowels, I am not a
young Man. I h ave a Swor d, a nd a Rifle, and can use
them both—but I also have a printing Pr ess, and can use
that to much gr eater Effect; it does not escape me that
one can wield S wor d or Musket only upon one Enemy at
a time, while W or ds may be employed upon any Number .
Y our Mother—doubtless contemplating the Pr ospect of
my being seasick for several W eeks in her immediate
V icinity—suggests that I mig ht enter Business with
Fer gus, making use of  L ’Oignon ‘s Pr ess, rather than
travel to Scotland to r etrieve my own .
I consider ed this, but I cannot in Conscience expose
Fer gus and his  Family to Danger by making us e of their
Pr ess for such P urposes as I intend. Theirs is one of only
a few Pr esses in operation between Charleston and
Norfolk; even wer e I to do my Printing with the utmost
Secr ecy , Suspicion would focus upon them in short or der
—New Bern is a Hotbed of Loyalist Sentiment, and theOrigins of my pamphleteering would become known
almost immediately .
Beyond Consideration for Fer gus and his Family , I
think ther e may be some Benefi t in visiting Edinbur gh in
or der t o r etrie ve my own P r ess. I had a varied
Acquaintance ther e; some may  have escaped Prison or
the Noose .
The second—and most important—Consideration that
compels me to Scotland, though, is your Cousin Ian.
Y ears ago, I sw or e to his Mother—upon the Memory of
our own Mother—that I would  bring him Home to her ,
and this  I mean to do, though the Man I bring back to
Lallybr och is not the Lad who left ther e. God alone knows
what the y will make of each oth er , Ian and Lallybr och—
and God has a most peculiar Sense of Humor . But if he is
to go back at all, it must be now .
The Sno w is melting; W ater drips fr om the Eaves all
Day , and Icicles r each fr om the  Roof of the Cabin nearly
to the Gr ound by Morning. W ithin a few W eeks, the Roads
will be clear en ough for T ravel. It seems strange to ask
that you pray for the Safety of a  V oyage which will have
been long completed by the T im e you learn of it–for good
or ill—b ut I ask it, nonetheles s. T ell Roger Mac that I
think G od take s no account of T ime. And kiss the
Childr en for me .
Y our most affectionate Father ,
 JF
 
Roger sat back a little, eyebrows raised, and glanced at her .
“The French Connection, you think?”
“The what ?” She frowned over his shoulder , saw where his
finger m arked the text. “Where he’ s talking about his friends
in Edinbur gh?”
“A ye. W ere not a good many of his Edinbur gh
acquaintances smugglers?”
“That’ s what Mama said.”“Hence the remark about nooses. And where were they
smuggling things fr om , mostly?”
Her stomach gave a small hop.
“Oh, you’re kidding. Y ou think  he’ s planning to mess with
French smugglers?”
“W ell, n ot smugglers, necessarily; he apparently knew a
good many seditionists, thieves, and prostitutes, too.” Roger
smiled briefly , but then grew serious again.
“But I told him as much as I knew about the shape of the
Revolution—admittedly , not a lot of detail, it not being my
period—and I certainly told him how important France would
be t o the Americans. I’m just thinking”—he paused, a little
awkwardly , then looked up at he r—”he isn’ t going to Scotland
to avoid the fighting; he’ s pretty clear about that.”
“So you think he might be looking for political
connections?” s he asked slowly . “Not just grabbing his
printing press, dropping Ian of f at Lallybroch, and beating it
back to America?”
She foun d the idea something of a relief. The notion of her
parents intriguin g in Edinbur gh and Paris was much less hair -
raising than her visions of them in the midst of explosions and
battlefields. And it would  be both of them, she realized. W here
her father went, her mother would be, too.
Roger shrugged.
“That of fhand remark about being what God made him. Y e
ken what he means by that?”
“A bloody man,” she said softly , and moved closer to Roger ,
putting a hand on his shoulder as though to ensure that he
wouldn’ t suddenly vanish. “He told me he was a bloody man.
That he’ d seldom  chosen to figh t, but knew he was born to do
it.”
“A ye, th at,” Roger said, just as  softly . “But he’ s no longer
the youn g laird who took up hi s sword and led thirty crofters
to a doomed battle—and took them home again. He knows alot m ore now , ab out what one m an can do. I think he means to
do it.”
“I think  so, too.” Her throat felt tight, but as much with
pride as fear .
Roger reached up and put his hand over hers, squeezing.
“I re member …” he said slowly . “A thing your mother said,
telling u s about—about when she came back, and how she
became a doctor . A thing your—Frank—that he said to her .
Something about it being bloody inconvenient to the people
round he r , but a great blessing that she knew what it was she
was mea nt to be. He was right about that, I think. And Jamie
does know .”
She nodded. She probably shouldn’ t say it, she thought. But
she couldn’ t hold the words back any longer .
“Do you  know?”
He was silent for a long time, looking at the pages on the
table, bu t at last shook his head , the motion so small that she
felt rather than saw it.
“I used to,” he said quietly , and let go of her hand.
 
HER FIR ST IMPULSE W AS to punch him in the back of
the neck ; her second was to sei ze him by the shoulders, bend
down with her e yeballs an inch from his, and say—calmly , but
distinctly—”What the hell do you mean by that ?”
She refrained from doing either , only because both were
likely to lead t o a prolonged conversation of a sort deeply
inappropriate fo r children, and both the kids were in the hall a
few feet from the study door; she could hear them talking.
“See that?” Jemmy was saying.
“Un-huh.”
“Bad people came here, a lo ng time ago, looking for
Grandda. Bad English  people. They did that.”Roger ’ s head turned as he caug ht what Jemmy was saying,
and he caught Brianna’ s eye, with a half smile.
“Bad Engwish! ” Mandy repeated obligingly . “Make ‘em
cwean it up!”
In spite of her annoyance, Brianna couldn’ t help sharing
Roger ’ s smile, though she felt a small shimmer in the pit of
her stomach, recalling her uncle Ian—so calm, so kind a man
—showing her the saber slashes in the wooden paneling of the
hall and  telling her , “W e keep it  so, to show the children—and
tell t hem, this is  what the Englis h are.” There had been steel in
his voice—and hearing a faint, absurdly childish echo of it in
Jemmy’ s voice, she had her first doubts regarding the wisdom
of keeping this particular family tradition.
“Did you tell him about it?”  she asked Roger , as the
children’ s voices moved away toward the kitchen. “I didn’ t.”
“Annie’d told him part of it; I thought I’d best tell him the
rest.” He raised his eyebrows. “ Should I have told him to ask
you?”
“Oh. No. No,” she repeated, dubiously . “But—should we be
teaching him to hate English people?”
Roger smiled at that.
” ‘Hate’  might be pitching it a  bit strong. And he did say
bad  English people. They wer e  b ad English pe ople who did
that. Besides, if he’ s going to grow up in the Highlands, he’ll
likely hear a few  barbed remarks regarding Sassenachs—he’ll
balance those against his memories of your mother; your da
always called her ‘Sassenach,’ after all.”
He g lanced at th e letter on the table, caught a glimpse of the
wall clock, and rose abruptly .
“Christ, I’m late. I’ll stop at the  bank whilst I’m in town—
need anything from the Farm and Household?”
“Y es,” she said dryly , “a new pump for the milk separator .”
“Right,” he said, and kissing he r hastily , went out, one arm
already into his jacket.She ope ned her mouth to call  after him that she’d been
joking, but on second thought closed it. The Farm and
Household Store s just might  hav e a pump fo r a milk separat or .
A lar ge, bewilderingly crowded building on the edge of
Inverness, the Farm and Ho usehold supplied just about
anything a farm might need, including pitchforks, rubber fire
buckets, baling wire, and washing machines, as well as
crockery , jars for canning, and not a few mysterious
implements whose use she could only guess at.
She stuck her head into the corridor , but the kids were in the
kitchen with Annie MacDonald, the hired girl; laughter and
the wire clong!  of the ancient toaster—it had come with the
house—floated past the ratty green baize door , along with the
enticing scent of hot buttered toast. The smell and the laughter
drew he r like a magnet, and the  warmth of home flowed over
her , golden as honey .
She paused to fo ld up the letter , though, before going to join
them, and the memory of Rog er ’ s last remark tightened her
mouth.
“I used to.”
Snorting ferociously , she tucked the letter back into the box
and wen t out into the hall, only to be arrested by sight of a
lar ge envelope on the table near  the door , where the daily mail
—and the contents of Roger ’ s  and Jemmy’ s pockets—were
daily un loaded. She grabbed the envelope out of the pile of
circulars, pebbles, pencil stubs, links of bicycle chain, and …
was that a dea d mouse? It was; flattened and dried, but
adorned with a s tif f loop of pink  tail. She picked it up gingerly
and, wit h the envelope clasped  against her breast, made her
way toward tea and toast.
In all honesty , she thought, R oger wasn’ t the only one
keeping things to himself. The dif ference was, she planned to
tell him what she was thinking—once it was settled. SPRING THA W
 Fraser ’ s Ridge, colony of North Carolina
 March 1777
 
O NE THING ABOUT a devastating fire, I reflected. It
did mak e packing easier . At pre sent, I owned one gown, one
shift, three petticoats—one woo len, two muslin—two pairs of
stockings (I’d been wearing one  pair when the house burned;
the othe r had been carelessly left drying on a bush a few
weeks b efore th e fire and was discovered later , weathered but
still wearable), a shawl, and a pair of shoes. Jamie had
procured a horrible cloak for me somewhere—I didn’ t know
where, a nd didn ’ t want to ask. Made of thick wool the color of
leprosy , it smelled as though someone had died in it and lain
undiscovered fo r a couple of days. I’d boiled it with lye soap,
but the ghost of its previous occupant lingered.
Still, I wouldn’ t freeze.
My medical kit was nearly as simple to pack. W ith a
regretful sigh for the ashes of m y beautiful apothecary’ s chest,
with its elegant tools and numerous bottles, I turned over the
pile of salvaged remnants from my sur gery . The dented barrel
of m y microscope. Three singed ceramic jars, one missing its
lid, one  cracked. A lar ge tin of goose grease mixed with
camphor—now nearly empty after a winter of catarrhs and
coughs. A handful of singed pa ges, ripped from the casebook
started by Daniel Rawlings and continued by myself—though
my spirits were lifted a bit by t he discovery that the salvaged
pages included one bearing Dr . Rawlings’ s special receipt for
Bowel-Bind.
It was the only one of his receipts I’d found ef fective, and
while I’d  long since committed the actual formula to memory ,
having i t to hand kept my sens e of him alive. I’d never met
Daniel R awlings in life, but he’d  been my friend since the day
Jamie gave me his chest and casebook. I folded the paper
carefully and tucked it into my pocket.Most of my h erbs and compounded medications had
perished in the flames, along with the earthenware jars, the
glass vials, the lar ge bowls in  which I incubated penicillin
broth, and my sur gical saws. I  still had one scalpel and the
darkened blade of a small am putation saw; the handle had
been charred, but Jamie could make me a new one.
The residents of the Ridge had been generous—as generous
as pe ople who h ad virtually nothing themselves could be at the
tail end of winter . W e had food for the journey , and many of
the wom en had brought me bits  of their household simples; I
had small jars of lavender , rosemary , comfrey , and mustard
seed, tw o precio us steel needles, a small skein of silk thread to
use for sutures a nd dental floss (though I didn’ t mention that
last use to the l adies, who would have been deeply af fronted
by t he notion), and a very small stock of bandages and gauze
for dressings.
One thin g I had in abundance, though, was alcohol. The
corncrib had been spared from the flames, and so had the still.
Since there was more than enou gh grain for both animals and
household, Jamie had thriftily transformed the rest into a very
raw—but potent—liquor , which we would take along to trade
for n ecessary goods along the w ay . One small cask had been
kept for my especial use, thou gh; I’d carefully painted the
legend Sauerkraut  on the side, to discourage theft on the road.
“And w hat if we should be set upon by illiterate banditti?”
Jamie had asked, amused by this.
“Thought of that,” I informed him, displaying a small
corked b ottle fu ll of cloudy liq uid. “Eau de sauerkraut . I’ll
pour it on the cask at first sight of anyone suspicious.”
“I suppose we’d best hope they’re not German bandits,
then.”
“Have y ou ever met a German  bandit?” I asked. W ith the
exception of the occasional drunkard or wife-beater , almost all
the Germans we knew were honest, hardworking, and virtuous
to a faul t. Not all that surprising, given that so many of them
had come to the colony as part of a religious movement.“Not as such,” he admitted. “But ye mind the Muellers, aye?
And wh at they did to your friends. They wouldna have called
themselves bandits, but the T uscarora likely didna make the
same distinction.”
That was no more than the truth, and a cold thumb pressed
the base of my skull. The Muellers, German neighbors, had
had a beloved daughter and her newborn child die of measles,
and had blamed the nearby India ns for the infection. Deranged
by grief , old Herr  Muelle r had led a party of his sons and
sons-in-law to take revenge—and scalps. My viscera still
remembered the shock of seeing my friend Nayawenne’ s
white-streaked hair spill out of a bundle into my lap.
“Is my hair turni ng white, do you think?” I said abruptly . He
raised hi s eyebrows, but bent forward and peered at the top of
my head, fingering gently through my hair .
“There’ s maybe one hair in fift y that’ s gone white. One in
five-and-twenty is silver . Why?”
“I suppose I have a little time, then. Nayawenne …” I
hadn’ t spoken her name aloud in several years, and found an
odd comfort in the speaking, a s though it had conjured her .
“She tol d me that I’d come into  my full power when my hair
turned white.”
“Now there’ s a fearsome thought,” he said, grinning.
“No doubt. Since it hasn’ t happ ened yet, though, I suppose
if w e stu mble in to a nest of sauerkraut thieves on the road, I’ll
have to defend my cask with my scalpel,” I said.
He g ave me a slightly queer look at this, but then laughed
and shook his head.
His own  packing was a little more involved. He and Y oung
Ian had removed the gold from  the house’ s foundation the
night after Mrs. Bug’ s funeral—a delicate process preceded by
my p utting out a  lar ge slop basin  of stale bread soaked in corn
liquor , t hen calling “Sooo-eeee! ” at the top of my lungs from
the head of the garden path.A m oment of sil ence, and then the white sow emer ged from
her den,  a pale blotch against the smoke-stained rocks of the
foundation. I knew exactly wha t she was, but the sight of that
white, rapidly moving form still made the hairs stand up on the
back of my neck. It had come on to snow—one of the reasons
for J amie’ s decision to act at on ce—and she came through the
whirl of  big, soft flakes with a velocity that made her seem
like the spirit of the storm itself, leading the wind.
For an instant, I thought she was going to char ge me; I saw
her head  swing toward me and caught the loud snuf f as she
took my  scent—but she scented the food as well, and swerved
away . An instant later , the ungo dly sounds of a pig in ecstasy
floated through the hush of t he snow , and Jamie and Ian
hurried out of the trees to begin their work.
It to ok more than two weeks to move the gold; they worked
only at night, and only when fr esh snow was either falling or
about to  fall, to cover their tracks. Meantime, they took it in
turn to guard th e remains of the Big House, keeping an eye
peeled for any sign of Arch Bug.
“Do you think he still cares a bout the gold?” I’d asked
Jamie in the mi dst of this ende avor , chafing his hands to get
enough h eat into  them for him to hold his spoon. He’d come in
for breakfast, frozen and exhau sted after a long night spent
walking round and round the b urnt house to keep his blood
flowing.
“He’ s no much else left to care  about, has he?” He spoke
softly , to avoid waking the Higgins family . “Other than Ian.”
I shivered, as much from th ought of old Arch, living
wraithlike in the forest, survivin g on the heat of his hatred, as
from the  cold that had come in with Jamie. He’d let his beard
grow for warmth—all the men did in winter , on the mountain
—and ice glimmered in his whiskers and frosted his brows.
“Y ou look like Old Man W inter himself,” I whispered,
bringing him a bowl of hot porridge.“I feel like it,”  he replied hoa rsely . He passed the bowl
under his nose, inhaling the steam and closing his eyes
beatifically . “Pass the whisky , aye?”
“Y ou’re propos ing to pour it on your porridge? It’ s got
butter and salt on, already .” Nonetheless, I passed him the
bottle from its shelf over the hearth.
“Nay , I’m going to thaw my wame enough to eat it. I’m
solid ice from the neck down.”
No o ne had seen hide nor hair of Arch Bug—not even an
errant track in t he snow—since his appearance at the funeral.
He might be denned up for the winter , snug in some refuge. He
might h ave gone away to the Indian villages. He might be
dead, and I rather hoped he was, uncharitable as the thought
might be.
I mentioned this, and Jamie shook his head. The ice in his
hair had melted now , and the firelight glimmered like
diamonds on the water droplets in his beard.
“If he’ s dead, and we never learn of it, Ian willna have a
moment’ s peace —ever . D’ye want him to be looking over his
shoulder at his wedding, afraid of a bullet through his wife’ s
heart as she spe aks her vows? Or wed with a family , fearing
each day to leav e his house and his bairns, for fear of what he
might come back to?”
“I’m impressed at the scope and morbidity of your
imagination—but you’re right. All right, I don’ t hope he’ s
dead—not unless we find his body .”
But no one did find his body , and the gold was moved, bit
by bit, to its new hiding place.
That ha d taken a bit of thought and considerable private
discussion betw een Jamie and I an. Not the whisky cave. V ery
few people knew about that—but some did. Joseph W emyss,
his daughter , Lizzie, and her two husbands—I marveled,
rather , that I’d got to the poin t where I could think about
Lizzie a nd the Beardsleys without boggling—all knew , of
necessity , and Bobby and Amy Higgins would need to beshown i ts location before we l eft, as they would be making
whisky themselv es in our absence. Arch Bug had not been told
of the cave’ s location—but very likely knew it.
Jamie was adamant that no on e should know even of the
gold’ s existence on the Ridge, let alone its location.
“Let even a rumor of it get out, and everyone here is in
danger ,” he’d said. “Y e ken wha t happened when yon Donner
told folk we had jewels here.”
I kent, all right. I still woke up in the midst of nightmares,
hearing the muf fled whumph!  of exploding ether fumes,
hearing the crash of glass and smashing wood as the raiders
wrecked the house.
In so me of these dreams, I ran fruitlessly to and fro, trying
to rescu e someo ne—who?—but met always by locked doors,
blank walls, or rooms engulfed in flame. In others, I stood
rooted, u nable to move a muscle, as fire crawled up the walls,
fed with  delicate greed on the clothes of bodies at my feet,
burst through a c orpse’ s hair , caught in my skirts and swarmed
upward, wrapping my legs in a blazing web.
I sti ll felt overpowering sadness—and a deep, cleansing
rage—when I looked at the soo ty smudge in the clearing that
had onc e been my home, but I  always had to go out in the
morning after one of these drea ms and look at it nonetheless:
walk rou nd the cold ruins and smell the taint of dead ash, in
order to quench the flames that burned behind my eyes.
“Right,” I said, and pulled my shawl tighter round me. W e
were sta nding by the springhouse, looking down on the ruins
as w e ta lked, an d the chill was seeping into my bones. “So …
where, then?”
“The Spaniard’ s Cave,” he said, and I blinked at him.
“The what?”
“I’ll show ye, a nighean,”  he said, grinning at me. “When
the snow melts.”
 
SPRING HAD SPRUNG, and  the creek was rising.
Swelled by melting snow and fed by hundreds of tiny
waterfalls that trickled and leap t down the mountain’ s face, it
roared p ast my feet, exuberant with spray . I could feel it cold
on my face, and knew that I’d be wet to the knees within
minutes, but it didn’ t matter . The  fresh green of arrowhead and
pickerelweed rimmed the banks, some plants dragged out of
the soil by the rising water and whirled downstream, more
hanging on by t heir roots for dear life, leaves trailing in the
racing wash. Dark mats of cress swirled under the water , close
by the sheltering banks. And fresh greens were what I wanted.
My gathering basket was half f ull of fiddleheads and ramp
shoots. A  nice big lot of tender new cress, crisp and cold from
the stream, would top of f the winter ’ s vitamin C deficiency
very we ll. I took of f my shoes and stockings, and after a
moment’ s hesita tion, took of f my gown and shawl as well and
hung the m over  a tree branch. The air was chilly in the shade
of the silver b irches that overhung the creek here, and I
shivered a bit but ignored the cold, kirtling up my shift before
wading into the stream.
That  col d was har der to ignore. I gasped, and nearly
dropped the basket, but found my footing among the slippery
rocks and made my way towar d the nearest mat of tempting
dark gre en. W ithin seconds, my legs were numb, and I’d lost
any sens e of cold in the enthusiasm of forager ’ s frenzy and
salad hunger .
A good deal of our stored food had been saved from the fire,
as it  was kept in the outbuildings: the springhouse, corncrib,
and smoking shed. The root cell ar had been destroyed, though,
and with it not only the carrots, onions, garlic, and potatoes
but mos t of my carefully gathe red stock of dried apples and
wild yam s, and the big hanging clusters of raisins, all meant to
keep us from th e ravages of scu rvy . The herbs, of course, had
gone up  in smoke, along with t he rest of my sur gery . T rue, a
lar ge quantity of pumpkins and squashes had escaped, these
having b een piled in the barn, but one grows tired of squashpie and succotash after a cou ple of months—well, after a
couple of days, speaking personally .
Not for the first time, I mourned Mrs. Bug’ s abilities as a
cook, though of course I did miss her for her own sake. Amy
McCallum Higgins had been raised in a crofter ’ s cottage in the
Highlands of Scotland and was, as she put it, “a good plain
cook.” Essentially , that meant she could bake bannocks, boil
porridge, and fry fish simultaneously , without burning any of
it. No mean feat, but a trifle monotonous, in terms of diet.
My own piece de resistance was stew—which, lacking
onions, garlic, carrots, and potatoes, had devolved into a sort
of po ttage consisting of venison  or turkey stewed with cracked
corn, barley , and possibly chunks of stale bread. Ian,
surprisingly , ha d turned out to be a passable cook; the
succotash and squash pie were his contributions to the
communal menu. I did wonder who had taught him to make
them, but thought it wiser not to ask.
So far no one had starved, nor yet lost any teeth, but by mid-
March, I would have been w illing to wade neck-deep in
freezing torrents in order to acqu ire something both edible and
green.
Ian had,  thank goodness, gone on breathing. And after a
week or so had ceased acting quite so shell-shocked,
eventually regaining something like his normal manner . But I
noticed Jamie’ s eyes follow him now and then, and Rollo had
taken to sleeping with his head on Ian’ s chest, a new habit. I
wondered wheth er he really sensed the pain in Ian’ s heart, or
whether it was simply a response to the cramped sleeping
conditions in the cabin.
I stretch ed my back, hearing the small pops between my
vertebrae. Now that the snowm elt had come, I could hardly
wait for  our departure. I would  miss the Ridge and everyone
on it—well, almost everyone. Possibly not Hiram Crombie, so
much. Or the Chisholms, or—I short-circuited this list before
it became uncharitable.“On the other  hand,” I said firmly to myself, “think of
beds.”
Granted, we would be spending  a good many nights on the
road, sleeping rough—but eventually we would reach
civilization. Inns. W ith food. And beds. I closed my eyes
momentarily , envisioning the absolute bliss of a mattress. I
didn’ t even aspire to a feather  bed; anything that promised
more than an in ch of padding between myself and the floor
would b e paradise. And, of course, if it came with a modicum
of privacy—even better .
Jamie and I had not been completely celibate since
December . Lust aside—and it w asn’ t—we needed the comfort
and warmth of each other ’ s body . Still, covert congress under a
quilt, w ith Rollo’ s yellow eyes fixed upon us from two feet
away , w as less than ideal, even  assuming that Y oung Ian was
invariably asleep , which I didn’ t think he was, though he was
suf ficiently tactful as to pretend.
A hideo us shriek split the air , and I jerked, dropping the
basket. I flung myself after it , barely snatching the handle
before it  was whirled away on the flood, and stood up dripping
and trembling, heart hammering as I waited to see whether the
scream would be repeated.
It was—followed in short order by an equally piercing
screech, but one deeper in timbr e and recognizable to my well-
trained ears as the sort of noise m ade by a Scottish Highlander
suddenly immer sed in freezing water . Fainter , higher -pitched
shrieks, and a b reathless “Fook!” spoken in a Dorset accent
indicated that the gentlemen of the household were taking their
spring bath.
I wr ang out the hem of my shi ft and, snatching my shawl
from the  branch where I’d left  it, slipped on my shoes and
made my way in the direction of the bellowing.
There are few th ings more enjoyable than sitting in relative
warmth and comfort while watching fellow human beings
soused in cold water . If said human beings present a complete
review o f the nude male form, so much the better . I threadedmy way through a small growth of fresh-budding river
willows, found a conveniently screened rock in the sun, and
spread out the d amp skirt of my shift, enjoying the warmth on
my shou lders, the sharp scent of the fuzzy catkins, and the
sight before me.
Jamie was standing in the pool, nearly shoulder -deep, his
hair slicked back like a russet seal. Bobby stood on the bank,
and pick ing up Aidan with a g runt, threw him to Jamie in a
pinwheel of flailing limbs and piercing shrieks of delighted
fright.
“Me-me-me -me !” Orrie was dancing around his stepfather ’ s
legs, his  chubby bottom bouncing up and down among the
reeds like a little pink balloon.
Bobby laughed, bent, and hoiste d him up, holding him for a
moment high overhead as he squealed like a seared pig, then
flung him in a shallow arc out over the pool.
He hit the water with a tremendous splash and Jamie
grabbed him, laughing, and pulled him to the surface, whence
he emer ged with a look of openmouthed stupefaction that
made them all h oot like gibbons. Aidan and Rollo were both
dog-paddling round in circles by now , shouting and barking.
I loo ked across to the opposite s ide of the pool and saw Ian
rush naked down the small hill and leap like a salmon into the
pool, uttering one of his best Mohawk war cries. This was cut
of f abrup tly by the cold water , a nd he vanished with scarcely a
splash.
I waited —as did  the others—for him to pop back up, but he
didn’ t. Jamie looked suspiciou sly behind him, in case of a
sneak at tack, but an instant la ter Ian shot out of the water
directly in front of Bobby with a bloodcurdling yell, grabbed
him by the leg, and yanked him in.
Matters thereafter became generally chaotic, with a great
deal of promisc uous splashing, yelling, hooting, and jumping
of f o f rocks, which gave me the opportunity to reflect on just
how delightful naked men are. Not that I hadn’ t seen a goodmany of  them in my time, but aside from Frank and Jamie,
most men I’d s een undressed usually had been either ill or
injured, and were encountered in such circumstances as to
prevent a leisurely appreciation of their finer attributes.
From Orrie’ s chubbiness and Aidan’ s spidery winter -white
limbs to  Bobby’ s skinny , pale to rso and neat little flat behind,
the McCallum-Higginses were as entertaining to watch as a
cageful of monkeys.
Ian a nd Jamie w ere something dif ferent—baboons, perhaps,
or mandrills. They didn’ t reall y resemble each other in any
attribute other than height, and yet were plainly cut from the
same cloth. W atching Jamie squatting on a rock above the
pool, thi ghs tensing for a leap, I could easily see him preparing
to attack  a leopard, while Ian stretched himself glistening in
the sun, warming his dangly bits while keeping an alert watch
for intru ders. A ll they needed w ere purple bottoms, and they
could have walked straight onto the African veldt, no
questions asked.
They were all lovely , in their wildly various ways, but it was
Jamie my gaze returned to, o ver and over again. He was
battered and scarred, his muscl es roped and knotted, and age
had grooved the hollows betwee n them. The thick welt of the
bayonet scar writhed up his th igh, wide and ugly , while the
thinner white line of the scar left by a rattlesnake’ s bite was
nearly in visible, clouded by the thick fuzz of his body hair ,
this beginning to dry now and stand out from his skin in a
cloud of  reddish-gold. The scimitar -shaped sword cut across
his r ibs had healed well, too, no more than a hair -thin white
line by now .
He turne d round  and bent to pick up a cake of soap from the
rock, an d my insides turned ov er . It wasn’ t purple but could
not otherwise have been improved on, being high, round,
delicately dusted with red-gold, and with a delightful muscular
concavity to the sides. His balls,  just visible from behind, wer e
purple with the cold, and gave me a strong ur ge to creep up
behind him and cup them in my rock-warmed hands.I wond ered wh ether the resultant standing broad-jump
would enable him to clear the pool.
I h ad not, in fa ct, seen him na ked—or even substantially
undressed—in several months.
But now  … I threw back my head, closing my eyes against
the brill iant spring sun, enjoying the tickle of my own fresh-
washed hair against my shoulder blades. The snow was gone,
the weather was good—and the whole outdoors beckoned
invitingly , filled with places where privacy could be assured,
bar the odd skunk.
 
I LEFT THE MEN dripping and sunning themselves on
the r ocks, and w ent to retrieve my clothes. I didn’ t put these
on, thou gh. Instead, I went quickly up to the springhouse,
where I submer ged my basket of greens in the cool water—if I
took it to the cab in, Amy would seize them and boil them into
submission—and left my gown, stays, and stockings rolled up
on the shelf where the cheeses w ere stacked. Then I went back
toward the stream.
The splashing and shouting had ceased. Instead, I heard
low-voiced singing, coming along the trail. It was Bobby ,
carrying Orrie, sound asleep after his exertions. Aidan, groggy
with cleanlines s and warmth, ambled slowly beside his
stepfather , dark head tilting to and fro to the rhythm of the
song.
It was a lovely Gaelic lullaby; Amy must have taught it to
Bobby . I did wonder if she’d told him what the words meant.
S’iomadh oidhche fhliuch is thioram
 Side nan seachd sian
 Gheibheadh Griogal dhomhsa cr eagan
 Ris an gabhainn dion.
 (Many a night, wet and dry
 Even in the worst of weather
 Gr egor would find a little r ock for me
 Beside which I could shelter .)
 
Obhan, obhan obhan iri
 Obhan iri o!
 Obhan, obhan obhan iri
 ‘S mor mo mhulad’ s mor .
 
(W oe is me, woe is me
 W oe is me, gr eat indeed is my sorr ow .)
 
I s miled  to see them, though w ith a catch in my throat. I
remembered Jamie carrying Jem back from swimming, the
summer before, and Roger sing ing to Mandy in the night, his
harsh, cr acked v oice little more than a whisper—but music, all
the same.
I nodded  to Bobby , who smiled and nodded back, though
without interrupting his song. He raised his brows and jerked a
thumb over his shoulder and uphill, presumably indicating
where Jamie had gone. He betrayed no surprise at seeing me in
shift and  shawl—doubtless he thought I was bound for the
stream to wash, as well, inspired by the singular warmth of the
day .
Eudail mhoir a shluagh an domhain
 Dhoirt iad d’ fhuil an de
 ‘S chuir iad do cheann air stob daraich
 T acan beag bhod chr e.
 
(Gr eat sweetheart of all people of the world
 They pour ed your blood yester day
 And they put your head on an oak stick
 A short distance fr om your body .) 
Obhan, obhan obhan iri
 Obhan iri o!
 Obhan, obhan obhan iri
 ‘S mor mo mhulad ‘s mor .
 
(W oe is me, woe is me
 W oe is me, gr eat indeed is my sorr ow .)
 
I w aved  briefly and turned up the side trail that led to the
upper clearing. “New House,” everyone called it, though the
only ind ications that there might someday be  a  house there
were a stack of felled logs and  a number of pegs driven into
the ground, with strings tied bet ween them. These were meant
to m ark the pla cement and dimensions of the house Jamie
intended to build in replacement of the Big House—when we
came back.
He’d bee n moving the pegs, I saw . The wide front room was
now wider , and the back room  intended for my sur gery had
developed a growth of some sort, perhaps a separate stillroom.
The arch itect w as sitting on a log, surveying his kingdom,
stark naked.
“Expecting me, were you?” I a sked, taking of f my shawl
and hanging it on a convenient branch.
“I was.”  He smiled, and scratch ed his chest. “I thought the
sight of my naked backside would likely inflame ye. Or was it
maybe Bobby’ s?”
“Bobby hasn’ t got one. Do yo u know , you haven’ t got a
single gray hair below the neck? Why is that, I wonder?”
He glanced down, inspecting him self, but it was true. There
were on ly a few strands of silve r among the fiery mass of his
hair , tho ugh hi s beard—the winter growth tediously and
painfully removed a few days before—was heavily frostedwith wh ite. But  the hair on his chest was still a dark auburn,
and that below a fluf fy mass of vivid ginger .
He com bed his fingers thought fully through the exuberant
foliage, looking down.
“I think it’ s hiding,” he remarked, and glanced up at me, one
eyebrow raised. “W ant to come and help me hunt for it?”
I came round in front of him and obligingly knelt down. The
object in question was in fact q uite visible, though admittedly
looking rather shell-shocked by the recent immersion, and a
most interesting shade of pale blue.
“W ell,” I said, after a moment’ s contemplation. “Great oaks
from tiny acorns grow . Or so I’m told.”
A sh iver ran thr ough him at the  warmth of my mouth and I
lifted my hands involuntarily , cradling his balls.
“Holy G od,” he said, and his hands rested lightly on my
head in benediction.
“What did ye say?” he asked, a moment later .
“I said,”  I said, coming up momentarily for air , “I find the
gooseflesh rather erotic.”
“There’ s more where that came from,” he assured me. “T ake
your shift of f, S assenach. I havena seen ye naked in nearly
four months.”
“W ell … no, yo u haven’ t,” I agreed, hesitating. “And I’m
not sure I want you to.”
One eyebrow went up.
“Whyever not?”
“Because I’ve been indoors for w eeks on end without sun or
exercise to speak of. I probably  look like one of those grubs
you find under rocks—fat, white, and squidgy .”
“Squidgy?” he repeated, breaking into a grin.
“Squidgy ,” I said with dignity , wrapping my arms around
myself.He p ursed his li ps and exhaled slowly , eyeing me with his
head on one side.
“I li ke it when ye’re fat, but I ken quite well that ye’re not,”
he said, “because I’ve felt your ribs when I put my arms about
you, each night since the end of January . As for white—ye’ve
been white all the time I’ve known ye; it’ s no likely to come a
great shock to me. As for the squidgy part”—he extended one
hand an d wiggled the fingers beckoningly at me—”I think I
might enjoy that.”
“Hmm,” I said, still hesitant. He sighed.
“Sassenach,” he said, “I said I havena seen ye naked in four
months. That means if ye take your shift of f now , ye’ll be the
best thin g I’ve seen in four mo nths. And at my age, I dinna
think I remember farther back than that.”
I laughed, and without further ado, stood up and pulled the
ribbon tie at the neck of my shift. W riggling, I let it fall in a
puddle round my feet.
He closed his eyes. Then breathed deep and opened them
again.
“I’m blinded,” he said softly , and held out a hand to me.
“Blinded as in sun bouncing of f a vast expanse of snow?” I
asked d ubiously . “Or as in c oming face to face with a
gor gon?”
“Seeing a gor gon turns ye to sto ne, not strikes ye blind,” he
informed me. “Though come to think”—he prodded himself
with an experimental forefinger—”I may turn to stone yet.
W ill ye come here, for God’ s sake?”
I came.
 
I FELL ASLEEP IN the warmth of Jamie’ s body , and
woke some time later , snugly wr apped in his plaid. I stretched,
alarming a squirrel overhead, w ho ran out on a limb to get abetter vi ew . Evidently he didn’ t like what he saw , and began
scolding and chattering.
“Oh, hu sh,” I said, yawning, an d sat up. The squirrel took
exception to this gesture and began having hysterics, but I
ignored him. T o my surprise, Jamie was gone.
I tho ught he’d l ikely just stepped into the wood to relieve
himself, but a quick glance round didn’ t discover him, and
when I scrambled to my feet, the plaid clutched to me, I saw
no sign of him.
I hadn’ t  heard anything; surely if someone had come, I
would have wakened—or Jamie would have wakened me. I
listened carefully , but—the squirrel having now gone about its
own business—heard nothing beyond the normal sounds of a
forest w aking to spring: the mur mur and rush of wind through
new-leafed trees, punctuated by the occasional crack of a
falling branch, or the rattle of last year ’ s pinecones and
chestnut hulls bouncing through the canopy; the call of a
distant jay , the conversation of  a gang of pygmy nuthatches
foraging in the l ong grass nearby , the rustle of a hungry vole in
the winter ’ s dead leaves.
The jay was sti ll calling; another had joined it now , shrill
with alarm. Perhaps that was where Jamie had gone.
I unwound myself from the plaid  and pulled on my shift and
shoes. It  was getting on for evening; we—or I, at least—had
slept a long time . It was still warm in the sun, but the shadows
under the trees were cold, and I put on my shawl and bundled
up Jamie’ s plaid into my arms—likely he’d want it.
I follow ed the calling of the jays uphill, away from the
clearing. There was a pair nesting near the White Spring; I’d
seen them building the nest only two days before.
It wasn’ t far from  the house site  at all, though that particular
spring always had the air of bei ng remote from everything. It
lay in the center of a small grove of white ash and hemlock,
and was  shielded on the east by a jagged outcropping of
lichen-covered r ock. All water has a sense of life about it, anda m ount ain spring carries a part icular sense of quiet joy , rising
pure fro m the heart of the earth. The White Spring, so called
for the big pale boulder that sto od guardian over its pool, had
something more—a sense of inviolate peace.
The clos er I came to it, the surer I was that that was where
I’d find Jamie.
“There’ s something there that listens,” he’d told Brianna
once, qu ite casually . “Y e see such pools in the Highlands;
they’re called saints’ pools—folk say the saint lives by the
pool and listens to their prayers.”
“And w hat sain t lives by the White Spring?” she’d asked,
cynical. “Saint Killian?”
“Why him?”
“Patron saint of gout, rheumatism, and whitewashers.”
He’d laughed at that, shaking his head.
“Whatever it is that lives in su ch water is older than the
notion of saints,” he assured her . “But it listens.”
I walked  softly , approaching the spring. The jays had fallen
silent now .
He was there, s itting on a rock by the water , wearing only
his shirt.  I saw why the jays had gone about their business—he
was still as the white boulder itself, his eyes closed, hands
turned upward on his knees, loosely cupped, inviting grace.
I s topped at once when I saw hi m. I had seen him pray here
once before—when he’d asked Dougal MacKenzie for help in
battle. I  didn’ t know who he w as talking to just now , but it
wasn’ t a conversation I wished to intrude upon.
I ou ght to leave, I supposed—b ut aside from the fear that I
might di sturb hi m by an inadver tent noise, I didn’ t want to go.
Most of the spr ing lay in shad ow , but fingers of light came
down through the trees, stroking him. The air was thick with
pollen, and the light was filled with motes of gold. It struck
answering glints from the crown of his head, the smooth high
arch of his foot, the blade of his nose, the bones of his face. Hemight h ave grown there, part o f earth and stone and water ,
might have been himself the spirit of the spring.
I did n’ t feel unw elcome. The peace of the place reached out
to touch me gently , slow my heart.
W as tha t what he sought here, I wondered? W as he drawing
the peace of the mountain into himself, to remember , to sustain
him during the months—the years, perhaps—of coming exile?
I would remember .
The ligh t began to go, brightne ss falling from the air . He
stirred, finally , lifting his head a little.
“Let me be enough,” he said quietly .
I started  at the sound of his voice, but he hadn’ t been
speaking to me.
He open ed his eyes and rose then, quiet as he’d sat, and
came past the stream, long feet bare and silent on the layers of
damp leaves. As he came past the outcropping of rock, he saw
me and smiled, r eaching out to take the plaid I held out to him,
wordless. He said nothing, but t ook my cold hand in his lar ge
warm on e and we turned toward  home, walking together in the
mountain’ s peace.
 
A FEW  DA YS LA TER, he c ame to find me. I was
foraging along the creek bank fo r leeches, which had begun to
emer ge from their winter ’ s hibernation, ravenous for blood.
They were simple to catch; I me rely waded slowly through the
water near shore.
At fi rst, the thou ght of acting as live bait for the leeches was
repellent, but after all, that was how I usually obtained leeches
—by let ting Jam ie, Ian, Bobby , or any of a dozen young males
wade thr ough the streams and pick them of f. And once you got
used to the sigh t of the creatures, slowly engor ging with your
blood, it wasn’ t all that bad.“I have to le t them have enough blood to sustain
themselves,” I explained, grimacing as I eased a thumbnail
under th e sucke r of a leech in order to dislodge it, “but not
enough that they’ll be comatose, or they won’ t be of any use.”
“A matt er of nice judgment,” Ja mie agreed, as I dropped the
leech in to a jar filled with water and duckweed. “When ye’ve
done feeding your wee pets, then, come along and I’ll show ye
the Spaniard’ s Cave.”
It was no little d istance. Perhaps  four miles from the Ridge,
through cold, muddy creeks and up steep slopes, then through
a crack in a granite clif f face t hat made me feel as though I
were being entombed alive, only to emer ge into a wilderness
of jutting boulders, smothered in nets of wild grape.
“W e found it, Jem and I, out hunting one day ,” Jamie
explained, lifting a curtain of l eaves for me to pass beneath.
The vine s snake d over the rocks , thick as a man’ s forearm and
knotted with age, the rusty-green  leaves of spring not yet quite
covering them. “It was a secret  between us. W e agreed we’d
tell no one else—not even his parents.”
“Nor me,” I said, but wasn’ t of fended. I heard the loss in his
voice at the mention of Jem.
The entr ance to the cave was a crack in the ground, over
which J amie had pushed a lar g e, flat rock. He slid this back
with some ef fort, and I bent o ver cautiously , experiencing a
brief cle nch of the innards at the faint sound of moving air
through the fissure. The surface air was warm, though; the
cave was drawing, not blowing.
I r emem bered all too well the cave at Abandawe, that had
seemed to breathe around us, and it took some force of will to
follow J amie as he disappeared into the earth. There was a
rough wooden ladder—new , I sa w , but replacing a much older
one that had fallen to pieces; some bits of rotted wood were
still in place, dangling from the rock on rusted iron spikes.
It could  have been no more tha n ten or twelve feet to the
bottom, but the neck of the cav e was narrow , and the descentseemed endless. At last I reache d the bottom, though, and saw
that the cave had opened out, like the bottom of a flask. Jamie
was crou ched to  one side; I saw him draw out a small bottle
and smelled the sharp scent of turpentine.
He’d brought a torch, a pine knot with a head dipped in tar
and wrapped with a rag. He so aked the rag with turpentine,
then drew the fi re-starter Bree had made for him. A shower of
sparks lit his face, intent and ruddy . T wice more, and the torch
caught, the flame bursting through the flammable cloth and
catching the tar .
He lifted the to rch, and gestured toward the floor behind
me. I turned and nearly jumped out of my skin.
The Spaniard leaned against the wall, bony legs stretched
out, skul l fallen forward as if in a doze. T ufts of reddish, faded
hair still clung h ere and there, but the skin had gone entirely .
His hands and feet were mostl y gone, too, the small bones
carried away by rodents. No lar g e animals had been able to get
at him, though, and while the torso and long bones showed
signs of nibbling , they were lar gely intact; the swell of the rib
cage pok ed thro ugh a tissue of cloth so faded that there was no
telling what color it had ever been.
He was  a Spaniard, too. A crested metal helmet, red with
rust, lay by him, along with an iron breastplate and a knife.
“Jesus H . Roosevelt Christ,” I whispered. Jamie crossed
himself, and knelt by the skeleton.
“I’ve no  notion how long he’ s b een here,” he said, also low-
voiced. “W e didna find anything  with him save the armor and
that.” H e pointe d to the gravel  just in front of the pelvis. I
leaned closer to look; a small crucifix, probably silver , now
tarnished black, and a few inches away , a tiny triangular shape,
also black.
“A rosary?” I asked, and Jamie nodded.
“I expec t he was wearing it about his neck. It must have
been made of w ood and string, and when it rotted, the metal
bits fell. That”—his finger gently touched the little triangle—”says Nr . Sra. Ang . on the one side —Nuestra Senor a de los
Angeles , I think  it means, ‘Our Lady of the Angels.’ There’ s a
wee picture of the Blessed V ir gin on the other side.”
I crossed myself by reflex.
“W as Jemmy scared?” I asked, after a moment’ s respectful
silence.
“I w as,” Jamie s aid dryly . “It was dark when I came down
the s haft, and I nearly stepped on this fellow . I thought he was
alive, and the shock of it liked to stop my heart.”
He’d cried out i n alarm, and Jemmy , left aboveground with
strict in structions not to move from the spot, had promptly
scrambled into the hole, losing  his grip of the broken ladder
halfway down and landing feetfirst on his grandfather .
“I heard him scr abbling and looked up, just in time to have
him plunge out of the heavens and strike me in the breast like
a canno nball.” Jamie rubbed the left side of his chest with
rueful a musement. “If I hadn’ t looked up, he’d have broken
my neck—and he’d never have got out, by himself.”
And we’d never have known wh at happened to either one of
you . I swall owed, d ry-mouthed at the thought. And yet … on
any give n day , something just as random might happen. T o
anyone.
“A wonder neither one of you broke anything,” I said
instead, and gestured toward the  skeleton. “What do you think
happened to this gentleman?” His people never knew .
Jamie shook his head.
“I dinna  ken. He wasna expecting an enemy , because he
wasna wearing his armor .”
“Y ou don’ t think he fell in and couldn’ t get out?” I squatted
by the skeleton, tracing the tibia of the left leg. The bone was
dried an d cracked, gnawed at th e end by small sharp teeth—
but I could see what might be a greenstick fracture of the bone.
Or might just be the cracking of age.
Jamie shrugged, glancing up.“I sh ouldna think so. He was a good bit shorter than I am,
but I think the original ladder m ust have been here when he
died—for if someone built the ladder later , why would they
leave thi s gentle man here at the bottom of it? And even with a
broken leg, he should have been able to climb it.”
“Hmm. He might have died o f a fever , I suppose. That
would a ccount f or his taking of f his breastplate and helmet.”
Though I personally would have taken them of f at the first
opportunity; depending on the season, he must either have
been boiled alive or suf fered severely from mildew , semi-
enclosed in metal.
“Mmphm.”
I glanced up at this sound, which indicated dubious
acceptance of my reasoning but disagreement with my
conclusion.
“Y ou think he was killed?”
He shrugged.
“He has armor—but nay weapon save a wee knife. And ye
can see he was right-handed, but the knife’ s lying to his left.”
The skeleton had  been right-hand ed; the bones of the right
arm were noticeably thicker , even by the flicker of torchlight.
Possibly a swordsman? I wondered.
“I k ent a good many Spani sh soldiers in the Indies,
Sassenach. All of them fair brist led wi’ swords and spears and
pistols. I f this man died of a fever , his companions might take
his a rms—but they’d take the a rmor , too, and  t he knif e. Why
leave it?”
“But by that token,” I objected , “why did whoever killed
him—if he was killed—leave the armor and the knife?”
“As for the armor—they didna want it. It wouldna be
particularly useful to anyone other than a soldier . As for the
knife—because it was sticking  in him?” Jamie suggested.
“And it’ s no a very good knife to begin with.”“V ery logical,” I said, swallowing again. “Putting aside the
question of how he died—what in God’ s name was he doing in
the mountains of North Carolina in the first place?”
“The Sp anish sent explorers up as far as V ir ginia, fifty or
sixty years ago,” he informed me. “The swamps discouraged
them, though.”
“I ca n se e why . But why … this ?” I stoo d up, waving a hand
to encom pass th e cave and its ladder . He didn’ t reply , but took
my arm and lifted his torch, turn ing me to the side of the cave
opposite the ladder . W ell above  my head, I saw another small
fissure i n the rock, black in the torchlight, barely wide enough
for a man to wriggle through.
“There’ s a smaller cave through there,” he said, nodding
upward. “And when I put Jem up to look, he told me there
were ma rks in the dust—square marks, as though heavy boxes
had sat there.”
Which i s why , when the need to hide treasure had occurred
to him, so had thought of the Spaniard’ s Cave.
“W e’ll bring the last of the gold tonight,” he said, “and pile
rocks to hide the  opening up there. Then we’ll leave the senor
here to his rest.”
I wa s obliged to admit that the cave made as suitable a
resting p lace as any . And the Sp anish soldier ’ s presence would
likely discourage anyone who stumbled on the cave from
further investigation, both Indians and settlers having a distinct
aversion to ghosts. For that matter , so did Highlanders, and I
turned curiously to Jamie.
“Y ou and Jem—you weren’ t troubled about being haunted
by him?”
“Nay , we said the proper prayer for the repose of his soul,
when I sealed the cave, and scattered salt around it.”
That made me smile.
“Y ou know the proper prayer for every occasion, don’ t
you?”He smile d faintl y in return, and rubbed the head of the torch
in th e da mp gra vel to extinguish it. A faint shaft of light from
above glowed on the crown of his head.
“There’ s always a prayer , a nighean , ev en if it’ s only A
Dhia, cuidich mi.” Oh, God—help me . A KNIFE THA T KNOWS MY HAND
 
N OT A LL THE G OLD rested with the Spaniard. T wo of
my p etticoats had an extra turnu p in the hem, with shavings of
gold evenly distributed in tiny pockets, and my lar ge pocket
itself had several ounces of gold stitched into the seam at the
bottom. Jamie and Ian each c arried a small amount in his
sporran. And each of them would carry two substantial shot
pouches on his b elt. W e had retired, the three of us, to the New
House clearing, to make the shot in private.
“Now , y e’ll no for get which sid e to load from, aye?” Jamie
dropped a fresh musket ball out of the mold, glowing like a
miniature sunrise, into the pot of grease and soot.
“As long as ye dinna take my shot bag in mistake, no,” Ian
said cau stically . He was making lead shot, dropping the hot
fresh ba lls into a hollow lined with moist leaves, where they
smoked and steamed in the crisp spring evening.
Rollo, lying nearby , sneezed as a wisp of smoke drifted past
his nose , and snorted explosively . Ian glanced at him with a
smile.
“W ill ye  like chasing the red deer through the heather , a
cu ? ”  he aske d. “Y e’ll need to keep of f the sheep, though, or
someone’ s like to shoot ye for a wolf.”
Rollo sighed and let his eyes go to drowsy slits.
“Thinking what ye’ll say to yo ur mam when ye see her?”
Jamie asked, squinting against the smoke of the fire as he held
the ladle of gold shavings over the flame.
“T ryin’ not to th ink too much,” Ian replied frankly . “I get a
queer feeling in my wame when I think of Lallybroch.”
“Good queer or bad queer?” I asked, gingerly scooping the
cooled g old balls out of the grease with a wooden spoon anddropping them into the shot pouches.
Ian frowned, eyes fixed on his ladle as the lead went
suddenly from crumpled blobs to a quivering puddle.
“Both, I think. Brianna told m e once about a book she’d
read in school that said ye can’ t go home again. I think that’ s
maybe true—bu t I want to,” he added softly , eyes still on his
work. The melted lead hissed into the mold.
I looked away from the wistfulness in his face, and found
Jamie looking at me, his ga ze quizzical, eyes soft with
sympathy . I looked away from him, too, and rose to my feet,
groaning slightly as my knee joint cracked.
“Y es, well,” I said briskly . “I suppose it depends on what
you thin k home is, doesn’ t it?  It isn’ t always a place, you
know .”
“A ye, that’ s true.” Ian held the  bullet mold for an instant,
letting it  cool. “But even when it’ s a person—ye can’ t always
go back,  aye? Or maybe ye can,” he added, his mouth quirking
a little as he glanced up at Jamie, and then at me.
“I th ink ye’ll fin d your parents much as ye left them,” Jamie
said dryly , choosing to ignore Ia n’ s reference. “Y ou may come
as a greater shock to them.”
Ian glanced down at himself and smiled.
“Got a bit taller ,” he said.
I g ave a brief sn ort of amusement. He’d been fifteen when
he’d left  Scotland—a tall, scrawny gowk of a boy . He was  a
couple o f inche s taller now . He  was also lean and hard as a
strip of dried raw hide, and normally tanned to much the same
color , though the winter had bleached him, making the
tattooed dots that ran in semicircles across his cheekbones
stand out more vividly .
“Y ou re member that other line I told you?” I asked him.
“When we came back to Lallybroch from Edinbur gh, after I …
found Ja mie aga in. Home is wher e, when you have to go ther e,
they have to take you in.”Ian raise d a brow , looked from me to Jamie, and shook his
head.
“Nay wonder ye’re sae fond of  her , Uncle. She must be a
rare comfort to ye.”
“W ell,” Jamie said, his eyes fixed on his work, “she keeps
takin’ me in—so I suppose she must be home.”
 
THE WORK FINISHED, Ian and Rollo took the filled
shot pou ches back to the cabin,  while Jamie stamped out the
fire and I packed  up the paraphernalia of bullet-making. It was
growing late, and the air—already so fresh it tickled the lungs
—acquired that extra edge of co ol liveliness that caressed the
skin as well, th e breath of spring moving restless over the
earth.
I sto od for a moment, enjoying it. The work had been close,
and hot,  despite being done in the open, and the cold breeze
that lifted the hair of f my neck was delightful.
“Have ye got a penny , a nighean ?” said Jamie, next to me.
“A what?”
“W ell, any sort of money will do.”
“I don’ t think  so, but …” I ru mmaged in the pocket tied at
my wais t, which by this point in our preparations held nearly
as lar ge a collec tion of improbabilities as did Jamie’ s sporran.
Among hanks of thread, twists  of paper containing seeds or
dried he rbs, needles stuck through bits of leather , a small jar
full of sutures, a woodpeck er ’ s black-and-white-spotted
feather , a chunk of white chalk, and half a biscuit, which I had
evidently been interrupted while  eating, I did in fact discover a
grubby half-shilling, covered in lint and biscuit crumbs.
“That do you?” I asked, wiping it of f and handing it over .
“It will, ” he said, and held out something toward me. My
hand closed automatically over what turned out to be the
handle of a knife, and I nearly dropped it in surprise.“Y e mu st alwa ys give money for a new blade,” he
explained, half smiling. “So i t kens ye for its owner , and
willna turn on ye.”
“Its own er?” The sun was touc hing the edge of the Ridge,
but ther e was still plenty of li ght, and I looked at my new
acquisition. It was a slender blade, but sturdy , single-edged
and beautifully honed; the cutting edge shone silver in the
dying sun. The hilt was made from a deer ’ s antler , smooth and
warm in my h and—and had been carved with two small
depressions, these just fitting my grip. Plainly it was my knife.
“Thank you,” I said, admiring it. “But—”
“Y e’ll fe el safer if ye have it by you,” he said, matter -of-
fact. “Oh—just the one more thing. Give it here.”
I han ded it back , puzzled, and was startled to see him draw
the blad e lightly  across the ball of his thumb. Blood welled up
from the  shallow cut, and he wiped it on his breeches and
stuck his thumb in his mouth, handing me back the knife.
“Y e bloo d a blade, so it knows its purpose,” he explained,
taking the wounded digit out of his mouth.
The hilt of the k nife was still warm in my hand, but a small
chill went through me. W ith rare exceptions, Jamie wasn’ t
given to  purely romantic gestures. If he gave me a knife, he
thought I’d need it. And not for  digging up roots and hacking
tree bark, either . Know its purpose, indeed.
“It f its my han d,” I said, looking down and stroking the
small gr oove tha t fit my thumb.  “How did you know to make
it so exactly?”
He laughed at that.
“I’ve had your h and round my cock often enough to know
the measure of your grip, Sassenach,” he assured me.
I sno rted briefly in response to t his, but turned the blade and
pricked the end of my own thumb with the point. It was
amazingly sharp; I scarcely felt it, but a bead of dark-red bloodwelled up at once. I put the kni fe into my belt, took his hand,
and pressed my thumb to his.
“Blood of my blood,” I said.
I didn’ t make romantic gestures, either . FIRESHIP
 New Y ork
 August 1776
 
I N F ACT , WILLIAM’S news of the Americans’ escape
was received much better than he had expected. W ith the
intoxicating feeling that they had the enemy cornered, Howe’ s
army moved with remarkable speed. The admiral’ s fleet was
still in Gravesen d Bay; within a day , thousands of men were
marched hastily  to the shore and reembarked for the quick
crossing to Manhattan; by sunset of the next day , armed
companies began the attack upon New Y ork—only to discover
the trenches empty , the fortifications abandoned.
While something of a disappointment to W illiam, who had
hoped for a chance of direct  and physical revenge, this
development ple ased General Howe inordinately . He moved,
with his staf f, into a lar ge mansion called Beekman House and
set abou t solidifying his hold u pon the colony . There was a
certain a mount of chafing among senior of ficers in favor of
running the Americans to groun d—certainly W illiam favored
that noti on—but General Howe was of the opinion that defeat
and attrition would shred W ash ington’ s remaining forces, and
the winter would finish them of f.
“And meanwhi le,” said Lieutenant Anthony Fortnum,
looking round the stifling attic to which the three most junior
staf f of ficers h ad been consigned, “we are an army of
occupation. Which means, I think, that we are entitled to the
pleasures of the post, are we not?”
“And what would those be?” W illiam inquired, looking in
vain for a spot i n which to put the weathered portmanteau that
presently contained most of his worldly goods.
“W ell, w omen,” Fortnum said  consideringly . “Certainly
women. And surely New Y ork has fleshpots?”
“I d idn’ t see a ny on the way in,” Ralph Jocelyn said
dubiously . “And I looked!”“Not ha rd enough,” Fortnum said firmly . “I feel sure there
must be fleshpots.”
“There’ s beer ,” W illiam suggested. “Decent public house
called Fraunces T avern, just of f W ater Street. I had a good pint
there on the way in.”
“Has to be something closer than that,” Jocelyn objected.
“I’m not walking miles in this heat!” Beekman House had a
pleasant situation, with spaciou s grounds and clean air—but
was a good way outside the city .
“Seek a nd ye shall find, my brothers.” Fortnum twisted a
side-curl into place and slung his coat over one shoulder .
“Coming, Ellesmere?”
“No, no t just now . I’ve letters  to write. If you find any
fleshpots, I shall expect a written report. In triplicate, mind.”
Left momentaril y to his own devices, he dropped his bag on
the floor and t ook out the small sheaf of letters Captain
Griswold had handed him.
There were five of them; three with his stepfather ’ s smiling
half-moon seal—Lord John wrote to him promptly on the
fifteenth of every month, thoug h at other times, as well—one
from his  uncle Hal, and he grinn ed at sight of that; Uncle Hal’ s
missives were occasionally confusing, but invariably
entertaining—and one in an unfamiliar but feminine-looking
hand, with a plain seal.
Curious, he broke the seal and o pened the letter to discover
two closely written sheets from his cousin Dottie. His
eyebrows went up at that; Dot tie had never written to him
before.
They stayed up as he perused the letter .
“I will be damned,” he said aloud.
“Why?” asked Fortnum, who had come back to retrieve his
hat. “Bad news from home?”
“What? Oh. No. No,” he repeate d, returning to the first page
of the letter . “Just … interesting.”Folding up the letter , he put it inside his coat, safely away
from Fortnum’ s interested gaze,  and took up Uncle Hal’ s note,
with its crested ducal seal. Fortn um’ s eyes widened at sight of
that, but he said nothing.
W illiam coughed and broke the seal. As usual, the note
occupied less than a page and included neither salutation nor
closing, Uncle Hal’ s opinion being that since the letter had a
direction upon it, the intended r ecipient was obvious, the seal
indicated plainly who had written it, and he did not waste his
time in writing to fools.
Adam is  posted to New Y ork un der Sir Henry Clinton.
Minnie has given him some obnoxiously cumbersome
Things for you. Dottie sends h er Love, which takes up
much less r oom.
John says you ar e doing so mething for Captain
Richar dson. I know Richar dson and I think you shouldn’ t .
Give Colonel Spencer my r eg ar ds, and don’ t play
Car ds with him .
 
Uncle H al, W ill iam reflected, could cram more information
—cryptic as it often was—into fewer words than anyone he
knew . He did wonder whether Colonel Spencer cheated at
cards or was sim ply very good or very lucky . Uncle Hal had
doubtless omitte d purposely to say , because if it had been one
of the latter alte rnatives, W illiam would have been tempted to
try his skill—dangerous as he knew it was to win consistently
against a  superior of ficer . Once or twice, though … No, Uncle
Hal was  a very g ood cardsman himself, and if he was warning
W illiam of f, prudence suggested he take the warning. Perhaps
Colonel Spencer  was both hones t and an indif ferent player but
a man to take of fense—and revenge—if beaten too often.
Uncle Hal was a cunning old devil, W illiam thought, not
without admiration.
Which was what worried him, rather , about that second
paragraph. I know  Richar dson …  In this instance, he
understood quite well why Uncle Hal had omitted theparticulars; mail  might be read by anyone, and a letter with the
Duke of Pardloe’ s crest might attract attention. Granted, the
seal didn ’ t seem  to have been tampered with, but he’d seen his
own father remove and replace seals with the greatest dexterity
and a hot knife, and was under no illusions on that score.
That didn’ t stop him from won dering just what  Uncle Hal
knew about Captain Richardson and why he was suggesting
that W illiam stop his intelligen cing—for evidently Papa had
told Uncle Hal what he was doing.
Further food for thought—if Papa had told his brother what
W illiam was doing, then Uncle Hal would have told Papa what
he knew  about Captain Richardson, if there was anything to
the captain’ s discredit. And if he had done that—
He p ut b y Uncle  Hal’ s note and  ripped open the first of his
father ’ s letters. No, nothing abo ut Richardson…. The second?
Again no. In the  third, a veiled reference to intelligencing, but
only a wish for  his safety and  an oblique remark about his
posture.
A ta ll m an is always notable in company; the mor e so if his
glance be dir ect and his dr ess neat .
W illiam smiled at that. W estminster , where he’d gone to
school, held its classes in one lar ge room, this divided by a
hanging curtain  into the upper and lower classes, but there
were boys of al l ages being taught together , and W illiam had
quickly learned when—and how—to be either inconspicuous
or outstanding, depending upon the immediate company .
W ell, then. Whatever Uncle Hal knew about Richardson, it
wasn’ t something that troubled Papa. Of course, he reminded
himself, it needn’ t be anything discreditable. The Duke of
Pardloe was fearless on his own behalf, but tended to
excessive cautio n with regard to his family . Perhaps he only
thought Richard son reckless; if that was the case, Papa would
presumably trust to W illiam’ s own good sense, and thus not
mention it.The attic was stifling; sweat was running down W illiam’ s
face and  wilting his shirt. Fortnu m had gone out again, leaving
the end of his cot tilted up at an absurd angle over his
protruding trunk. It did leave jus t enough floor space vacant as
to al low W illiam to stand up and  walk to the door , though, and
he made his escape into the outer air with a sense of relief. The
air o utside was hot and humid, but at least it was moving. He
put his hat on his head and set  of f to find out just where his
cousin Adam was billeted. Obnoxiously cumbersome  sounded
promising.
As h e pressed th rough a crowd of farm wives headed for the
market square, though, he felt the crackle of the letter in his
coat, and remembered Adam’ s sister .
Dottie sends her love, which takes up much less r oom .
Uncle Hal was cunning, W illiam thought, but the cunningest
of devils has the occasional blind spot.
 
OBNOXIOUSL Y CUMBERSOME  fulfilled its promise: a
book, a bottle o f excellent Spanish sherry , a quart of olives to
accompany it, and three pairs of new silk stockings.
“I am awash in stockings,” his cousin Adam assured
W illiam, when the latter tried to share this bounty . “Mother
buys them by the gross and dispatches them by every carrier , I
think. Y ou’re lucky she didn’ t th ink to send you fresh drawers;
I ge t a pair in every diplomatic pouch, and if you don’ t think
that’ s  an awkward thing to explain to Sir Henry … W ouldn’ t
say no to a glass of your sherry , though.”
W illiam was not entirely sure h is cousin was joking about
the drawers; Adam had a grave mien that served him well in
relations with senior of ficers, a nd had also the Grey family
trick of saying the most outrageous things with a perfectly
straight face. W illiam laugh ed, nonetheless, and called
downstairs for a pair of glasses.One of Adam’ s friends brought three, helpfully staying to
assist with disposal of the sherry . Another friend appeared,
apparently out of the woodwork—it was very good sherry—
and prod uced a half bottle of p orter from his chest to add to
the festivities. W ith the inevitability of such gatherings, both
bottles and friends multiplied, until every surface in Adam’ s
room—admittedly a small one—was occupied by one or the
other .
W illiam had generously made f ree with his olives, as well
as th e sh erry , an d toward the bot tom of the bottle raised a glass
to h is aunt for her generous gifts, not omitting to mention the
silk stockings.
“Though I rather think your mother was not responsible for
the book?” he sa id to Adam, low ering his empty glass with an
explosion of breath.
Adam broke into a fit of the giggles, his usual gravity quite
dissolved in a quart of rum punch.
“No,” he said, “nor Papa, n either . That was my own
contribution to the cause of cutlural, culshural, I mean,
advanshment in the colonies.”
“A signal service to the sensibilities of civilized man,”
W illiam assured  him gravely , showing of f his own ability to
hold his liquor and manage his  tongue, no matter how many
slippery esses might throw themselves in his way .
A general cry of “What book? What book? Let us see this
famous book!” resulting, he wa s obliged to produce the prize
of his collection  of gifts—a cop y of Mr . Harris’ s famous List
of Covent Gar den Ladies , this being a lavishly descriptive
catalog of the charms, specialities, price, and availability of
the best whores to be found in London.
Its appearance was greeted with cries of rapture, and
following a brief struggle over possession of the volume,
W illiam rescued it before it should be torn to pieces, but
allowed himself to be induced to read some of the passagesaloud, his dramatic rendering being greeted by wolflike howls
of enthusiasm and hails of olive pits.
Reading is of course dry work, and further refreshment was
called for and c onsumed. He could not have said who first
suggested that the party should constitute itself an
expeditionary fo rce for the purpose of compiling a similar list
for New Y ork. Whoever first bruited the suggestion, though,
was rou ndly sec onded and hailed in bumpers of rum punch—
the bottles having all been drained by now .
And so it fell out that he fou nd himself wandering in a
spirituous haze through narrow  streets whose darkness was
punctuated by the pinpricks of candlelit windows and the
occasional hanging lantern at a crossroad. No one appeared to
have any  direction in mind, and  yet the whole body advanced
insensibly as one, drawn by some subtle emanation.
“Like dogs following a bitch in heat,” he observed, and was
surprised to receive a buf fet and shout of approbation from one
of Adam’ s friends—he hadn’ t realized that he’d spoken aloud.
And yet he had been correct, for eventually they came to an
alley down which two or three lanterns hung, sheathed in red
muslin so the light spilled in  a bloody glow across the
doorways—all w elcomingly aja r . Whoops greeted the sight,
and the body of would-be inve stigators advanced a-purpose,
pausing only for a brief ar gument in the center of the street
regarding the choice of establishment in which to begin their
researches.
W illiam himself  took little part in the ar gument; the air was
close, muggy , and fetid with the stench of cattle and sewage,
and he was suddenly aware that one of the olives he had
consumed had quite possibly been a wrong ‘un. He was
sweating heavily and unctuously , and his wet linen clung to
him wit h a clasping insistence that terrified him with the
thought that he might not be ab le to get his breeches down in
time, should his inward disturbance move suddenly southward.
He forced a sm ile, and with a vague swing of the arm,
indicated to Adam that he might proceed as he liked—W illiamwould venture a bit farther .
This he did, le aving the moil of riotous young of ficers
behind him, and staggered past the last of the red lanterns. He
was looking rather desperate ly for some semblance of
seclusion in which to be sick , but finding nothing to his
purpose, at length stumbled to a  halt and vomited profusely in
a doorway—whereupon, to his horror , the door swung open,
revealing a highly indignant householder , who did not wait for
explanations, apologies, or of fers of recompense, but seized a
cudgel of some kind from behind his door and, bellowing
incomprehensible oaths in what might be German, chased
W illiam down the alleyway .
What with one thing and ano ther , it was some time of
wandering through pig yards, shacks, and ill-smelling wharves
before he found his way back to the proper district, there to
find his cousin Adam going up and down the street, banging
on doors and hallooing loudly in search of him.
“Don’ t knock on that one!” he said in alarm, seeing Adam
about to  attack the door of the cudgel-wielding German. Adam
swung about in relieved surprise.
“There you are! All right, old man?”
“Oh, yes. Fine.” He felt somewh at pale and clammy , despite
the sweltering heat of the summ er night, but the acute inner
distress had pur ged itself, and h ad the salutary side ef fect of
sobering him in the process.
“Thought you’d been robbed or murdered in an alleyway .
I’d neve r be able to look Uncle John in the face, was I to have
to tell him I’d got you done in.”
They were walking down the alley , back toward the red
lanterns. All of the young men  had disappeared into one or
another of the establishments, though the sounds of revelry
and ban ging from within suggested that their high spirits had
not abated, but merely been relocated.
“Did you find yourself decent ly accommodated?” Adam
asked. He jerked his chin in the  direction from which W illiamhad come.
“Oh, fine. Y ou?”
“W ell, s he wouldn’ t rate more n or a paragraph in Harris, but
not b ad for a sinkhole like New Y ork,” Adam said judiciously .
His stock was hanging loose round his neck, and as they
passed th e faint glow of a windo w , W illiam saw that one of the
silver bu ttons of his cousin’ s coat was missing. “Swear I’ve
seen a couple of these whores in camp, though.”
“Sir Henry send you out to make a census, did he? Or do
you just  spend so much time with the camp followers you
know them all by—”
He w as interrupted by a chang e in the noise coming from
one of the houses down the street. Shouting, but not of the
genially drunke n sort evident heretofore. This was ugly
shouting, a male voice in a rage and the shrieks of a woman.
The cousins exchanged glances, then started as one toward
the racket.
This had increased as they hurri ed toward its source, and as
they came even with the farth est house, a number of half-
dressed soldiers spilled out into the alleyway , followed by a
burly lieutenant to whom W illiam had been introduced during
the p arty in Ada m’ s room, but whose name he did not recall,
dragging a half-naked whore by one arm.
The lieu tenant h ad lost both coa t and wig; his dark hair was
polled close and grew low on h is brow , which, together with
his thick-shouldered build, gave him the look of a bull about to
char ge. In fact, he did, turning and ramming a shoulder into
the woman he’d dragged out, slamming her into the wall of the
house. He was roaring drunk , and bellowing incoherent
profanities.
“Fireship.”
W illiam didn’ t see who’d spoken the word, but it was taken
up in excited m urmurs, and something ugly ran through the
men in the alley .“Fireship! She’ s a fireship!”
Several women had gathered in the doorway . The light
behind them was too dim to show their faces, but they were
clearly frightene d, huddling together . One called out, tentative,
stretching out an arm, but the  others pulled her back. The
black-haired lieutenant took no notice; he was battering the
whore, punching her repeatedly in the stomach and breasts.
“Hoy , fellow!”
W illiam started  forward, shouting, but several hands
grasped his arms, preventing him.
“Fireship!” The men were beginning to chant it, with each
blow of the lieutenant’ s fists.
A firesh ip was a poxed whore, and as the lieutenant left of f
his bashing and hauled the woman under the light of the red
lantern, W illiam could see that indeed she was; the rash across
her face was plain.
“Rodham! Rodh am!” Adam was shouting the lieutenant’ s
name, t rying to break through the crush of men, but they
moved together , pushing him back, and the chant of
“Fireship!” got louder .
Shrieks came from the whores  in the doorway , and they
crammed back as Rodham flung the woman down on the
doorstep. W illiam lunged and succeeded in breaking through
the pres s, but before he could reach the lieutenant, Rodham
had seized the lantern and, dashing it against the front of the
house, flung blazing oil over the whore.
He fell back the n, panting, eyes wide and staring as though
in di sbelief, as t he woman leapt to her feet, arms windmilling
in panic as the flames caught her hair , her gauzy shift. W ithin
seconds, she was wrapped in f ire, screaming in a high, thin
voice th at cut through the confusion of noise in the street and
ran straight into W illiam’ s brain.
The men  fell back as she staggered toward them, lurching,
hands reaching—whether in a futile plea for help or in the
desire to  immolate them, as we ll, he couldn’ t tell. He stoodrooted to the s pot, his body clenched with the need to do
something, the impossibility of doing anything, the
overwhelming sense of disaster . An insistent pain in his arm
made him glance mechanically aside, to find Adam beside
him, fingers digging hard into the muscle of his forearm.
“Let’ s go,” Adam whispered, his face white and sweating.
“For God’ s sake, let’ s go!”
The doo r of the whorehouse had slammed shut. The burning
woman fell against it, hands pressed against the wood. The
appetizing smell  of roasting meat filled the close, hot confines
of the alley , and W illiam felt his gor ge rise once more.
“God curse you! May your go ddamned pricks all rot and
fall of f!”  The scream came from a window above; W illiam’ s
head jerked up a nd he saw a woman shaking a fist at the men
below . There was a rumble fro m the men, and one shouted
something foul in reply; another bent and seized a cobblestone
and rising, flung it hard. It bou nced against the front of the
house b elow the window , and fell back, striking one of the
soldiers, who cursed and shoved the man who’d thrown it.
The burn ing woman had sunk d own by the door; the flames
had mad e a charred spot on it.  She was still making a faint
keening noise, but had ceased to move.
Suddenly W illiam lost his mind and, grabbing the man who
had thro wn the stone, took him  by the neck and cracked his
head against the doorpost of the  house. The man stif fened and
slumped, his knees giving way , and sat in the street, moaning.
“Get out!” W illiam bellowed. “All of you! Leave!” Fists
clenched, he turned on the black-haired lieutenant, who, his
rage all vanished, was standing motionless, staring at the
woman on the stoop. Her sk irts had vanished; a pair of
blackened legs twitched feebly in the shadow .
W illiam reached  the man in one stride and took him by the
front of his shirt, yanking him round.
“Go,” he said, in a dangerous voice. “Leave. Now!”He released the man, who blinked, swallowed, and, turning,
walked like an automaton into the dark.
Panting, W illiam  turned on the rest of them, but they had
lost the thirst f or violence as quickly as it had come upon
them. There were a few glances  toward the woman—she had
gone still now—and shuf flings,  incoherent murmurs. None of
them would meet another ’ s eye.
He was vaguely  conscious of Adam by his side, trembling
with shock but solidly beside him. He put a hand on his
smaller cousin’ s shoulder and held on, trembling himself, as
the m en melted away . The man sitting in the street got slowly
to h is hands and feet, half- rose, and lurched after his
companions, caroming of f the fronts of houses as he made his
way into the dark.
The alley fell quiet. The fire had gone out. The other red
lanterns in the street had been extinguished. He felt as though
he h ad grown to the spot, would stand in this hateful place
forever—but Adam moved a little, and his hand fell from his
cousin’ s shoulder and he found that his feet would carry him.
They tur ned away , and walked in silence back through the
dark streets. They came by a sentry point, where soldiers on
guard w ere stan ding round a fir e, keeping casual watch. They
were to keep order in the occupied city , the guards. The
sentries glanced at them, but did not stop them.
In the light of the fire, he saw the tracks of wetness on
Adam’ s face and realized that his cousin was crying.
So was he. TRANSVERSE LIE
 Fraser ’ s Ridge
 March 1777
 
T HE WORLD W AS DRIPPING. Freshets leapt down
the mountain, grass and leaves  were wet with dew , and the
shingles steamed in the morning sun. Our preparations were
made and the passes were clear . There remained only one
more thing to do before we could leave.
“T oday , d’ye think?” Jamie ask ed hopefully . He was not a
man ma de for peaceful contemp lation; once a course of action
was decided upon, he wanted to be acting. Babies,
unfortunately , are completely indif ferent to both convenience
and impatience.
“Maybe,” I said, trying to keep a grip on my own patience.
“Maybe not.”
“I saw her last week, and she looked then as though she was
goin’ to explode any minute, Auntie,” Ian remarked, handing
Rollo the last bi te of his muf fin. “Ken those mushrooms? The
big round ones? Y e touch one and poof!”  He flicked his
fingers, scattering muf fin crumbs. “Like that.”
“She’ s only having the one, no?” Jamie asked me, frowning.
“I told you—six  times so far—I  think so. I bloody hope  so,”
I added, repressing an ur ge to cross myself. “But you can’ t
always tell.”
“T wins run in families,” Ian put in helpfully .
Jamie did cross himself.
“I’ve heard only one heartbeat, ” I said, keeping a grip on
my temper , “and I’ve been listening for months.”
“Can ye not count the bits that stick out?” Ian inquired. “If it
seemed to have six legs, I mean …”
“Easier said than done.” I coul d, of course, make out the
general aspect of the child—a head was reasonably easy tofeel, and so were buttocks; arms and legs a bit more
problematical. That was what was disturbing me at the
moment.
I’d b een checking Lizzie once a  week for the past month—
and had been going up to her ca bin every other day for the last
week, though it was a long wal k. The child—and I did think
there was only one—seemed v ery lar ge; the fundus of the
uterus was a good bit higher than I thought it should be. And
while ba bies fre quently changed  position in the weeks prior to
birth, this one had remained in a transverse lie—wedged
sideways—for a worryingly long time.
The fact was that without a hospital, operating facilities, or
anesthesia, my ability to deal wi th an unorthodox delivery was
severely limited. Sans  sur gical intervention, with a transverse
lie, a midwife had four alternatives: let the woman die after
days of  agonizing labor; let t he woman die after doing a
cesarean section without benefit  of anesthesia or asepsis—but
possibly save the baby; possibly save the mother by killing the
child in the w omb and then removing it in bits (Daniel
Rawlings had had several pages in his book—illustrated—
describing this procedure), or a ttempting an internal version,
trying to  turn the baby into a position in which it might be
delivered.
While superficially the most attractive option, that last one
could easily be as dangerous a s the others, resulting in the
deaths of mother and  child.
I’d t ried an external version the  week before, and managed
—with dif ficulty—to induce the child to turn head-down. T wo
days later , it had  turned right back, evidently liking its supine
position. It might turn again by itself before labor started—and
it might not.
Experience being what it was, I normally managed to
distinguish betw een intelligent planning for contingencies and
useless worrying over things that might not happen, thus
allowing myself to sleep at nigh t. I’d lain awake into the small
hours ev ery night for the last week, though, envisioning thepossibility that the child would n’ t turn in time, and running
through that short, grim list of a lternatives in futile search for
one more choice.
If I had ether …  but what I’d had had gone when the house
burned.
Kill Lizzie, in o rder to save the new child? No. If it came to
that, better to kill the child in uter o , and  leave Rod ney with a
mother , Jo and Kezzie with th eir wife. But the thought of
crushing the skull of a full-ter m child, healthy , ready to be
born … or decapitating it with a loop of sharp wire—
“Are ye no hungry this morning, Auntie?”
“Er … no. Thank you, Ian.”
“Y e look a bi t pale, Sassenach. Are ye sickening for
something?”
“No!” I got up  hastily before they could ask any more
questions—there was absolutely no point in anyone but me
being terrorized by what I was thinking—and went out to fetch
a bucket of water from the well.
Amy was outside; she had starte d a fire going under the big
laundry kettle, and was chivyin g Aidan and Orrie, who were
scrambling round to fetch wood, pausing periodically to throw
mud at each other .
“Are ye wanting water , a bhana-mhaighstir ?” she asked,
seeing the bucket in my hand. “Aidan will fetch it down for
ye.”
“No, that’ s all right,” I assured her . “I wanted a bit of air . It’ s
so n ice out in the mornings now .” It was; still chilly until the
sun got high, b ut fresh, and di zzy with the scents of grass,
resin-fat buds, and early catkins.
I t ook my bucket up to the well,  filled it, and made my way
down the path again, slowly , loo king at things as you do when
you kno w you might not see t hem again for a long time. If
ever .Things had changed drastically on the Ridge already , with
the com ing of violence, the disruptions of the war , the
destruction of the Big House.  They’d change a great deal
more, with Jamie and me both gone.
Who wo uld be the natural leader? Hiram Crombie was the
de facto  head of the Presbyterian fisher -folk who had come
from Th urso—but he was a rigid, humorless man, much more
likely to cause f riction with the rest of the community than to
maintain order and foster cooperation.
Bobby? After considerable thought, Jamie had appointed
him factor , with the responsibility of overseeing our property
—or what was left of it. But asid e from his natural capabilities
or la ck thereof, Bobby was a young man. He—along with
many of the othe r men on the Ridge—could so easily be swept
up i n the comin g storm, taken away and obliged to serve in
one of the militias. Not the Crown’ s forces, though; he had
been a British soldier , stationed  in Boston seven years before,
where he and se veral of his fellows had been menaced by a
mob of several hundred irate Bostonians. In fear for their lives,
the sold iers had loaded their mu skets and leveled them at the
crowd. Stones and clubs were thrown, shots were fired—by
whom, n o one could establish; I had never asked Bobby—and
men had died.
Bobby’ s life had been spared at  the subsequent trial, but he
bore a brand on his cheek—”M,” for “Murder .” I had no idea
of h is politics—he never spoke of such things—but he would
never fight with the British army again.
I pushed open the door to the cabin, my equanimity
somewhat restored.
Jamie and Ian were now ar guing as to whether the new child
would be a sister or brother to little Rodney or a half sibling.
“W ell, n o way of telling, is there?” Ian said. “Nobody kens
whether Jo or K ezzie fathered wee Rodney , and the same for
this bairn. If Jo is Rodney’ s father , and Kezzie this one’ s—”“It doesn’ t really matter ,” I interrupted, pouring water from
the bucket into the cauldron. “Jo and Kezzie are identical
twins. T hat means their … er … their sperm is identical, as
well.” That was oversimplifying  matters, but it was much too
early in  the day to try to expl ain reproductive meiosis and
recombinant DN A. “If the mother is the same—and she is—
and the father is genetically the same—and they are—any
children born would be full sisters or brothers to each other .”
“Their spunk’ s the same, too?” Ian demanded, incredulous.
“How can ye tell? Did ye look ?” he added, giving me a look of
horrified curiosity .
“I did not,” I said severely . “I didn’ t have to. I know these
things.”
“Oh, aye,” he said, nodding w ith respect. “Of course ye
would. I for get sometimes what ye are, Auntie Claire.”
I wasn’ t  sure what he meant by that, exactly , but it didn’ t
seem necessary either to inquire or to explain that my
knowledge of the Beardsleys’ intimate processes was
academic, rather than supernatural.
“But it is  Kezzie that’ s this one’ s father , no?” Jamie put in,
frowning. “I sent Jo away; it’ s Kezzie she’ s been living with
this past year .”
Ian gave him a pitying look.
“Y e think he went? Jo?”
“I’ve not seen him,” Jamie sai d, but the thick red brows
drew together .
“W ell, ye wouldn’ t,” Ian conceded. “They’ll ha’ been gey
careful about it, not wantin’ to cross ye. Y e never do see more
than one of them—at a time,” he added, of fhanded.
W e both  stared at him. He looked up from the chunk of
bacon in his hand and raised his brows.
“I ken these things, aye?” he said blandly .
 
AFTER SUPPER, the household shifted and settled for
the nigh t. All the Higginses retired to the back bedroom,
where they shared the single bedstead.
Obsessively , I opened my midw ifery bundle and laid out the
kit, checking everything over once more. Scissors, white
thread for the cord. Clean cloths, rinsed many times to remove
all t race of lye soap, scalded and dried. A lar ge square of
waxed canvas, to waterproof th e mattress. A small bottle of
alcohol, diluted fifty percent with sterile water . A small bag
containing sever al twists of was hed—but not boiled—wool. A
rolled-up sheet of parchmen t, to serve in lieu of my
stethoscope, wh ich had perished in the fire. A knife. And a
length o f thin wire, sharpened at one end, coiled up like a
snake.
I hadn’ t eaten much at dinne r—or all day—but had a
constant sense of rising bile at the back of my throat. I
swallowed and wrapped the k it up again, tying the twine
firmly round it.
I felt Jamie’ s eyes on me and looked up. He said nothing,
but smiled a little, warmth in his eyes, and I felt a momentary
easing—then a fresh clenching, as I wondered what he would
think, if worst came to worst, an d I had to—but he’d seen that
twist of fear in my face. W ith hi s eyes still on mine, he quietly
took his  rosary from his sporran, and began silently to tell the
beads, the worn wood sliding slowly through his fingers.
 
TWO NIGHTS LA TER, I came instantly awake at the
sound of feet on the path outside and was on my own feet,
pulling o n my clothes, before Jo ’ s knock sounded on the door .
Jamie let him in; I heard the m murmuring together as I
burrowed under the settle for my kit. Jo sounded excited, a
little wo rried—but not panicked. That was good; if Lizzie had
been frig htened or in serious tro uble, he would have sensed itat on ce—the twins were nearly as sensitive to her moods and
welfare as they were to each other ’ s.
“Shall I come?” Jamie whispered, looming up beside me.
“No,” I whispered back, touching him for strength. “Go
back to sleep. I’ll send, if I need you.”
He w as tousled from sleep, the  embers of the fire making
shadows in his hair , but his eyes were alert. He nodded and
kissed m y forehead, but instead of stepping back, he laid his
hand on  my head and whispere d, “O blessed Michael of the
Red Domain …” in Gaelic, then touched my cheek in farewell.
“I’ll see ye in the morning then, Sassenach,” he said, and
pushed me gently toward the door .
T o my surprise,  it was snowing  outside. The sky was gray
and full of light  and the air alive with huge, whirling flakes
that bru shed my face, melting i nstantly on my skin. It was a
spring storm; I c ould see the fla kes settle briefly on the grass
stems, then vanish. There would  likely be no trace of snow by
morning, but the night was fille d with its mystery . I turned to
look back, but could not see the cabin behind us—only the
shapes of trees half shrouded, un certain in the pearl-gray light.
The path before us looked likewise unreal, the trace
disappearing into strange trees and unknown shadows.
I felt weirdly disembodied, caught between past and future,
nothing visible save the whirling white silence that surrounded
me. And yet I felt calmer than I had in many days. I felt the
weight of Jamie’ s hand on m y head, with its whispered
blessing. O blessed Michael of the Red Domain …
It was the blessing given to a warrior going out to battle. I
had given it to him, more than once. He’d never done such a
thing before, and I had no idea what had made him do it now
—but the words glowed in my heart, a small shield against the
dangers ahead.
The sno w cover ed the ground no w in a thin blanket that hid
dark earth and sprouting grow th. Jo’ s feet left crisp black
prints that I fol lowed upward, the needles of fir and balsambrushing cold and fragrant agai nst my skirt, as I listened to a
vibrant silence that rang like a bell.
If ev er there we re a night when angels walked, I prayed it
might be this one.
 
IT W AS NEARL Y an hour ’ s walk to the Beardsley cabin,
in daylight and good weather . Fear hastened my footsteps,
though, and Jo—I thought it was Jo, by his voice, was hard-
pressed to keep up with me.
“How long has she been at it?” I asked. Y ou could never
tell, but Lizzie’ s first labor had b een fast; she’d delivered little
Rodney quite alone and without incident. I didn’ t think we
were going to b e that lucky tonight, though my mind couldn’ t
help hopefully envisioning an arrival at the cabin to find
Lizzie already holding the new baby , safely popped out
without dif ficulty .
“Not long,” he panted. “Her w aters came all of a sudden,
when we were all abed, and she said I best come fetch you at
once.”
I tri ed not to notice that “all abed”—after all, he and/or
Kezzie might have slept on the floor—but the Beardsley
menage  w as the litera l personification  of double entendre;
nobody who knew the truth could think of them without
thinking of …
I did n’ t bother asking how lon g he and Kezzie had both
been living at the cabin; from what Ian had said, they’d likely
both been there all the time. G iven the normal conditions of
life in the backcountry , no one would have blinked at the
notion o f a man and his wife living with his brother . And so
far a s the gener al population of the Ridge was aware, Lizzie
was married to Kezzie. She wa s. She was also married to Jo,
as the result of a set of machinations that still caused me to
marvel, but the Bearsdley household kept that fact quiet, on
Jamie’ s orders.“Her pap’ll be there,” Jo said, breath pluming white as he
pulled a longside me where the trail opened out. “And Auntie
Monika. Kezzie went to fetch ‘em.”
“Y ou left Lizzie alone ?”
His shoulders hunched defensively , uncomfortable.
“She said to,” he said simply .
I did n’ t bother r eplying, but hastened my step, until a stitch
in my side mad e me slow a little. If Lizzie hadn’ t already
given birth and hemorrhaged or had some other disaster while
alone, i t might be a help to have “Auntie Monika”—Mr .
W emyss’ s secon d wife—to hand. Monika Berrisch W emyss
was a German lady , of limite d and eccentric English but
boundless courage and common sense.
Mr . W emyss had his share of courage, too, though it was a
quiet sort. He was waiting for us on the porch, with Kezzie,
and it was clear  that Mr . W emy ss was supporting his son-in-
law , rather than the reverse. Ke zzie was openly wringing his
hands and jigging from foot to f oot, while Mr . W emyss’ s slight
figure b ent consolingly toward  him, a hand on his arm. I
caught l ow murmurs, and then t hey saw us and turned toward
us, sudden hope in the straightening of their bodies.
A long, low ho wl came from the cabin, and all the men
stif fened as though it had been a  wolf springing out of the dark
at them.
“W ell, she sounds all right,” I s aid mildly , and all of them
exhaled at once, audibly . I wanted to laugh, but thought better
not, and pushed open the door .
“Ugh,” said Lizzie, looking up from the bed. “Oh, it’ s you,
ma’am. Thank the Lord!”
“Gott bedanket , ay e,” agreed Auntie Monika , tranquilly .
She was on her  hands and kne es, sponging the floor with a
wad of cloth. “Not so long now , I hope.”
“I hope not, too,” s aid Lizzie, grimacing.
“GAAAAARRRRRGH!” Her face convulsed into a rictus andwent bright red, and her swolle n body arched backward. She
looked more like someone in the grip of tetanus than an
expectant mother , but luckily the spasm was short-lived, and
she collaped into a limp heap, panting.
“It wasna like this, last time,” she complained, opening one
eye as I palpated her abdomen.
“It’ s nev er the same,” I said absently . One quick glance had
made my heart l eap; the child w as no longer sideways. On the
other hand … i t wasn’ t neatly head-down, either . It wasn’ t
moving—babies generally didn’ t, during labor—and while I
thought I had lo cated the head up under Lizzie’ s ribs, I wasn’ t
at all sure of the disposition of the rest.
“Let me  just have a look here …” She was naked, wrapped
in a quilt. Her w et shift was hanging over the back of a chair ,
steaming in front of the fire. The bed wasn’ t soaked, though,
and I deduced t hat she’d felt the rupturing of her membranes
and made it to a standing position before her water broke.
I’d been afraid to look, and le t my breath out in audible
relief. T he chief fear with a breech presentation was that part
of the umbilical cord would prolapse when the membranes
ruptured, the loop then being sq ueezed between the pelvis and
some part of the fetus. All clear , though, and a quick feel
indicated that the cervix was very nearly ef faced.
The only thing to do now was to wait and see what came out
first. I undid my bundle, and—shoving the coil of sharpened
wire hastily under a packet of cloths—spread out the waxed
canvas, hoicking Lizzie onto it with Auntie Monika’ s help.
Monika blinked and glanced at the trundle where little
Rodney was snoring when Lizzie let out another of those
unearthly howls. She looked to me for reassurance that
nothing was wrong, then took hold of Lizzie’ s hands,
murmuring soft ly to her in German while she grunted and
wheezed.
The doo r creaked gently , and I looked round to see one of
the B eardsleys peering in, his f ace showing a mixture of fearand hope.
“Is it here?” he whispered hoarsely .
“NO!” bellowed Lizzie, sitting bolt upright. “Get your neb
out o f my sight,  or I’ll twist your wee ballocks of f! All four o’
them!”
The door promptly closed, and Lizzie subsided, puf fing.
“I ha te them,” sh e said through clenched teeth. “I want them
to die!”
“Mmm-hmm,” I said sympat hetically . “W ell, I’m sure
they’re suf fering, at least.”
“Good.” She went from fury t o pathos in a split second,
tears welling in her eyes. “Am I going to die?”
“No,” I said, as reassuringly as possible.
“EEEAAAAARRRRRRGGGGG!”
“Gruss Gott,” Auntie Monika said, crossing herself. “Ist
gut?”
“Ja,”I  s aid, still reassu ring. “I don’ t suppose there are any
scissors … ?”
“Oh, ja,”  she replied, rea ching for her bag. She produced a
tiny pair of very worn but once-gilded embroidery scissors.
“Dese you need?”
“Danke.”
“BLOOOOOORRRRRGGGG!”
Monika and I both looked at Lizzie.
“Don’ t overdo it,” I said. “They’re frightened, but they
aren’ t idiots. Besides, you’ll sca re your father . And  Rodney ,” I
added, w ith a glance at the little heap of bedclothes in the
trundle bed.
She subs ided, panting, but managed a nod and the ghost of a
smile.Matters proceeded fairly rapidly thereafter; she was  fast. I
checked her pulse, then her cervix, and felt my own heart rate
double a s I touched what was p lainly a tiny foot, on its way
out. Could I get the other one?
I glanced at Monika, with an eye to size and strength. She
was toug h as whipcord, I knew , but not that lar ge. Lizzie, on
the other hand, was the size of—well, Ian had not been
exaggerating when he thought it might be twins.
The cree ping th ought that it sti ll might be  twins made the
hair on the bac k of my neck stand up, despite the humid
warmth of the cabin.
No , I said firmly to myself. It isn’ t; you know  it isn’ t. One is
going to be bad enough .
“W e’re going to need one of the men, to help hold her
shoulders up,” I said to Monika. “Get one of the twins, will
you?”
“Both,” Lizzie gasped, as Monika turned toward the door .
“One will be—”
“Both! Nnnnnnggggg …”
“Both,” I said to Monika, who nodded in a matter -of-fact
manner .
The twins came in on a rush of cold air , their faces identical
ruddy masks of alarm and excitement. W ithout my saying
anything to them, they came at once to Lizzie, like a pair of
iron filings to a magnet. She had struggled into a sitting
position, and one of them knel t behind her , his hands gently
kneading her shoulders as they relaxed from the last spasm.
His brother sat beside her , a su pportive arm round what used
to be her waist, his other hand smoothing back the sweat-
soaked hair from her brow .
I t ried to arrang e the quilt rou nd her , over her protruding
belly , but she pu shed it away , h ot and fretful. The cabin was
filled with moist heat, from th e steaming cauldron and the
sweat of ef fort. W ell, presumably the twins were somewhatmore fa miliar with her anatomy than I was, I reflected, and
handed the wadded quilt to Au ntie Monika. Modesty had no
place in childbirth.
I k nelt in front  of her , scissors in hand, and snipped the
episiotomy quickly , feeling a tiny spray of warm blood across
my hand. I seldom needed to do one for a routine birth, but for
this, I was going to need room to maneuver . I pressed one of
my clean cloths to the cut, but the amount of bleeding was
negligible, and the insides of h er thighs were streaked with
bloody show in any case.
It was  a foot; I could see the toes, long ones, like a frog’ s,
and glanced automatically at Lizzie’ s bare feet, planted solidly
on the floor to either side of me. No, hers were short and
compact; it must be the twins’ influence.
The humid, swampish scent of birth waters, sweat, and
blood rose like fog from Lizzi e’ s body , and I felt my own
sweat running down my sides . I groped upward, hooked a
finger round the heel, and brought the foot down, feeling the
life in the child move in its flesh, though the baby itself was
not moving, helpless in the grip of birth.
The oth er one, I needed the other one. Feeling ur gently
through the belly wall between one contraction and the next, I
slid my other ha nd up the emer gent leg, found the tiny curve
of t he buttock. Switched hand s hastily and, with my eyes
closed, found the curve of the  flexed thigh. Bloody hell, it
seemed to have its knee tucked up under its chin … felt the
yielding stif fness of tiny , cartilaginous bones, solid in the
squish of fluid, the stretch of muscle … got a finger , two
fingers, circling the other ankle, and—snarling, “Brace her!
Hold he r!” as Lizzie’ s back arched and her bottom scooted
toward me—brought the second foot down.
I sat  back, eyes  open and breathing hard, though it hadn’ t
been a physical strain. The litt le froggy feet twitched once,
then drooped, as the legs came into view with the next push.
“Once more, sweetheart,” I whispered, a hand on Lizzie’ s
straining thigh. “Give us one more like that.”A gr owl from th e depths of the earth as Lizzie reached that
point where a w oman no longer cares whether she lives, dies,
or splits apart, and the child’ s lower body slid slowly into
view , th e umbil icus pulsing like a thick purple worm looped
across the belly . My eyes were fixed on that, thinking, Thank
God, thank God , wh en I became aware of Auntie Monika,
peering intently over my shoulder .
“Ist das  balls?” she said, puzzled, pointing at the child’ s
genitals.
I h adn’ t  spared time to look, concerned as I was with the
cord, but I glanced down and smiled.
“No. Ist eine Madchen,”  I said. The baby’ s sex was
edematous; it did look much lik e a little boy’ s equipment, the
clitoris protruding from swollen labia, but wasn’ t.
“What? What is it?” One of t he Beardsleys was asking,
leaning down to look.
“Y ou ha f f a leedle girl,” Auntie Monika told him, beaming
up.
“A g irl?” the other Beardsley gasped. “Lizzie, we have a
daughter!”
“W ill you fucking shut up?! ?” Lizzie snarled.
“NNNNNNNGGGGG!”
At this point, Rodney woke up and sat bolt upright,
openmouthed and wide-eyed. Auntie Monika was on her feet
at once,  scoopin g him out of his bed before he could start to
scream.
Rodney’ s sister was inching reluctantly into the world,
shoved by each contraction. I w as counting in my head, One
hippopotamus, t wo hippopotam us …  From the appearance of
the umbilicus to successful delivery of the mouth and the first
breath, we could af ford no more than four minutes before
brain damage from lack of ox ygen began to occur . But I
couldn’ t pull and risk damage to the neck and head.“Push, sweetheart,” I said, bracing my hands on both
Lizzie’ s knees, my voice calm. “Hard, now .”
Thirty-four hippopotamus, thirty-five …
All we needed now was for th e chin to hang up on the
pelvic bone. When the contrac tion eased, I slid my fingers
hastily up onto the child’ s face, and got two fingers over the
upper m axilla. I  felt the next contraction coming, and gritted
my teeth as the force of it crushed my hand between the bones
of the pelvis and the baby’ s skull, but didn’ t pull back, fearful
of losing my traction.
Sixty-two hippopotamus …
Relaxation, and I drew down, slowly , slowly , pulling the
child’ s h ead forw ard, easing the chin past the rim of the pelvis
…
Eighty-nine hippopotamus, ninety hippopotamus …
The child was hanging from Lizzie’ s body , bloody-blue and
shining in the firelight, swaying in the shadow of her thighs
like the clapper of a bell—or a body from a gibbet, and I
pushed that thought away …
“Should not we take … ?” Auntie Monika whispered to me,
Rodney clutched to her breast.
One hundr ed .
“No,” I said. “Don’ t touch it— her . Not yet.” Gravity was
slowly helping the delivery . Pull ing would injure the neck, and
if the head were to stick …
One hundr ed ten hippo—that was a lot of hippopotami , I
thought, abstractedly envisaging herds of them marching down
to the hollow , there they will wallow , in mud, glooooorious …
“Now ,” I said, p oised to swab the mouth and nose as they
emer ged—but Lizzie hadn’ t waited for prompting, and with a
long dee p sigh and an audible pop! , t he head deliv ered all at
once, and the baby fell into my hands like a ripe fruit.
 
I DIPPED A LITTLE more water from the steaming
cauldron into the washing bowl and added cold water from the
bucket. The warmth of it stung my hands; the skin between my
knuckles was cracked from the  long winter and the constant
use of dilute alcohol for steriliza tion. I’d just finished stitching
Lizzie u p and cleaning her , and  the blood floated away from
my hands, dark swirls in the water .
Behind m e, Lizzie was tucked up neatly in bed, clad in one
of th e tw ins’ shi rts, her own shi ft being not yet dried. She was
laughing with the euphoria of b irth and survival, the twins on
either side of he r , fussing over her , murmuring admiration and
relief, one tucking back her loose, damp fair hair , the other
softly kissing her neck.
“Are yo u fevered, my lover?” o ne asked, a tinge of concern
in his voice. That made me turn  round to look; Lizzie suf fered
from ma laria, and while she hadn’ t had an attack in some time,
perhaps the stress of birth …
“No,” she said, and kissed Jo or Kezzie on the forehead.
“I’m only flushed from bein’ ha ppy .” Kezzie or Jo beamed at
her in adoration, while his bro ther took up the neck-kissing
duties on the other side.
Auntie Monika coughed. She’d wiped down the baby with a
damp cl oth and some wisps of the wool I’d brought—soft and
oily with lanolin—and had it now swaddled in a blanket.
Rodney had got bored with the proceedings long since and
gone to sleep on the floor by the wood-basket, a thumb in his
mouth.
“Y our vater , L izzie, ” she said, a slight hint of reproof in her
voice. “H e vill cold begetting. Und die Madel  he vant see, mit
you , bu t maybe no t so much mit der … ” She managed to
incline her head toward the  bed, while simultaneously
modestly avertin g her eyes from the frolicsome trio on it. Mr .
W emyss and his sons-in-law had had a gingerly reconciliation
after the birth of Rodney , but best not to press things.Her wor ds galva nized the twins, who hopped to their feet,
one stoo ping to scoop up Rodney , whom he handled with
casual af fection,  the other rushing for the door to retrieve Mr .
W emyss, for gotten on the porch in the excitement.
While s lightly blue round the edges, relief made his thin
face glow as tho ugh lit from within. He smiled with heartfelt
joy at Monika, sparing a brief g lance and a ginger pat for the
swaddled bundle—but his attention was all for Lizzie, and
hers for him.
“Y our hands are frozen, Da,” sh e said, giggling a little, but
tightening her grip as he made to pull away . “No, stay; I’m
warm en ough. C ome sit by me and say good e’en to your wee
granddaughter .” Her voice rang with a shy pride, as she
reached out a hand to Auntie Monika.
Monika set the b aby gently in Lizzie’ s arms, and stood with
a hand on Mr . W emyss’ s shoulder , her own weathered face
soft with something much deep er than af fection. Not for the
first time, I was surprised—and vaguely abashed that I should
be s urprised—b y the depth of her love for the frail, quiet little
man.
“Oh,” Mr . W emyss said softly . His finger touched the baby’ s
cheek; I  could hear her making small smacking noises. She’d
been shocked by the trauma of birth and not interested in the
breast at first, but plainly was beginning to change her mind.
“She’ll b e hungry .” A rustle of bedclothes as Lizzie took up
the baby and put her to the breast with practiced hands.
“What will ye call her , a leannan ?” Mr . W emyss asked.
“I h adna really thought of a gir l’ s name,” Lizzie answered.
“She was so big, I thought sure she was a—ow!” She laughed,
a low , sweet sound. “I’d for got how greedy a newborn wean is.
Ooh! There, a chuisle , aye, that’ s better …”
I r eache d for the sack of wool,  to rub my own raw hands
with one of the soft, oily wisps, and happened to see the twins,
standing back out of the way , si de by side, their eyes fixed on
Lizzie and their daughter , and ea ch wearing a look that echoedAuntie Monika’ s. Not taking his eyes away , the Beardsley
holding little Rodney bent his h ead and kissed the top of the
little boy’ s round head.
So m uch love i n one small place. I turned away , my own
eyes mis ty . Did it matter , really , how unorthodox the marriage
at th e ce nter of this odd family was? W ell, it would to Hiram
Crombie, I reflected. The leader of the rock-ribbed
Presbyterian im migrants from Thurso, he’d want Lizzie, Jo,
and Kez zie stoned, at the least—together with the sinful fruit
of their loins.
No chance of that happening, so long as Jamie was on the
Ridge—but with him gone? I slowly cleaned blood from under
my nails, hoping that Ian was right about the Beardsleys’
capacity for discretion—and deception.
Distracted by these musings,  I hadn’ t noticed Auntie
Monika, who had come quietly up beside me.
“Danke,” she  said softly , laying a gnarled hand on my arm.
“Gern geschehen.” I  p ut my hand over hers and sq ueezed
gently . “Y ou were a great help—thank you.”
She still smiled, but a line of worry bisected her forehead.
“Not so much. But I am afraid, ja?”  She glanced over her
shoulder at the bed, then back at me. “What happens, next
time, you are not hier?  D ey don’ t stop,  you know ,” she  added,
discreetly making a circle of thumb and forefinger and running
the middle finger of the other hand into it in a most indiscreet
illustration of exactly what she meant.
I converted a laugh hastily i nto a coughing fit, which
fortunately went ignored by the relevant parties, though Mr .
W emyss glanced over his shoulder in mild concern.
“Y ou’ll be here,” I told her , recovering. She looked
horrified.
“Me? Nein,”  she said, shaking her head. “Das r eicht nicht .
Me—” S he poked herself in he r meager chest, seeing that I
hadn’ t understood. “I … am not enough.”I took a deep breath, knowing that she was right. And yet …
“Y ou’ll have to be,” I said, very softly .
She blin ked once, her lar ge, wis e brown eyes fixed on mine.
Then slowly nodded, accepting.
“Mein Gott, hilf mir ,”  she said.
 
JAMIE HADN’ T BEEN ABLE to go back to sleep. He
had trouble sleeping these day s, in any case, and often lay
awake late, watching the fading  glow of embers in the hearth
and turn ing things over in his mind, or seeking wisdom in the
shadows of the r afters overhead . If he did fall asleep easily , he
often came awake later , sudden and sweating. He knew what
caused that, though, and what to do about it.
Most of his strategies for reaching slumber involved Claire
—talking to her , making love to her—or only looking at her
while she slept, finding solace in the solid long curve of her
collarbone, or the heartbreaking shape of her closed eyelids,
letting sleep steal upon him from her peaceful warmth.
But Claire, of course, was gone.
Half an hour of saying the rosar y convinced him that he had
done as much in  that direction as was necessary or desirable
for the sake of Lizzie and her impending child. Saying the
rosary for penance—aye, he saw the point of that, particularly
if you had to say it on your knees. Or to quiet one’ s mind,
fortify the soul, or seek the in sight of meditation on sacred
topics, a ye, that , too. But not for petition. If he were God, or
even the  Blesse d V ir gin, who w as renowned for patience, he
thought he would find it tedio us to listen to more than a
decade or so of someone saying please about something over
and over , and s urely there was no point to boring a person
whose aid you sought?
Now , the Gaelic prayers seemed much more useful to the
purpose, being as they were concentrated upon a specificrequest or blessing, and more pleasing both in rhythm and
variety . If you asked him, not that anyone was likely to.
Moir e gheal is Bhride;
 Mar a rug Anna Moir e,
 Mar a rug Moir e Criosda,
 Mar a rug Eile Eoin Baistidh
 Gun mhar -bhith dha dhi,
 Cuidich i na ‘h asaid,
 Cuidich i a Bhride!
 
Mar a gheineadh Criosd am Moir e
 Comhliont air gach laimh,
 Cobhair i a mise, mhoime,
 An gein a thoir bho ‘n chnaimh;
 ‘S mar a chomhn thu Oigh an t-solais,
 Gun or , gun odh, gun ni,
 Comhn i ‘s mor a th’ othrais,
 Comhn i a Bhride!
 
he murmured as he climbed.
Mary fair and Bride;
 As Anna bor e Mary ,
 As Mary bor e Christ,
 As Eile bor e John the Baptist
 W ithout flaw in him,
 Aid thou her in her unbearing,
 Aid her , O Bride!
 
As Christ was conceived of Mary
 Full perfect on every hand,
 Assist thou me, foster mother ,
 The conception to bring fr om the bone;
 And as thou didst aid the V ir gin of joy ,
 W ithout gold, without corn, without kine,
 Aid thou her , gr eat is her sickness, Aid her , O Bride! 
He’d lef t the cabin, unable to b ear its smothering confines,
and wan dered in  a contemplative fashion through the Ridge in
the fallin g snow , ticking through mental lists. But the fact was
that all his preparation was done , bar the packing of the horses
and mules, and without really thinking about it, he found that
he w as making his way up th e trail toward the Beardsley
place. The snow had ceased to fall now , but the sky stretched
gray and  gentle overhead, and cold white lay calm upon the
trees and stilled the rush of wind.
Sanctuary , he thought. It wasn’ t, of course—there was no
safe place in tim e of war—but the feel of the mountain night
reminded him of the feel of churches: a great peace, waiting.
Notre Dame in P aris … St. Giles’ in Edinbur gh. T iny stone
churches in the Highlands, where he’d sometimes gone in his
years of hiding, when he thought it safe. He crossed himself,
remembering th at; the plain stones, often nothing more than a
wooden altar inside—and yet th e relief of entering, sitting on
the floo r if there was no bench, just sitting, and knowing
himself to be not alone. Sanctuary .
Whether the thought of churches or of Claire reminded him,
he remembered another church—the one they had married in,
and he grinned to himself at the memory of that. Not a
peaceful waiting , no. He could still feel the thunder of his
heart against his ribs as he’d s tepped inside, the reek of his
sweat—he’d smelled like a rutting goat, and hoped she didn’ t
notice—the inability to draw a full breath. And the feel of her
hand in his, her fingers small and freezing cold, clutching at
him for support.
Sanctuary . They’d been that for each other then—and were
so now . Blood o f my blood . The tiny cut had healed, but he
rubbed the ball o f his thumb, smiling at the matter -of-fact way
she’d said it.
He cam e in sight of the cabin, and saw Joseph W emyss
waiting on the p orch, hunched and stamping his feet against
the c old. He was about to hail Jo seph, when the door suddenlyopened and one of the Beardsley twins—Christ, what were
they  doing in there?—reached out and seized his father -in-law
by the arm, nearly pulling him of f his feet in his excitement.
It was  excitem ent, too, not grief or alarm; he’d seen the
boy’ s face clearly in the glow of the firelight. He let out the
breath he hadn’ t realized he w as holding, white in the dark.
The child was come, then, and both it and Lizzie had survived.
He relaxed against a tree, touc hing the rosary around his
neck.
“Moran taing,”  he said softly , in brief but heartfelt thanks.
Someone in the cabin had put m ore wood on the fire; a shower
of sp arks flew u p from the chimney , lighting the snow in red
and gold and hissing black where cinders fell.
Y et m an is born  to tr ouble, as the sparks fly upwar d . He’d
read that line of Job many times in prison, and made no great
sense of it. Upw ard-flying sparks caused no trouble, by and
lar ge, un less you had very dry shingles; it was the ones that
spat stra ight out of the hearth tha t might set your house on fire.
Or if the writer h ad meant only that it was the nature of man to
be i n trouble—as plainly it wa s, if his own experience was
aught to go by—then he wa s making a comparison of
inevitability , saying that sparks always flew upward—which
anyone w ho’d ever watched a fire for long could tell you they
didn’ t.
Still, who was h e to be criticizin g the Bible’ s logic, when he
ought to be repe ating psalms of praise and gratitude? He tried
to think of one, but was too content to think of more than odd
bits and pieces.
He realized with a small shock that he was entirely happy .
The safe birth of  the child was a great thing in itself, to be sure
—but it also meant that Claire h ad come safe through her trial,
and that he and  she were now free. They might leave the
Ridge, knowing  they had done all that could be done for the
folk who remained.A ye, the re was always a sadness in leaving home—but in
this case , it might be ar gued that their home had left them ,
when th e house burned, and in any case, it was overbalanced
by his rising se nse of anticipation. Free and away , Claire by
his s ide, no dail y chores to do, no petty squabbles to settle, no
widows and orphans to provide for—well, that was an
unworthy thought, doubtless, and yet …
W ar was  a terrible thing, and this one would be, too—but it
was und eniably exciting, and the blood stirred in him from
scalp to soles.
“Moran taing,”  he said again, in heartfelt gratitude.
A short  time later , the door of the cabin opened again,
spilling light, and Claire came out, pulling up the hood of her
cloak, h er basket over her arm. V oices followed her , and
bodies crowded the door . She tu rned to wave farewell to them,
and he heard he r laugh; the sou nd of it sent a small thrill of
pleasure through him.
The door closed and she came down the path in the gray-lit
dark; he  could see that she staggered just a little, from
weariness, and yet there was an  air of something about her—
he thought it might be the same euphoria that lifted him.
“Like th e sparks that fly upward,” he murmured to himself,
and smiling, stepped out to greet her .
She was n’ t startled, but turned at once and came toward
him, seeming almost to float on the snow .
“It’ s we ll, then,”  he said, and she sighed and came into his
arms, so lid and warm within th e cold folds of her cloak. He
reached inside it, drew her close, inside the wool of his own
big cloak.
“I ne ed you, ple ase,” she whispered, her mouth against his,
and without reply he took her up  in his arms—Christ, she was
right, that cloak stank of dead meat; had the man who sold it to
him used it to haul a butchered deer in from the forest?—and
kissed h er deep,  then put her down and led her down the hill,the light snow s eeming to melt away from their feet as they
walked.
It seeme d to take no time at all t o reach the barn; they spoke
a litt le on the trail, but he could not have said what they talked
about. It only mattered to be with each other .
It wasn’ t precis ely cozy inside the barn, but not freezing,
either . W elcoming, he thought, with the pleasant warm smell
of th e beasts in  the dark. The  weird gray light of the sky
filtered in, just a  bit, so you could see the hunched shapes of
horses a nd mules dozing in th eir stalls. And there was dry
straw to lie on, for all it was old and a trifle musty .
It w as too cold to undress, but h e laid his cloak in the straw ,
her upon  it, and lay upon her , both of them shivering as they
kissed, so their teeth clacked together and they drew back,
snorting.
“This is silly ,” she said, “I can see my breath —and  yours.
It’ s cold enough to blow smoke rings. W e’ll freeze.”
“No, we won’ t. Ken the way the Indians make fire?”
“What, rubbing a dry stick on a …”
“A ye, fr iction.” He’d got her p etticoats up; her thigh was
smooth and cold under his hand . “I see it’ s no going to be dry ,
though—Christ, Sassenach, what have ye been about?” He had
her firm ly in the palm of his hand, warm and soft and juicy ,
and she squealed  at the chill of h is touch, loud enough that one
of the mules le t out a startled  wheeze. She wriggled, just
enough to make him take his hand out from between her legs
and insert something else, quick.
“Y e’re going to rouse the whole barn,” he observed,
breathless. God, the enveloping shock of the heat of her made
him giddy .
She ran her cold hands up unde r his shirt and pinched both
his nipples, hard, and he yelped, then laughed.
“Do that again,” he said, and b ending, stuck his tongue in
her cold ear for the pleasure of hearing her shriek. Shewriggled and arched her bac k, but didn’ t—he noticed—
actually turn her head away . He took her earlobe gently
between his teeth and began to  worry it, rogering her slowly
and laughing to himself at the noises she made.
It had been a long time of making silent love.
Her hands were busy at his ba ck; he’d only let down the
flap of his breeks and pulled his shirttail up out of the way , but
she’d go t the shirt out at the back now , and shoved both hands
down his breeks and got his h urdies in a good two-handed
grip. Sh e pulled  him in tight, digging in her nails, and he took
her meaning. He let go her ear , r ose on his hands, and rode her
solid, the straw a-rustle round them like the crackle of burning.
He wanted simply to let go at once, spill himself and fall on
her , hol d her to his body and  smell her hair in a doze of
warmth and joy . A dim sense of obligation reminded him that
she’d as ked him  for this, she’d needed it. He couldn’ t go and
leave her wanting.
He closed his eyes and slowed himself, lowered himself
onto her  so her body strained and rose along his length, the
cloth of their cl othes rasping and bunching up between them.
He got a hand down under her , cupped her bare bum, and slid
his finge rs into the straining wa rm crease of her buttocks. Slid
one a little farther , and she gasp ed. Her hips rose, trying to get
away , but he la ughed deep in his throat and didn’ t let her .
W iggled the finger .
“Do tha t again,” he whispered i n her ear . “Make that noise
again for me.”
She made a better one, one he’d never heard before, and
jerked under him, quivering and whimpering.
He pulled out the finger and guddled her , light and quick, all
along the slick deep parts, fee ling his own cock under his
fingers, big and slippery , stretching her …
He made a terrible noise himself—like a dying cow—but
was too happy to be shamed.“Y e’re no verra peaceful, Sassenach,” he murmured a
moment later , breathing in the smell of musk and new life.
“But I like ye fine.” ENOUGH
 
I  T OOK MY L EA VE, starting  from the springhouse.
Stood in side for  a moment, liste ning to the trickle of the water
in its stone cha nnel, breathing  the cold, fresh smell of the
place, with its faint sweet scents of milk and butter . Coming
out, I turned le ft, passing the weathered palisades of my
garden, covered with the tattered, rattling remnants of gourd
vines. I paused, hesitating; I hadn’ t set foot in the garden since
the day that Mal va and her child  had died there. I set my hands
on two of the wooden stakes, leaning to look between them.
I wa s glad I hadn’ t looked before; I couldn’ t have borne to
see i t in its winter desolation, the ragged stems blackened and
stif f, the  rags of leaves rotted into the ground. It was still a
sight to strike a pang to a ga rdener ’ s heart, but no longer
desolate. Fresh green sprouted e verywhere, spangled with tiny
flowers; the kindness of spring laying garlands over winter ’ s
bones. Granted, half the green t hings growing were grass and
weeds; by summer , the woods would have reclaimed the
garden, smothering the stunted sproutings of cabbages and
onions. Amy had made a new  vegetable patch near the old
cabin; neither she nor anyone el se on the Ridge would set foot
here.
Something stirre d in the grass, and I saw a small gopher
snake slide through, hunting. The sight of something live
comforted me, little as I cared for snakes, and I smiled as I
lifted m y eyes and saw that bees were humming to and fro
from on e of the old bee gums th at still stood at the foot of the
garden.
I looked  last at the spot where I had planted salad greens;
that’ s w here she had died. In memory , I’d always seen the
spreading blood, imagined it still there, a permanent stain
soaked dark into the earth among the churned wreckage ofuprooted lettuces and wilting leaves. But it was gone; nothing
marked the spot save a fairy ring of mushrooms, tiny white
heads poking out of the wild grass.
“I will arise a nd go now ,”  I said softly , “and go to
Innisfr ee, and a small cabin bu ild ther e, of clay and wattles
made; nine bean r ows will I have ther e, a hive for the
honeybee, and live alone in the bee-loud glade.”  I paused for a
moment, and as I turned away , added in a whisper , “And I
shall have some peace ther e, for peace comes dr opping slow .”
I made my way briskly down the path then; no need to
apostrophize the ruins of the house, nor yet the white sow . I’d
remember them  without ef fort. As for the corncrib and hen
coop—if you’ve seen one, you’ve seen them all.
I cou ld see the little gathering of horses, mules, and people
moving in the slow chaos of imminent departure in front of the
cabin. I wasn’ t quite ready yet for goodbyes, though, and
stepped into the wood to pull myself together .
The gras s was long beside the trail, soft and feathery against
the hem of my weighted skirts. Something heavier than grass
brushed them, and I looked d own to see Adso. I’d been
looking for him most of yesterd ay; typical of him to show up
at the last minute.
“So there you a re,” I said, accusing. He looked at me with
his huge  calm eyes of celadon  green, and licked a paw . On
impulse, I scooped him up and  held him against me, feeling
the rum ble of his purr and the  soft, thick fur of his silvery
belly .
He’d be  all right; I knew that. The woods were his private
game pr eserve, and Amy Higgins liked him and had promised
me t o see him right for milk and a warm spot by the fire in bad
weather . I knew that.
“Go on,  then,” I said, and set him on the ground. He stood
for a moment, tail waving slowly , head raised in search of food
or interesting smells, then stepped into the grass and vanished.I bent, very slowly , arms crossed, and shook, weeping
silently , violently .
I c ried until my  throat hurt and  I couldn’ t breathe, then sat
in the grass, curled into myself like a dried leaf, tears that I
couldn’ t stop dropping on my knees like the first fat drops of a
coming storm. Oh, God. It was only the beginning.
I rubbed my h ands hard over my eyes, smearing the
wetness, trying to scrub away g rief. A soft cloth touched my
face, and  I looked up, snif fing, to find Jamie kneeling in front
of me, handkerchief in hand.
“I’m sorry ,” he said, very softly .
“It’ s not —don’ t worry , I’m … H e’ s only a cat,” I said, and a
small fresh grief tightened like a band round my chest.
“A ye, I know .” He moved besid e me and put an arm round
my shoulders, pulling my head  to his chest, while he gently
wiped my face. “But ye couldn a weep for the bairns. Or the
house. Or your wee garden. Or the poor dead lass and her
bairn. But if ye weep for your cheetie, ye know ye can stop.”
“How do  you know that?” My v oice was thick, but the band
round my chest was not quite so tight.
He made a small, rueful sound.
“Because I canna weep for those things, either , Sassenach.
And I havena got a cat.”
I snif fled, wiped my face one last time, and blew my nose
before g iving him back the handkerchief, which he stuf fed into
his sporran without grimace or thought.
Lor d , he’ d sa id. Let me be enough . That prayer had lodged
in my heart like an arrow whe n I’d heard it and thought he
asked fo r help in doing what ha d to be done. But that wasn’ t
what he’d meant at all—and the realization of what he had
meant split my heart in two.
I too k his face between my hands, and wished so much that
I had his own g ift, the ability to say what lay in my heart, in
such a way that he would know . But I hadn’ t.“Jamie,” I said at last. “Oh, Ja mie. Y ou’re … everything.
Always.”
An hour later , we left the Ridge. UNREST
 
I  AN  LA Y DOW N WITH a sack of rice under his head
for a pillow . It w as hard, but he  liked the whisper of the small
grains w hen he turned his head and the faint starched smell of
it. R ollo rooted under the plaid with his snout, snorting as he
worked his way close against Ia n’ s body , ending with his nose
cozily buried in Ian’ s armpit. Ian scratched the dog’ s ears
gently , then lay back, watching the stars.
It was a sliver m oon, thin as a nail paring, and the stars were
big and brilliant in the purple-black of the sky . He traced the
constellations overhead. W ould he see the same stars in
Scotland? he wondered. He’d no t paid much mind to the stars
when he was h ome in the Highlands, and you couldn’ t see
stars at all in Edinbur gh, for the smoke of the reeking lums.
His aunt  and uncle lay on the other side of the smoored fire,
close en ough together as to look  like one log, sharing warmth.
He s aw the bla nkets twitch, settle, twitch again, and then a
stillness, waiting . He heard a whisper , too low to make out the
words but the intent behind them clear enough.
He k ept his bre athing regular , a little louder than usual. A
moment, and then the stealthy m ovements began again. It was
hard to fool Un cle Jamie, but there are times when a man
wants to be fooled.
His hand rested gently on the do g’ s head, and Rollo sighed,
the h uge body going limp, warm  and heavy against him. If not
for the dog, he would never be able to sleep out of doors. Not
that he ever slept soundly , or fo r long—but at least he could
surrender now and then to bo dily need, trusting that Rollo
would hear any footstep long before he did.
“Y e’re safe enough,” his uncle Jamie had told him, their
first nigh t on the road. He’d bee n unable to fall asleep then fornerviness, even with Rollo’ s hea d on his chest, and had got up
to si t by  the fire, poking sticks in to the embers until the flames
rose up into the night, pure and vivid.
He was well aware that he was perfectly visible to anyone
who might be watching, but there was nothing to be done
about that. And if he had a tar get painted on his chest, lighting
it up wouldn’ t make a deal of dif ference.
Rollo, ly ing watchful beside the growing fire, had lifted his
big head  suddenly , but only turned it toward a faint sound in
the dark. That meant someone familiar , and Ian wasn’ t
bothered, nor yet surprised wh en his uncle came out of the
wood where he’d gone to relieve himself and sat down beside
him.
“He doe sna want ye dead, ken,” Uncle Jamie had said
without preamble. “Y ou’re safe enough.”
“I dinna ken if I want to be safe,” he’d blurted, and his uncle
had glanced at him, his face troubled—but not surprised.
Uncle Jamie had only nodded, though.
He knew  what his uncle meant;  Arch Bug didn’ t want him
to di e, because that would end his guilt, and thus his suf fering.
Ian had looked into those anci ent eyes, the whites of them
yellowed and threaded with red , watering with cold and grief,
and seen  someth ing there that h ad frozen the core of his soul.
No, Arch Bug wouldn’ t kill him—yet.
His uncl e was staring into the f ire, the light of it warm on
the broad bones of his face, and the sight gave Ian both
comfort and panic.
Does it not occu r to you?  h e’d thought, a nguished, but did
not say . He said he’d tak e what I love. And ther e ye sit beside
me, clear as day .
The firs t time the thought had c ome to him, he’d pushed it
away; old Arch owed Uncle Jam ie, for what he’d done for the
Bugs, and he w as a man to acknowledge a debt—though
perhaps more ready to claim one. And he had nay doubt Bugrespected his uncle as a man, to o. For a time, that had seemed
to settle the matter .
But other thoughts had come to him, uneasy , many-legged
things th at crept out of the sleepless nights since he’d killed
Murdina Bug.
Arch was an old man. T ough as a fire-hardened spear , and
twice as dangerous—but old. He’d fought at Sherif fmuir; he
had to be rising  eighty . Revenge might keep him alive for a
time, bu t all flesh came to an en d. He might well think that he
hadn’ t time to wait for Ian t o acquire “something worth
taking.” If he meant to keep his threat, he’d need to act soon.
Ian coul d hear the subtle shifts and rustlings from the other
side of the fire, and swallowed, his mouth dry . Old Arch might
try to take his aunt, for surely Ia n loved her , and she would be
much ea sier to kill than Uncle Jamie. But no—Arch might be
half crazed with grief and rage , but he wasn’ t insane. He’d
know that to t ouch Auntie Claire—without killing Uncle
Jamie at the same time—would be suicide.
Maybe he wouldn’ t car e . Th at was ano ther thought that
walked over his belly with small, cold feet.
He should leave them; he knew that. He’d meant to—he still
meant to. W ait ‘til they’d falle n asleep, then rise and steal
away . They’d be safe then.
But his heart h ad failed him, that first night. He’d been
trying to  gather his courage, there by the fire, to go—but his
uncle ha d forestalled him, coming out of the wood and sitting
by him, silent but companionable, until Ian had felt able to lie
down again.
T omorr ow , h e’d thought. After all, there  was no sign of
Arch Bug; hadn’ t been, since his wife’ s funeral. And maybe
he’ s dead . He was  an old man, and alone.
And there was the consideratio n that if he left without a
word, Uncle Jamie would come after him. He’d made it clear
that Ian was g oing back to Scotland, whether he did it
willingly or tied in a sack. Ian grinned, despite his thoughts,and Roll o made a small grunt as  the chest under him moved in
a silent laugh.
He’d barely spared a thought fo r Scotland and what might
await him there.
Perhaps it was the noises from the other side of the fire that
made him think it—a sudden hig h-pitched intake of breath and
the d eep twin sig hs that followed it, his familiarity providing a
vivid physical memory of the a ction that had caused that sigh
—but he  wondered suddenly whether he might find a wife in
Scotland.
He couldn’ t. Could he? W ould Bug be able to follow him so
far? Maybe h e’ s alr e ady dead , he thought again, and shifted a
bit. Rollo grumbled in his thro at but, recognizing the signs,
shuf fled of f him and curled up a little distance away .
His family would be there. Surrounded by the Murrays,
surely h e—and a wife—would be safe. It was simple to lurk
and stea l throug h the dense woo ds here in the mountains—not
nearly so simple in the Highlan ds, where every eye was sharp
and no stranger passed unnoticed.
He d idn’ t know quite what his mother would do when she
saw him —but o nce she got use d to it, maybe she could think
of a girl who wouldn’ t be too frightened of him.
A suck of breath and a sound not quite a moan from his
uncle—he did that when she put her mouth on his nipple; Ian
had seen  her do it once or twice, by the glow of embers from
the c abin’ s hearth, her eyes clos ed, a quick wet gleam of teeth,
and her hair fal ling back from naked shoulders in a cloud of
light and shadow .
He put a hand on his cock, tempted. He had a private
collection of images that he cherished for the purpose—and
not a few of them were of his cousin, though it shamed him a
little. Sh e was Roger Mac’ s wife, after all. But he’d thought at
one point that he’d need to m arry her himself, and while
terrified at the prospect—he’d been only seventeen and sheconsiderably older—had been e mboldened at the thought of
having her to bed.
He’d watched her close for several days, seeing her arse
round an d solid, the dark shadow  of her red-haired quim under
the thin muslin o f her shift when  she went to bathe, imagining
the thril l of seeing it plain on the night when she’d lie down
and open her legs for him.
What wa s he doing? He couldn’ t be thinking of Brianna like
that, not lying a dozen feet from her father!
He grimaced and squinched his eyes tight shut, hand
slowing as he su mmoned up a dif ferent image from his private
library . Not the witch—not tonight. Her memory aroused him
with great ur gency , often painfully , but was tinged with a sense
of h elplessness. Malva … No, he was afraid to summon her;
he often thought her spirit was not yet so very far away .
W ee Mary . A ye, her . His hand se ttled at once into its rhythm
and he sighed, escaping with relief to the small pink breasts
and encouraging smile of the first lass he’d ever lain with.
Hovering mome nts later on the  edge of a dream of a wee
blond girl who w as his wife, he thought drowsily , A ye, maybe
he’ s alr eady dead .
Rollo made a de ep, dissentient noise in his throat, and rolled
over with his paws in the air . DELICA TE MA TTERS
 London
 November 1776
 
T HERE W ERE M ANY compens ations to growing older ,
Lord John thought. W isdom, perspective, position in life, the
sense of accomplishment, of ti me well spent, a richness of
af fection for friends and family … and the fact that he needn’ t
keep his  back pressed against a wall when talking to Lord
Geor ge Germain. While both his looking glass and his valet
assured him that he continued to be presentable, he was at
least twenty years too old to appeal to the secretary of state,
who liked them young and tender -skinned.
The clerk who h ad shown him in met this description, being
equipped also with long dark lashes and a soft pout. Grey
spared him no more than a glance; his own tastes were harder -
edged.
It was not early—knowing Germain’ s habits, he had waited
until one o’clock—but the man  still showed the ef fects of a
long night. Deep blue pouches cupped eyes like soft-boiled
eggs, which surveyed Grey with a distinct lack of enthusiasm.
Still, Germain made an ef fort at courtesy , bidding Grey sit and
sending the doe-eyed clerk for brandy and biscuits.
Grey seldom took strong drink b efore teatime, and wanted a
clear he ad now .  He therefore b arely sipped his own brandy ,
excellent though it was, but Germain dipped the famous
Sackville nose—sharply protrusive as a letter opener—into his
glass, inhaled deeply , then drained it and poured another . The
liquid appeared to have some restorative ef fect, for he emer ged
from his second glass looking somewhat happier and inquired
of Grey how he did.
“V ery well, I thank you,” G rey said politely . “I have
recently returned from America, and have brought you several
letters from mutual acquaintances there.”“Oh, have you?” Germain brig htened a bit. “Kind of you,
Grey . Decent voyage, was it?”
“T olerable.” In fact, it had been miserable; they had run a
gauntlet of storms across the Atlantic, pitching and yawing
without cease for days on end , to the point that Grey had
wished f ervently for the ship to sink, just to put an end to it all.
But he did not want to waste time on trivial chat.
“I ha d a rather re markable encou nter , just before leaving the
colony of North Carolina,” he s aid, judging that Germain was
now suf ficiently  alert as to listen. “Allow me to tell you about
it.”
Germain was both vain and petty , and had brought the art of
political vagueness to a fine poi nt—but could apply himself to
a matte r when  he wished, w hich was lar gely when he
perceived some benefit to himself in a situation. The mention
of the Northwest T erritory focused his attention admirably .
“Y ou did not sp eak to this Beauchamp further?” A third
glass of brandy sat by Germain’ s elbow , half drunk.
“No. He had del ivered his message; there was nothing to be
gained by further conversation, as plainly he has no power to
act upon his own. And had he intended to divulge the identity
of his principals, he would have done so.”
Germain picked  up his glass, but did not drink, instead
turning it in his hands as an aid  to thought. It was plain, not
faceted, and smeared with fingerprints and the smudges of
Germain’ s mouth.
“Is the man familiar to you? Why did he seek you out, in
particular?” No, not stupid , Grey thought.
“I had encountered him many years ago,” he replied
equably . “In the course of my work with Colonel Bowles.”
Nothing on earth would compel  Grey to reveal Percy’ s true
identity to Germain; Percy had been—well, still was—
stepbrother to himself and Hal, and only good fortune and
Grey’ s o wn dete rmination had prevented an almighty scandalat th e time of Percy’ s presumed death. Some scandals dimmed
with time—that one wouldn’ t.
Germain’ s pluck ed eyebrow flickered at mention of Bowles,
who had headed England’ s Black Chamber for many years.
“A spy? ” Mild distaste showed in his voice; spies were
vulgar necessities; not somethi ng a gentleman would touch
with his bare hands.
“At one time, perhaps. Appar ently he has risen in the
world.” He picked up his own glass, took a healthy mouthful
—it was very good brandy , after all—then set it down and
stood up to tak e his leave. He knew better than to prod
Germain. Leave the matter in the secretary’ s lap, and trust to
his own self-interest to pursue it.
Grey left Germain sitting back in his chair , staring
contemplatively into his empty glass, and took his cloak from
the soft-lipped clerk, whose hand brushed his in passing.
 
NOT , H E REFLECTED, pulling the cloak around him
and tug ging down his hat aga inst the rising wind, that he
proposed to leave the matter to Germain’ s capricious sense of
responsibility . G ermain was secretary of state for America,
true—but this was not a matter  that concerned only America.
There were two other secretar ies of state in Lord North’ s
cabinet—one for the Northern Department, that being all of
Europe, and another for the Southern Department, this
constituting the rest of the world . He would have preferred not
to deal with Lor d Germain at al l. However , both protocol and
politics prevented him from going straight to Lord North,
which had been his first impulse. He’d give Germain a day’ s
head start, then call upon the Southern secretary , Thomas
Thynne, V iscount W eymouth, with the invidious Mr .
Beauchamp’ s pr oposal. The Southern secretary was char ged
with dealing with the Catholic countries of Europe, thus
matters with a French connection were his concern as well.If both men cho se to take up the matter , it would certainly
come to  Lord North’ s attention—and North, or one of his
ministers, would come to Grey .
A storm  was rolling up the Tham es; he could see billows of
black cloud, fuming as though to unleash their fury directly
upon the Houses of Parliament.
“A bit of thund er and lightning would do them good,” he
murmured balef ully , and hailed a cab, as the first thick drops
began to fall.
The rain was pelting down in sheets by the time he arrived
at the Beefsteak, and he was nearly drenched in the three paces
from curb to doorway .
Mr . Bodley , the elderly steward, received him as though he
had come in the day before, rather than some eighteen months.
“T urtle soup with sherry tonight, my lord,” he informed
Grey , gesturing to a minion to ta ke Grey’ s damp hat and cloak.
“V ery w arming to the stomach. F ollowed by a nice lamb cutlet
with new potatoes?”
“The very thing, Mr . Bodley ,” Grey replied, smiling. He
took his  place in the dining room , soothed by its good fire and
cool white napery . As he leaned  back to allow Mr . Bodley to
tuck the  napkin under his ch in, though, he noted a new
addition to the room’ s decoration.
“Who is that?” he asked, startled. The painting, prominently
displayed upon the wall opposite, showed a stately Indian,
festooned in ostrich plumes a nd embroidered draperies. It
looked distinctly odd, set as it was among the staid portraits of
several distinguished—and mostly deceased—members.
“Oh, tha t is Mr . Brant, of course,” Mr . Bodley said, with an
air o f mild reproof. “Mr . Joseph  Brant. Mr . Pitt brought him to
dine last year , when he was in London.”
“Brant?”
Mr . Bodley’ s brows rose. Like most Londoners, he assumed
that everyone who had been in America must of necessityknow every other person there.
“He is a Mohaw k chief, I believe,” he said, pronouncing the
word “Mohawk”  carefully . “He has been to visit the King, you
know!”
“Indeed,” Grey murmured. He wondered whether the King
or the Indian had been more impressed.
Mr . Bodley withdrew , presumably to fetch the soup, but
returned within moments to lay a letter upon the cloth before
Grey .
“This was sent for you in care of the secretary , sir .”
“Oh? Th ank you , Mr . Bodley .” G rey took it up, recognizing
his son’ s hand immediately , and suf fering a mild drop of the
stomach in consequence. What had W illie not wanted to send
in care either of his grandmother or of Hal?
Something he didn’ t want to risk  either of them r eading . His
mind su pplied the logical answer at once, and he took up his
fish knife to open the letter with due trepidation.
W as it Richardson? Hal disliked the man, and hadn’ t
approved at all of W illiam’ s wo rking for him, though he had
nothing concrete to adduce against him. Perhaps he should
have been more cautious about setting W illiam on that
particular path, knowing what he did about the black world of
intelligencing. S till, it had been  imperative to get W illie away
from North Carolina, before he came face-to-face with either
Jamie Fraser or Percy so-called Beauchamp.
And you did ha ve to let a son g o, to make his own way in
the worl d, no matter what it co st you; Hal had told him that,
more than once. Three times, to be exact, he thought with a
smile—every ti me one of H al’ s boys had taken up his
commission.
He unfolded the letter with c aution, as though it might
explode. It was penned with a  care that he found instantly
sinister; W illie was normally legible, but not above the odd
blot.T o Lor d John Gr ey
 The Society for Appr eciation of the English Beefsteak
 Fr om Lieutenant W illiam Lor d Ellesmer e
 7 September , 1776
 Long Island
 The Royal Colony of New Y ork
 
Dear Father ,
 I have a Matter of some delicacy to confide.
 
W ell, there was a sentence to chill the blood of any parent,
Grey thought. Had W illie got a young woman with child,
gambled and lost substantial p roperty , contracted a venereal
complaint, challenged someone or been challenged to a duel?
Or—had he encountered something sinister in the course of his
intelligencing, o n his way to General Howe? He reached for
the wine, and took a prophylactic swallow before returning,
thus braced, to t he letter . Nothing could have prepared him for
the next sentence, though.
I am in love with Lady Dor othea.
 
Grey choked, spluttering wine over his hand, but waved of f
the s teward hastening toward him with a towel, instead wiping
his hand on his breeches as he hastily scanned the rest of the
page.
W e have both been conscious of a gr owing Attraction
for s ome time, but I hesitated to make any Declaration,
knowing that I w as soon to depa rt for America. However ,
we disc over ed ourselves une xpectedly alone in the
Gar den at Lady Belveder e’ s Ba ll, the W eek befor e I left,
and the beauty of the Setting, t he r omantic sense of the
Evening, and the intoxicating nearness of the Lady
overpower ed my Judgment.
 “Oh, Jesus,” Lord John said aloud. “T ell me you didn’ t
deflower her under a bush, for God’ s sake!”
He c aught the interested gaze o f a nearby diner , and with a
brief cough, returned to the letter .
I blush with Shame to admit that my Feelings over came
me, to an Exten t that I hesitate to commit to Paper . I
apologized, of course, not that ther e could be any
sufficient Apology for such dishonourable Conduct. Lady
Dor othea was both gener ous in her For giveness and
vehement in her Insistence that I must not—as I was at
first inclined—to go at once to her Father .
 
“V ery se nsible o f you, Dottie,” Grey murmured, envisioning
all too well the response of his brother to any such revelation.
He could only hope that W illie was blushing over some
indiscretion a good deal short of …
I int ended to ask  you to speak to Uncle Hal for me next
Y ear , when I should r eturn Home and be able to formally
r equest Lady Dor othea’ s Hand in Marriage. However , I
have just learned that she has r eceived another Offer ,
fr om V iscount Maxwell, and that Uncle Hal is seriously
considering this.
I would not besmir ch the lady’ s Honour in any W ay , but
under t he Cir c umstances, cle arly she cannot marry
Maxwell .
 
Y ou mean Maxwell would discover that she’ s not a vir gin ,
Grey tho ught gr imly , and come barr eling r ound the morning
after the wedding night to tell Hal so . He  rubbed a hand hard
over his face and went on.
W or ds c annot convey my Remorse at my actions,
Father , and I ca nnot bring myself to ask a For giveness I
do not deserve, for so grievously disappointing you. Not
for my Sake, but  for hers, I beg that you will speak to the
Duke. I hope that he can be persuaded to entertain mySuit and  allow us to be affianced, without the Necessity of
making such explicit Discoveries to him as might distr ess
the Lady .
Y our most humble Pr odigal, W illiam
 
He sank  back in the chair and closed his eyes. The first
shock was beginning to dissipat e, and his mind come to grips
with the problem.
It should  be possible. There would be no bar to a marriage
between W illiam  and Dottie. While titularly cousins, there
were no  blood ties between them; W illiam was his son in all
ways that mattered, but not by b lood. And while Maxwell was
young, w ealthy , and very suitable, W illiam was an earl in his
own righ t, as well as heir to Dunsany’ s baronetcy , and far from
poor .
No, that  part was all right. And Minnie liked W illiam very
much. Hal and the boys … well, provided they never got wind
of W illiam’ s behavior , they sho uld be agreeable. On the other
hand, should any of them discover it, W illiam would be lucky
to escape with b eing horsewhipped and having every bone in
his body broken. So would Grey .
Hal would be very much surprised, of course—the cousins
had seen  a good deal of each other during W illie’ s time in
London, but W illiam had never spoken of Dottie in a way that
would have indicated …
He pick ed up the letter and read it over again. And again.
Set i t down and  gazed at it for several minutes with narrowed
eyes, thinking.
“I’m damned if I believe it,” he said aloud, at last. “What
the devil are you up to, W illie?”
He crumpled the letter , and taking a candlestick from a
nearby t able wit h a nod of apology , set fire to the missive. The
steward, observing this, instantly produced a small china dish,
into whi ch Grey dropped the flaming paper , and together they
watched the writing blacken into ash.“Y our soup, my lord,” said M r . Bodley , and waving the
smoke of conflagration gently away with a napkin, placed a
steaming plate before him.
 
WILLIAM BEING OUT of reach, the obvious course of
action must be to go and confront his partner in crime—
whatever sort of crime it was. The more he considered, the
more convinced he became that whatever complicity lay
between W illiam, Ninth Earl of Ellesmere, and Lady Dorothea
Jacqueline Bene dicta Grey , it w as not the complicity either of
love or guilty passion.
How wa s he to speak to Dottie, though, without exciting the
notice o f either of her parents? H e could not hang about in the
street until both Hal and Minnie went somewhere, hopefully
leaving Dottie alone. Even i f he managed to catch her
somehow alone at home and interview her privately , the
servants would certainly mentio n that he had done so, and Hal
—who had a sense of protective alertness regarding his
daughter akin to that of a lar ge mastif f regarding its favorite
bone—would be round promptly to find out why .
He declined the doorman’ s of fe r to secure him a carriage,
and walked back to his mother ’ s house, pondering ways and
means. H e could  invite Dottie to  dine with him … but it would
be very unusual for such an invitation not to include Minnie.
Likewise, were he to invite her to a play or opera; he often
escorted the women, as Hal cou ld not sit still long enough to
hear an entire o pera, and considered most plays to be tedious
twaddle.
His way  lay through Covent Garden, and he skipped nimbly
out of the way of a swash of water , flung from a bucket to
wash th e slimy cabbage leaves and rotten apples from the
cobbles by a fruiterer ’ s stall. In summer , wilted blooms littered
the pave ment; before dawn, the fresh flowers would come in
by cart from the countryside, and fill the square with scent and
freshness. In autumn, the place h eld a ripely decadent smell ofsquashed fruit, decaying meat, and broken vegetables that was
the signature to the changing of the guard in Covent Garden.
During the day , vendors shou ted their wares, haggled,
fought pitched battles with one another , fought of f thieves and
pickpockets, and shambled of f at nightfall to spend half their
profits i n the taverns in T avistock and Brydges streets. W ith
the shad es of evening drawing nigh, the whores claimed the
Garden for their own.
The sight of a couple of these, arrived early and trolling
hopefully for customers among the home-going vendors,
distracted him momentarily fro m his familial quandary and
returned his thoughts to the earlier events of his day .
The entr ance to Brydges Street l ay before him; he could just
see the genteel house that stood near the far end, set back a
little in elegant d iscretion. That was a thought; whores knew a
great deal—and could find  out more, with suitable
inducement. He was tempted to go and call upon Nessie now ,
if only for the pleasure her company gave him. But no—not
yet.
He need ed to find out what was already known about Percy
Beauchamp in more of ficial circles, before he started his own
hounds in pursuit of that rabbit. And before he saw Hal.
It was too late in the day to make of ficial calls. He’d send a
note, th ough, making an appointment—and in the morning,
would visit the Black Chamber . THE BLACK CHAMBER
 
G REY W ONDERED what roman tic soul had originally
christened the Black Chamber—or whether it was in fact a
romantic designation. Perhaps the spies of an earlier day had
been consigned  to a windowless hole under the stairs at
Whitehall, and the name was purely descriptive. These days,
the Black Chamber designated a class of employment rather
than a specific location.
All t he capitals of Europe—and not a few lesser cities—had
Black Chambers, these being the centers wherein mail
intercepted en r oute  or by spies or simply removed from
diplomatic pou ches was inspected, decoded with varying
degrees of success, and then sent to whichever person or
agency had need of the information thus derived. England’ s
Black Chamber had employed four gentlemen—not counting
clerks and of fice boys—when Grey had labored there. There
were more of them now , distributed in random holes and
corners in the bu ildings down Pall Mall, but the main center of
such operations was still in Buckingham Palace.
Not in any of the beautifully equipped areas that served the
Royal F amily or their secretaries, ladies’ maids, housekeepers,
butlers, or other upper servants—but still, within the palace
precincts.
Grey passed the guard at the b ack gate with a nod—he’d
worn hi s uniform, with the lieutenant-colonel’ s insignia, to
facilitate entry—and made his way down a shabby , ill-lit
corridor whose scent of ancient floor polish and ghosts of
boiled cabbage and burnt tea cake gave him a pleasant frisson
of nosta lgia. The third door on the left stood ajar , and he
entered without knocking.
He was expected. Arthur Norr ington greeted him without
rising, and motioned him to a chair .He’d known Norrington for years, though they were not
particular friends, and found it comforting that the man
seemed not to h ave changed at all in the years since their last
meeting. Arthur was a lar ge, soft man, whose lar ge, slightly
protruding eyes and thick lips gave him the mien of a turbot on
ice: dignified and faintly reproachful.
“I a ppreciate your help, Arthur ,” Grey said, and as he sat,
deposited on the corner of the desk a small wrapped parcel. “A
small token of that appreciation,” he added, waving a hand at
it.
Norrington raised one thin brow and took the package,
which he unwrapped with greedy fingers.
“Oh!” he said, with unfeigned delight. He turned the tiny
ivory ca rving over gently in his  lar ge, soft hands, bringing it
close to his face to see the details, entranced. “T suji?”
Grey shr ugged, pleased with the ef fect of his gift. He knew
nothing of netsuke  him self, but knew a man who d ealt in ivory
miniatures from China and Japan. He had been surprised at the
delicacy and artistry of the tiny  thing, which showed a half-
clothed woman engaged in a very athletic form of sexual
congress with a naked obese gentleman with his hair in a
topknot.
“I’m afraid it has no provenance,” he said apologetically ,
but Nor rington waved that aside, eyes still fixed on the new
treasure. After a moment, he si ghed happily , then tucked the
thing away in the inner pocket of his coat.
“Thank you, my lord,” he said. “As for the subject of your
own inq uiry , I am afraid that we have relatively little material
available regard ing your mysterious Mr . Beauchamp.” He
nodded at the desk, where a battered, anonymous leather
folder reposed. Grey could see t hat there was something bulky
inside—something not paper; the folder was pierced, and a
small pi ece of twine ran throu gh it, fastening the object in
place.“Y ou surprise me, Mr . Norrington,” he said politely , and
reached for the f older . “Still, let me see what you do have, and
perhaps—”
Norrington pressed his fingers flat against the file and
frowned for a moment, trying to convey the impression that
of ficial secrets could not be imparted to just anyone . Grey
smiled at him.
“Come o f f it, Arthur ,” he said. “ If you want to know what I
know about our mysterious Mr . Beauchamp—and I assure
you, you do—you’ll show me  every word you have about
him.”
Norrington relaxed a little, letting his fingers slide back—
though still with a show of reluctance. Cocking one eyebrow ,
Grey picked up the leather folder and opened it. The bulky
object w as revea led to be a small cloth bag; beyond that, there
were only a few sheets of paper . Grey sighed.
“Poor protocol,  Arthur ,” he sa id reprovingly . “There are
snowdrifts of paper involving Beauchamp—cross-referenced
to that name, to o. Granted, he h asn’ t been active in years, but
someone ought to have looked.”
“W e did ,” Norrington said, an odd note in his voice that
made Grey look sharply up. “Old Crabbot remembered the
name, and we looked. The files are gone.”
The skin across Grey’ s shoulders tightened, as though he’d
been struck with a lash.
“That is  odd,” he said calmly . “W ell, then …” He bent his
head over the folder , though it took a moment to subdue his
racing t houghts enough to see what he was looking at. No
sooner had his eyes focused on the page than the name
“Fraser” leapt out of it, nearly stopping his heart.
Not Jamie Fraser , though. He breathed slowly , turned the
page, read the next, turned back . There were four letters in all,
only on e comp letely decoded, though another had been
started; it bore someone’ s tenta tive notes in the mar gin. His
lips tightened; he had been a good decoder in his day , but hadbeen ab sent from  the field of battle far too long to have any
notion of the cu rrent common idioms in use by the French, let
alone the idiosyncratic terms an individual spy might use—
and these letters were the work of at least two dif ferent hands;
so much was clear .
“I’ve looked them over ,” Norrington said, and Grey looked
up to find Arthu r ’ s protruding hazel eyes fixed on him like a
toad eyeing a juicy fly . “I haven’ t officially  decoded them yet,
but I’ve a good general idea what they say .”
W ell, he ’d alrea dy decided that it had to be done, and he’d
come pr epared t o tell Arthur , wh o was the most discreet of his
old Black Chamber contacts.
“Beauchamp is one Percival W ainwright,” he said bluntly ,
wondering even as he said it, why he kept the secret of
Percival’ s real name. “He’ s a British subject—was an army
of ficer , a rrested for the crime of sodomy but never tried. It was
thought that he’d died in Newgate awaiting trial, but”—he
smoothed the letters and closed the folder over them
—”evidently not.”
Arthur ’ s plump lips rounded in a soundless “O.”
Grey wondered for an instant if he could leave it there—but
no. Arth ur was persistent as a dachshund digging into a badger
sett, and  if he discovered the rest of it on his own, he would at
once suspect Grey of withholding much more.
“He’ s also my stepbrother ,” Grey said, as casually as
possible, and laid the folder on  Arthur ’ s desk. “I saw him in
North Carolina.”
Arthur ’ s mouth sagged for an instant. He firmed it up at
once, blinking.
“I see,” he said. “W ell, then … I see.”
“Y es, you do,” Grey said dryly . “Y ou see exactly why I must
know th e conten ts of these lett ers”—he nodded at the folder
—”as soon as possible.”Arthur nodded, compressing his lips, and settled himself,
taking t he letters into his hands. Once determined to be
serious, there was no nonsense about him.
“Most o f what I could decode se ems to deal with matters of
shipping,” he said. “Contacts in the W est Indies, car goes to be
delivered—simple smuggling, though on a fairly lar ge scale.
One reference to a banker in E dinbur gh; I couldn’ t make out
his conn ection exactly . But three of the letters mentioned the
same name en clair— you will have seen that, of course.”
Grey didn’ t bother denying it.
“Someone in France wants very much to find a man named
Claudel Fraser ,” Arthur said, and raised one brow . “Any idea
who that is?”
“No,” Grey said, though he cert ainly had the glimmer of an
idea. “Any idea who  it is that wants to find him—or why?”
Norrington shook his head.
“No idea why ,” he said frankly . “As to who, though—I
think it may be  a French nobleman.” He opened the folder
again and, from the little bag att ached to it, carefully removed
two wax seals, one cracked alm ost in half, the other lar gely
intact. Both showed a martlet against a rising sun.
“Haven’ t found anyone yet who  recognized it,” Norrington
said, poking one of the seals gently with a podgy forefinger .
“Do you, by chance?”
“No,” Grey said, his throat gone suddenly dry . “But you
might look into one Baron Amandine. W ainwright mentioned
that name to me as—a personal connexion of his.”
“Amandine?” Norrington looked puzzled. “Never heard of
him.”
“Neither has anyone else.” Grey sighed and rose to his feet.
“I begin to wonder whether he exists.”
 HE W A S STILL WONDERING, as he made his way to
Hal’ s house. The Baron Amandi ne might or might not exist; if
he did, he migh t be only a front, disguising the interest of
someone much more prominent. If he didn’ t … matters
became simultaneously more confusing and simpler of
approach; with no way of knowing who was behind the matter ,
Percy W ainwright was the only possible avenue of approach.
None of Norrington’ s letters had mentioned the Northwest
T erritory nor held any hint of the proposition Percy had put
before him. That was not surp rising, though; it would have
been extremely dangerous to put such information on paper ,
though h e had certainly known spies do such things before. If
Amandine did exist, and was directly involved, apparently he
was both sensible and cautious.
W ell, Hal would have to be told about Percy , in any case.
Perhaps he would know something regarding Amandine, or
could find out; Hal had a number of friends in France.
The thought of what Hal mu st be told reminded him
abruptly of W illiam’ s letter , which he had nearly for gotten in
the intrig ues of the morning. He breathed strongly through his
nose at the thought. No. He wasn’ t mentioning that  to his
brother until he’d had a chanc e to speak to Dottie, alone.
Perhaps he could contrive a pri vate word with her , arrange to
meet later .
Dottie proved not to be at home, though, when Grey arrived
at Ar gus House.
“She’ s at one of Miss Brierley’ s musical afternoons,” his
sister -in-law Mi nnie informed him, when he inquired politely
how his niece and goddaughter did. “She’ s very sociable these
days. Sh e’ll be sorry to have missed you, though.” She stood
on tiptoe  and kissed him, beaming. “It’ s good to see you again,
John.”
“And you, Minnie,” he said, meaning it. “Is Hal at home?”
She rolled her eyes expressively at the ceiling.“He’ s b een at home for a week, with the gout. Another
week, and I shall put poison in his soup.”
“Ah.” That reinforced his decis ion not to speak to Hal of
W illiam’ s letter . Hal in good spirits was a prospect that
daunted hardened soldiers and lifetime politicians; Hal in ill
health …  Presumably that was why Dottie had had the good
sense to absent herself.
W ell, it wasn’ t as though his news would improve Hal’ s
mood in  any case, he thought.  He pushed open the door to
Hal’ s st udy with due caution, though; his brother had been
known to throw things when peevish—and nothing peeved
him more than bodily indisposition.
As it was, Hal w as asleep, slumped in his chair before the
fire, his bandaged foot on a stool. The smell of some strong
and acrid medicine floated in the air , overlying the scents of
burning wood, melted tallow , and stale bread. A congealed
plate of soup sa t upon a tray at Hal’ s side, untasted. Perhaps
Minnie had made her threat explicit, Grey thought with a
smile. Aside from himself and t heir mother , Minnie was likely
the only other p erson in the world who was never afraid of
Hal.
He sat down quietly , wondering whether to wake his
brother . Hal looked ill and tired, much thinner than usual—and
Hal was normally lean to start  with. He could not look less
than elegant, even clad in bree ches and a worn linen shirt,
bare-legged, and with a ratty shawl draped about his shoulders,
but the lines of a life spent fighting were eloquent in his face.
Grey’ s heart contracted with a sudden, unexpected
tenderness, and he wondered whether , after all, he should
trouble Hal with his news. Bu t he couldn’ t risk Hal being
confronted unex pectedly with the tidings of Percy’ s untimely
resurrection; he would have to be warned.
Before he could make up his m ind whether to go away and
come back, though, Hal’ s eyes opened abruptly . They were
clear and  alert, the same light bl ue as Grey’ s own, with no sign
of drowsiness or distraction.“Y ou’re back,” Hal said, and smiled with great af fection.
“Pour me a brandy .”
“Minnie says you have the gou t,” Grey said, with a glance
at Hal’ s foot. “Don’ t the quacks say you ought not to take
strong drink, with the gout?” Nonetheless, he rose to his feet.
“They d o,” Hal said, pulling him self upright in his chair and
grimacing as the movement jarre d his foot. “But from the look
of y ou, you’re a bout to tell me something that means I’ll need
it. Best bring the decanter .”
 
IT W AS SEVERAL HOURS before he left Ar gus House
—declining Min nie’ s invitation  to stay for supper—and the
weather had deterioriated substantially . There was autumn
chill in the air; a  gusty wind was getting up, and he could taste
salt in the air— the traces of se a fog drifting toward shore. It
would be a good night to stay indoors.
Minnie h ad apologized for not b eing able to of fer her coach,
as Dottie had gone of f to her afternoon salon  in it. He had
assured her that walking suited him, assisting him to think. It
did, but the whoosh of wind flap ping the skirts of his coat and
threatening to carry away his ha t was a distraction, and he was
beginning to regret the coach,  when he suddenly saw the
equipage itself, waiting in the drive of one of the big houses
near the Alexandra Gate, the horses blanketed against the
wind.
He t urned in at the gate and, hea ring a cry of “Uncle John!”
looked toward the house and w as in time to see his niece,
Dottie, bearing down on him like a ship under full sail—
literally . She wore a plum silk mantua and a rose-pink cloak
and, wit h the wind behind her , billowed alarmingly . In fact,
she scu dded toward him with such velocity that he was
obliged to catch her in his arm s in order to halt her forward
progress.
“Are you a vir gin?” he demanded without preamble.Her eyes widened, and without the least hesitation, she
wrested one arm free and slapped his cheek.
“What?”  she said.
“My ap ologies. That was a trifle abrupt, wasn’ t it?” He
glanced at her waiting coach—and the driver , looking rigidly
ahead—and, cal ling to the drive r to wait, took her by the arm
and turned her in the direction of the park.
“Where are we going?”
“Just for a little walk. I have a few questions to ask you, and
they aren’ t the sort that I wish to  have overheard—nor do you,
I assure you.”
Her eyes widened still further , b ut she didn’ t ar gue; merely
clapped a hand to her saucy litt le hat and came with him, her
skirts foaming in the wind.
W eather and passersby prevented his asking any of the
questions he had in mind until after they had made their way
well into the pa rk and found themselves in a more or less
deserted path that led through a small topiary garden, where
ever green bushes and trees had been clipped into fanciful
shapes.
The wind had dropped momentarily , though the sky was
darkening. Dott ie pulled to a halt in the shelter of a topiary
lion and said, “Uncle John. What  is this taradiddle about?”
Dottie had her mother ’ s autumn-leaf coloring, with hair the
color of ripened wheat and ch eeks with the perpetual faint
flush of  rose hips. But where Minnie’ s face was pretty and
gently appealing, Dottie’ s was underlain by Hal’ s fine bones
and em broidered with his dark lashes; her beauty had a
dangerous edge to it.
The edge was uppermost in th e look she turned on her
uncle, an d he thought that, in fa ct, if W illie was  enamored of
her , it was perhaps not surprising. If he  was.
“I ha d a letter from W illiam, intimating that he had—if not
actually forced his attentions upon you—behaved in a mannerunbecoming a gentleman. Is it true?”
Her mouth fell open in undissimulated horror .
“He told you what? ”
W ell, that relieved his mind of one burden. She was likely
still a vir gin, and he needn’ t have W illiam shipped of f to China
to avoid her brothers.
“It was,  as I say , an intimation. He didn’ t provide me with
details. Come, let us walk before we freeze.” He took her by
the arm and guided her up one of the paths that led to a small
oratory . Here they took shelter in the vestibule, overlooked
only by a staine d-glass window of St. Barbara, carrying her
severed breasts on a platter . Grey af fected to study this
elevating image, allowing Dottie a moment to settle her wind-
flustered garments—and decide what she was going to tell
him.
“W ell,” she began, turning to hi m with her chin raised, “it’ s
true that we—well, that I let him kiss me.”
“Oh? Where? I mean”—he added hastily , seeing the
momentary shock in her eye—and that  wa s interesting, for
would a completely inexperienced young lady realize that it
was possible to b e kissed elsewhere than on lips or hand?—”in
what geographical location?”
The flus h in her cheeks deepened, for she realized as well as
he what she had just given away , but she met his eye directly .
“In Lady W indermere’ s garden. W e’d both come to her
musicale, and the supper wasn’ t ready , so W illiam invited me
to walk outside with him for a bit, and—I did. It was such  a
beautiful evening,” she added ingenuously .
“Y es, he  noted that, as well. I had not previously realized
the intoxicant properties of good weather .”
She gave him a slight glare.
“W ell, anyway , we’re in love! Did he say that , at least?”“Y es, he did,” G rey replied. “He began with a statement to
that ef fe ct, in fact, before goin g on to make his scandalous
confessions regarding your virtue.”
Her eyes widened.
“He—what, exactly , did he say?” she demanded.
“Enough to persuade me—he hoped—to go at once to your
father and put before him the desirability of W illiam’ s suit for
your hand.”
“Oh.” She drew a deep breath at that, as though relieved,
and looked away for a mome nt. “W ell. Are you going to,
then?” she asked, swiveling big blue eyes back in his
direction. “Or have you already?” she added, with an air of
hopefulness.
“No, I have said  nothing to your father regarding W illiam’ s
letter . For one thing, I thought I had best speak to you  first, and
see whether you were in such agreement with W illiam’ s
sentiments as he appears to think.”
She blinked, then gave him one of her radiant smiles.
“That was very  con siderate of you, Uncle John . Many men
wouldn’ t bother with the woman’ s opinion of the situation—
but you’ve always been so  thoughtful. Mother cannot say
enough good things about your kindness.”
“Don’ t over -egg  the pudding, Dottie,” he said tolerantly .
“So you say that you are willing to marry W illiam?”
“W illing?” she cried. “Why , I desire it more than anything!”
He g ave her a long, level look, and while she continued to
meet his eye, the blood rose precipitously in her throat and
cheeks.
“Oh, yes?” he said, allowing all the skepticism he felt to
show in his voice. “Why?”
She blinked twice, very fast.
“Why?”“Why?” he repeated patiently . “What is there in W illiam’ s
character—or appearance, I suppose,” he added fairly , for
young women had no great reputation as judges of character ,
“that so attracts you as to desire marriage to him? And hasty
marriage at that.”
He c ould just about see one or both of them developing an
attraction—but what was the hurry? Even if W illiam feared
Hal’ s deciding to allow V iscount Maxwell’ s suit, Dottie herself
could not possibly be under the  illusion that her doting father
would force her to marry anyone she did not want to.
“W ell, we are in love, of course!” she said, though with a
rather uncertain  note in her voice for such a theoretically
fervent d eclaration. “As for his—his character …  why , Uncle,
you are his own  father; surely you cannot be in ignorance of
his … his … intelligence!” She came up with the word
triumphantly . “His kindness, his good humor …” she was
picking up speed now , “… his gentleness …”
Now it was L ord John’ s turn to blink. W illiam was
undoubtedly intelligent, good-humored, and reasonably kind,
but “gentle” was not the word that sprang immediately to mind
with reg ard to him. On the other  hand, the hole in the paneling
of his mother ’ s dining room, through which W illiam had
inadvertently thr own a companion during a tea party , had still
not been  repaired, and this ima ge was fresh in Grey’ s mind.
Probably W illie behaved more circumspectly in Dottie’ s
company , but still …
“He is the very model of a gentleman!” she declaimed with
enthusiasm, hav ing now got the bit well between her teeth.
“And hi s appear ance—well, of course he is admired by every
woman I know! So tall, so imposing a figure …”
He notic ed, wit h an air of clinical detachment, that while
she touched on several of W illiam’ s notable characteristics,
she did not at any point mention his eyes. Aside from his
height—which could scarcely escape notice—his eyes were
probably his most striking featu re, being a deep and brilliant
blue, an d unusually shaped, with a catlike slant. They were, infact, Jamie Fraser ’ s eyes, and th ey gave John a faint, passing
clench of the heart whenever W illie looked at him with a
certain expression.
W illie knew the ef fect his ey es had on young women
excellently well— and had no he sitation in making the most of
it. Had he been gazing longingly into Dottie’ s own eyes, she
would h ave been transfixed, whether she loved him or not.
And tha t touch ing account of rapture in the garden …
Following a musicale, or during a ball, and at Lady
Belvedere’ s or at Lady W indermere’ s …
He h ad been so occupied by his own thoughts that he did
not realize for a moment that she had stopped talking.
“I b eg your par don,” he said, with great courtesy . “And I
thank you for the encomia regarding W illiam’ s character ,
which cannot fail to warm a father ’ s heart. Still—what is the
ur gency in arranging a marriage? W illiam will be sent home in
a year or two, surely .”
“He might be killed!” she said, and there was in her voice a
sudden note of real fear , so rea l that his attention sharpened.
She swallowed visibly , a hand going to her throat.
“I could n’ t bear it,” she said, her voice suddenly small. “If
he were killed, and we’d never … never had a chance to …”
She look ed up at him, her eyes brilliant with emotion, and put
her hand pleadingly on his arm.
“I have to,” she  said. “Really , Uncle John. I must, and I
cannot wait. I want to go to America and be married.”
His mouth fell open. W anting to be married was one thing,
but this …  !
“Y ou cannot possibly be serious,” he said. “Y ou cannot
think that your parents—your father , in particular—would ever
countenance such a thing.”
“He wo uld,” she countered. “If you  put the matter to him
properly . He values your opinion more than anyone’ s,” she
went on persuasively , squeezing a little. “And you, of all
people, must understand the ho rror I feel at the thought thatsomething migh t … happen t o W illiam before I see him
again.”
Indeed, he thought, the only thing weighing in her favor was
the feeling of desolation that the mention of W illiam’ s possible
death caused in his own heart. Y es, he could be  killed. Any
man mig ht be, in time of war , and most particularly a soldier .
That was one of the risks you took—and he could not in
conscience have prevented W illiam taking it, even though the
mere thought of W illiam blow n to pieces by cannon fire or
shot through the head or dying in agony of the flux …
He swal lowed, dry-mouthed, and with some ef fort shoved
those pusillanimous images firmly back into the locked mental
closet in which he normally kept them confined.
He took a long breath.
“Dorothea,” he said firmly . “I will  discover what you’re up
to.”
She looked at hi m for a long, thoughtful moment, as though
estimating the chances. The corner of her mouth rose
insensibly as her eyes narrowed, and he saw the response on
her face, as clearly as if she’d said it aloud.
No. I don’ t think so .
The expression was no more tha n a flicker , though, and her
face resumed its air of indignation mingled with pleading.
“Uncle John! How dare you accuse me and W illiam—your
own son!—of, of … what ar e  you accusing us of?”
“I don’ t know ,” he admitted.
“W ell, then! W ill  you  speak to Papa for us? For me? Please?
T oday?”
Dottie was a bor n flirt; as she spoke, she leaned toward him,
so that he could smell the fragrance of violets in her hair , and
twined her fingers charmingly in the lapels of his coat.
“I can’ t,” he said, striving to extricate himself. “Not just
now . I’ve already given him o ne bad shock today; anothermight finish him of f.”
“T omorrow , then,” she coaxed.
“Dottie.” He took her hands in his, and was rather touched
to find them cold and trembling. She did  m ean it—or mean
something, at least.
“Dottie,” he repeated, more gently . “Even if your father
were dis posed to send you to America to be married—and I
cannot think that anything less exigent than your being with
child would compel it—there is no possibility of sailing before
April. There is therefore no need to harry Hal into an early
grave by telling him any of this, at least not until he has
recovered from his current indisposition.”
She was n’ t pleased, but was ob liged to admit the force of
his reasoning.
“Besides,” he added, letting go of her hands, “campaigning
ceases in winter; you know that. The fighting will stop soon,
and W illiam will be relatively safe. Y ou need have no fears for
him.” Other t han ac cident, flux, ague, blood poisoning,
griping belly , tavern brawls, a nd ten or fifteen other life-
thr eatening possibilities , he added privately to himself.
“But—” she began, but stopped, and sighed. “Y es, I suppose
you’re right. But … you will  speak to Papa soon, won’ t you,
Uncle John?”
He sighed in turn, but smiled at her nonetheless.
“I w ill, if that is what you truly desire.” A gust of wind hit
the oratory and t he stained-glass image of St. Barbara shivered
in its leaded fra me. A rush of sudden rain rattled across the
roof slates, and he drew his cloak around him.
“Stay here,” he advised his niece. “I’ll fetch the coach round
to the road.”
As he made his way against the wind, one hand on his hat to
prevent it taking flight, he recal led with some unease his own
words to  her: I c annot think t hat anything less exigent than
your being with child would compel it .She wouldn’ t. W ould she? No, he assured himself. Become
pregnant by someone in order t o convince her father to allow
her to marry so meone else? Fat chance; Hal would have her
married to the guilty party before she could say “cat.” Unless,
of c ourse, she c hose someone impossible to do the deed: a
married man, say , or—But this was nonsense! What would
W illiam say , were she to arrive in America, pregnant by
another man?
No. Not even B rianna Fraser MacKenzie—the most hair -
raisingly pragm atic woman he had ever known—would have
done something like that. He smiled a little to himself at
thought of the formidable Mrs. MacKenzie, recalling her
attempt at blackmailing him  into marriage—while pregnant by
someone who was definitely not him. He’d always wondered
if the child was in fact her husb and’ s. Perhaps she  would. But
not Dottie.
Surely not. UNARMED CONFLICT
 Inverness, Scotland
 October 1980
 
T HE OLD  HI GH CHURCH of St. Stephen’ s stood
serene on the bank of the Ness, the weathered stones in its
kirkyard a testament to righteou s peace. Roger was aware of
the serenity—but none of it was for him.
His bloo d was still throbbing in  his temples, and the collar
of his shirt was damp from exertion, chilly though the day
was. He’d walked from the High Street car park, at a ferocious
pace that seemed to eat the distance in seconds.
She’d called him a coward, by God. She’d called him a lot
of other  things, too, but that wa s the one that stung—and she
knew it.
The figh t had started after supper the day before, when
she’d pu t a crusted pot into the  old stone sink, turned to him,
drawn a deep breath, and informed him that she had an
interview for a job at the Nort h of Scotland Hydro Electric
Board.
“Job?” he’d said stupidly .
“Job,” she’d repeated, narrowing her eyes at him.
He had  been swift enough to suppress the automatic “But
you’ve g ot a job” that had sprung to his lips, substituting a
rather mild—he thought—”Why?”
Never o ne for quiet diplomacy , she’d fixed him with a stare
and said , “Becau se one of us needs to work, and if isn’ t going
to be you, it’ll have to be me.”
“What do you mean, ‘needs to work’?” he’d asked—damn
it, she was right, he was  a coward, because he knew
goddamned well  what she meant by it. “W e’ve money enough
for a time.”
“For a time,” sh e agreed. “A year or two—maybe more, if
we’re ca reful. And you think w e should just sit on our assesuntil the money runs out, and then what? Then  you start
thinking about what you ought to be doing?”
“I’ve been thinking,” he said th rough his teeth. T rue, that;
he’d bee n doing little else for months. There was the book, of
course; he was writing down al l the songs he’d committed to
memory in the e ighteenth centu ry with commentary—but that
was har dly a job in itself, nor would it earn much money .
Mostly thinking.
“Y eah? So have I.” She turned her back on him, turning on
the t ap, either to  drown out what ever he might say next, or just
in order  to get a grip on herself. The water ceased, and she
turned round again.
“Look,” she said, trying to sound reasonable. “I can’ t wait
much longer . I can’ t stay out of the field for years and years
and just walk back into it anytim e. It’ s been nearly a year since
the last consulting job I did—I can’ t wait any longer .”
“Y ou never said you meant to go back to work full-time.”
She’d done a couple of small jobs in Boston—brief consulting
projects, once Mandy was out of the hospital and all right. Joe
Abernathy had got them for her .
“Look, man,” Joe had said confidentially to Roger , “she’ s
antsy . I know that girl; she needs to move . She’ s been focused
on th e baby day  and night, probably since she was born, been
cooped up with doctors, hospita ls, clingy kids for weeks now .
She’ s gotta get out of her own head.”
And I don’ t?  Roger had thought—but couldn’ t say so.
An e lderly man in a flat cap was weeding round one of the
gravestones, a limp mass of up rooted greenery lying on the
ground beside him. He’d been watching Roger as he hesitated
near the  wall, and nodded to him  in a friendly way , but didn’ t
speak.
She wa s a mother , he’d want ed to say . W anted to say
something abou t the closeness between her and the kids, the
way they needed her , like they needed air and food and water .He w as now and then jealous over not being needed in the
same primal way; how could she deny that gift?
W ell, he’d tried  to  say somethin g of the kind. The result had
been wh at might be expected by lighting a match in a mine
filled with gas.
He turned abruptly and walked out of the kirkyard. He
couldn’ t speak to the rector right this minute—couldn’ t speak
at all, come to th at; he’d have to cool down first, get his voice
back.
He turne d left and went down along Huntly Street, seeing
the facade of St. Mary’ s across the river from the corner of his
eye; the only Catholic church in Inverness.
During one of the earlier , more  rational parts of the fight,
she’d made an ef fort. Asked if it was her fault.
“Is it me?” she’d asked seriously . “Being a Catholic, I mean.
I k now—I know that makes it  more complicated.” Her lips
twitched. “Jem told me about Mrs. Ogilvy .”
He h adn’ t felt at all like laughing, but couldn’ t help a brief
smile at the me mory . He’d been out by the barn, shoveling
well-rotted manure into a wheelbarrow to spread on the
kailyard, Jem assisting with his own small spade.
“Sixteen tons and what do you get?” Roger had sung—if the
sort of hoarse croaking he produced could be called that.
“Another day older and deeper in shit!” Jem bellowed,
doing his best to pitch his voice down into T ennessee Ernie
Ford range, but then losing control in a glissando of giggles.
It w as at this unfortunate moment that he’d turned round to
find that they had visitors: Mrs. Ogilvy and Mrs. MacNeil,
pillars of the La dies’ Altar and T ea Society at the Free North
Church in Inverness. He knew them—and he knew just what
they were doing here, too.
“W e’ve come to call upon your good wife, Mr . MacKenzie,”
Mrs. MacNeil said, smiling with pursed lips. He wasn’ t sure
whether the expression was  meant to indicate innerreservations, or whether it was merely that she feared her ill-
fitting false teeth might fall out if she opened her mouth more
than a quarter of an inch.
“Ah. She’ll be away to the town just now , I’m afraid.” He’d
wiped h is hand on his jeans, thi nking to of fer it, but looked at
it, thoug ht better of it, and nodded to them instead. “But please
to come in. W ill I have the girl make tea?”
They shook their heads in unison.
“W e hav ena seen your wife in kirk as yet, Mr . MacKenzie.”
Mrs. Ogilvy fixed him with a fishy eye.
W ell, he’d been expecting that  one. He could buy a little
time by saying, ach, the baby’d been ailing—but no point; the
nettle would have to be grasped sooner or later .
“No,” he said pleasantly , though his shoulders stif fened by
reflex. “ She’ s a Catholic. She’ll be to the Mass at St. Mary’ s of
a Sunday .”
Mrs. Og ilvy’ s square face sagged into a momentary oval of
astonishment.
“Y our wife’ s a Papist?” she sa id, giving him a chance to
correct the clearly insane thing he’d just said.
“She is, aye. Born one.” He shrugged lightly .
There ha d been relatively little conversation following this
revelation. Just  a glance at Jem, a sharp question about
whether he went to Sunday school, an intake of breath at the
answer , and a gimlet-eyed stare at Roger before they took their
leave.
Do you want me to convert?  Bree had demanded, in the
course of the a r gument. And it had been a demand, not an
of fer .
He’d wa nted sud denly and fiercely to ask her to do just that
—only to see if she would, for love of him. But religious
conscience would never let him do such a thing; still less, his
conscience as her lover . Her husband.Huntly S treet tu rned suddenly into Bank Street, and the foot
traf fic of the shopping precinct disappeared. He passed the
small memorial garden, put up t o commemorate the service of
nurses during W orld W ar II, and thought—as he always did—
of C laire, though this time with  less than the usual admiration
he had for her .
And what would  you say?  he thou ght. He  knew damned
well what she’d say—or at leas t, whose side she’d be on, in
this. She  h adn’ t hung about being a full -time mum, had she?
She’d g one to medical school when Bree was seven. And
Bree’ s dad, Frank Randall, had taken up the slack, whether he
wanted to or not. He slowed his step briefly , realizing. No
wonder , then, if Bree was thinking …
He passed the Free North Ch urch and half-smiled at it,
thinking of Mrs. Ogilvy and M rs. MacNeil. They’d be back,
he k new , if he didn’ t do something about it. He knew their
brand of determined kindliness.  Dear God, if they heard that
Bree had gone to work and—to their way of thinking—
abandoned him with two small children, they’d be running
shepherd’ s pies and hot stovies out to him in relays. That
mightn’ t be such a bad thing, he  thought, meditatively licking
his lips— save that they’d stay to poke their noses into the
workings of his household, and letting them into Brianna’ s
kitchen would be not merely playing with dynamite but
deliberately thro wing a bottle of nitroglycerin into the midst of
his marriage.
“Catholics don’ t believe in divorce,” Bree had informed him
once. “W e do  b elieve  in murder . There’ s always Confession,
after all.”
On t he far shore  was the only Anglican church in Inverness,
St. Andrew’ s. One Catholic church, one Anglican church—
and no fewer than six Presbyterian churches, all standing
foursquare by the river , in the sp ace of less than a quarter mile.
T ell you  all you needed to know , he thought, about the basic
character of Inverness. And he had  told Bree—though
without, he admitted, mentioning his own crisis of faith.She hadn’ t asked. He’d give her that. He’d come within a
hair of ordination in North Carolina—and in the traumatic
aftermath of that interruption , with Mandy’ s birth, the
disintegration of the Ridge’ s community , the decision to risk
the pass age through the stones … no one had mentioned it.
Likewise, when they’d come back, the immediate demands of
taking c are of Mandy’ s heart and then assembling some kind
of life … the question of his ministry had been ignored.
He thought Brianna hadn’ t mentioned it because she wasn’ t
sure how he meant to handle it and didn’ t want to seem to
push him  in either direction—if her being a Catholic made his
being a Presbyte rian minister in Inverness more complicated,
he could n’ t ignore the fact tha t his being a minister would
cause major complications in her life, and she’d know that.
The upshot was that neither o f them had talked about it
when working out the details of their return.
They’d worked out the practicalities as best they could. He
couldn’ t go back to Oxford—not without a truly elaborate
cover story .
“Y ou just can’ t drop in and out of academia,” he’d
explained to Bree and to Joe Abernathy , the doctor who had
been Claire’ s longtime friend before her own departure to the
past. “Y ou can go on a sabbatical, true—or even an extended
leave. But you have to have a st ated purpose and something to
show fo r your absence when you come back, in terms of
published research.”
“Y ou could write a killer book about the Regulation,
though,” Joe Abernathy had ob served. “Or the run-up to the
Revolution in the South.”
“I could,” he admitted. “But not a respectable scholarly
one.” H e’d smiled wryly , feeling a slight itch in the joints of
his f ingers. He could  write a book—one that no one else could
write. But not as a historian.
“No sources,” he’d explained, w ith a nod at the shelves in
Joe’ s study , where they were holding the first of severalcouncils of war . “If I wrote a b ook as a historian, I’d need to
provide sources  for all the information—and for most of the
unique s ituations I could describe, I’m sure nothing was ever
recorded. ‘Eyew itness testimony of author ’ wouldn’ t go over
well wit h a university press, I as sure you. I’d have to do it as a
novel.” That idea actually held some small appeal—but
wouldn’ t impress the colleges of Oxford.
Scotland, though …
People didn’ t appear in Inverness—or anywhere else in the
Highlands—unremarked. But Roger wasn’ t an “incomer .”
He’d gro wn up in the manse in Inverness, and there were still
a go od many people who had known him as an adult. And
with an American wife and children to explain his absence …
“See, folk there don’ t really car e what it is you were doing
when yo u were away ,” he explained. “They only care about
what you do when you’re there.”
He’d reached the Islands of the Ness by now . A small, quiet
park set on sma ll islets that lay only a few feet of f the river ’ s
bank, it had pack ed-dirt paths, big trees, and little traf fic at this
time of day . He wandered the paths, trying to empty his mind,
let it be filled o nly with the so und of the rushing water , the
quietness of the overcast sky .
He r eached the end of the island  and stood for a time, half-
seeing the debris left in the bran ches of the bushes that edged
the water—wodges of dead leaves, birds’ feathers, fish bones,
the odd  cigarette packet, deposited by the passage of high
water .
He had, of course, been thinking of himself. What he’d be
doing, w hat fol k would think about him . Why had it never
occurred to him to wonder wh at Brianna intended doing, if
they went to Scotland?
W ell, that was obvious—if stu pid—in retrospect. On the
Ridge, Bree had done … wel l, a bit more than the usual
woman there did, true—one couldn’ t overlook the buf falo-
hunting, turkey-shooting, goddess-huntress, pirate-killing sideof her—but also what the usual woman did. Mind her family ,
feed, cl othe, comfort—or occ asionally smack—them. And
with Mandy sick, and Brianna g rieving the loss of her parents,
the question of working at anything had been irrelevant.
Nothing could have separated her from her daughter .
But Mandy was well now—ha ir -raisingly healthy , as the
trail of destruction that followed her testified. The painstaking
details of reestablishing their identities in the twentieth century
had been accomplished, the purchase of Lallybroch made from
the ban k that owned it, the physical removal to Scotland
accomplished, J em settled—m ore or less—into the village
school nearby , and a nice girl from the same village engaged
to come clear up and help look after Mandy .
And now Brianna was going to work.
Roger was going to hell. Metaphorically , if not literally .
 
BRIANNA COULDN’T SA Y she hadn’ t been warned. It
was a man’ s world she was walking into.
A ro ugh job it had been, a tough  undertaking—the toughest,
digging the tunnels that carried  the miles of cable from the
turbines of the hydroelectric plants. “T unnel tigers,” they’d
called the men who dug them, many of them Polish and Irish
immigrants who’d come for a job in the 1950s.
She’d read about them, seen pictures of them, grimy-faced
and white-eyed as coal miners, in the Hydro Electric authority
of fice—the walls were covered  with them, documentation of
Scotland’ s proudest modern achievement. What had been
Scotland’ s pr oud est ancient achievement?  she wondered. The
kilt?  She’d suppressed a laugh at the thought, but evidently it
made her look pleasant, because Mr . Campbell, the personnel
manager , had smiled kindly at her .
“Y ou’re in luck, lass; we’ve an o pening at Pitlochry , starting
in a month,” he’d said.“That’ s wonderful.” She had a f older in her lap, containing
her c redentials. He didn’ t ask to  see it, which rather surprised
her , but she set it on the desk before him, flipping it open.
“Here a re my … er … ?” He was staring at the curriculum
vitae on top, his mouth hanging open far enough for her to see
the steel fillings in his back teeth.
He s hut his mou th, glanced up at her in astonishment, then
looked back at the folder , slowly lifting the CV as though
afraid t here might be something even more shocking
underneath.
“I th ink I have all the qualifications,” she said, restraining
the nervous ur ge to clench her fingers in the fabric of her skirt.
“T o be a plant inspector , I mean.” She knew damned well she
did. Sh e had the qualifications to build  a freaking
hydroelectric station, let alone inspect one.
“Inspector …” he said faintly . Then he coughed, and flushed
a bit . Heavy sm oker; she could smell the fug of tobacco that
clung to his clothes.
“I’m afraid there’ s been a bit of a misunderstanding, my
dear ,” he said. “It’ s a secretary we’re needing at Pitlochry .”
“Perhaps you do,” she said, giving in to the cloth-clenching
ur ge. “B ut the advertisement I replied to was for plant
inspector , and that’ s the position I’m applying for .”
“But … my de ar …” He was shaking his head, clearly
appalled. “Y ou’re a woman!”
“I am,” she said , and any of a hundred men who’d known
her f ather would have picked up the ring of steel in her voice
and given in on the spot. Mr . C ampbell unfortunately hadn’ t
known Jamie Fraser—but was about to be enlightened.
“W ould you care to explain to  me exactly which aspects of
plant inspection require a penis?”
His eye s bulged and he turne d the shade of a turkey’ s
wattles in courting season.
“That—you—that is—” W ith evident ef fort, he mastered
himself enough to speak courteously , though the shock wasstill plain on his blunt features.
“Mrs. MacKenzie. I’m not unfamiliar with the notion of
women’ s liberation, aye? I’ve daughters of my own.” And
none of them would have said something like  that to me , his
raised brow said. “It’ s not that I think ye’d be incompetent.”
He g lanced at th e open folder , raised both brows briefly , then
shut it firmly . “I t’ s the—the work environment. It wouldn’ t be
suitable for a woman.”
“Why not?”
He was recovering his aplomb by now .
“The conditions are often physically rough—and to be
honest, Mrs. MacKenzie, so are the men you would encounter .
The company cannot in good c onscience—or as a matter of
good business—risk your safety .”
“Y ou employ men who would be likely to assault a
woman?”
“No! W e—”
“Y ou have plants that are physically dangerous? Then you
do  need an inspector , don’ t you?”
“The legalities—”
“I’m well up on the regulations pertaining to hydroelectric
plants,” she said firmly , and re aching into her bag, produced
the p rinted booklet of regulation s—obviously well thumbed—
supplied by the Highlands and Islands Development Board. “I
can spo t problems, and I can tell you how to rectify them
promptly—and as economically as possible.”
Mr . Campbell was looking deeply unhappy .
“And I hear tha t you haven’ t had many applicants for this
position,” she finished. “None, to be exact.”
“The men …”
“Men?” she said, and allowed the smallest edge of
amusement to tinge the word. “I ’ve worked with men before. I
get on with them well.”She look ed at him, not saying an ything. I know what it’ s like
to kill a man , she thought. I know just how easy it is. And you
don’ t . She was not a ware of having changed expression, but
Campbell lost a bit of his high color and looked away . She
wondered for a split second wh ether Roger would look away ,
if he  saw  that knowledge in her eyes. But this was no time to
think of things like that.
“Why don’ t you show me one of the work sites?” she said
gently . “Then we’ll talk some more.”
 
IN T HE EIGHTEENTH CENTUR Y , St. Stephen’ s had
been used as a temporary prison for captured Jacobites. T wo of
them ha d been executed in the graveyard, by some accounts. It
wasn’ t t he wors t thing to have as your last sight of earth, he
supposed: the wide river and the vast sky , both flowing to the
sea. They carried an abiding sense of peace, wind and cloud
and water did, despite their constant movement.
“If ever you find  yourself in the  midst of paradox, you can
be sur e you stand on the edge of truth,”  his adoptive father
had told him once. “Y ou ma y not know what it  is, mind,” he’d
added  with a smile. “But it’ s ther e.”
The rector at St. Stephen’ s, Dr . W eatherspoon, had had a
few aphorisms to share, too.
“When God closes a door , he opens a window .”  Y eah. The
problem was that this particular window opened of f the tenth
story , and he wasn’ t so sure God supplied parachutes.
“Do Y o u?” he asked, looking up at the drifting sky over
Inverness.
“Beg pardon?” said the startled sexton, popping up from the
gravestone behind which he’d been working.
“Sorry .” Roger flapped a han d, embarrassed. “Just …
talking to myself.”The elderly man nodded under standingly . “A ye, aye. Nay
bother , then. It’ s when ye sta rt getting answers ye should
worry .” Chuckling hoarsely , he descended back out of sight.
Roger made his way down from  the high graveyard to street
level, walking slowly back to the car park. W ell, he’d taken the
first step . W ell past the time he should have done—Bree was
right, to a degree; he had  been a coward—but he had done it.
The dif ficulty wasn’ t resolved as yet, but it had been a great
comfort, only being able to l ay it out for someone who
understood and sympathized.
“I’ll pra y for you,”  Dr . W eatherspoon had said, shaking his
hand in parting. That was a comfort, too.
He started up the dank concr ete steps of the car park,
fumbling in his pocket for the  keys. Couldn’ t say he was
entirely at peace with himself, just yet—but he felt a lot more
peaceable toward Bree. Now he could go home and tell her …
No, damn it. He couldn’ t, not yet. He had to check.
He d idn’ t have t o check; he kne w he was right. But he had
to have it in his hands, had to be able to show Bree.
T urning abruptly  on his heel, he strode past a puzzled car -
park atte ndant c oming up behind him, took the stairs two at a
time, and walked up Huntly Street as though he trod on red-
hot coals. He stopped briefly at the Fox, digging in his pocket
for coin s, and rang through fro m the call box to Lallybroch.
Annie answered the phone with her customary rudeness,
saying “ Y iss?” with such abruptness that it emer ged as little
more than an interrogatory hiss.
He didn’ t bother rebuking her phone manners.
“It’ s Ro ger . T ell the Missus I’m  going down to Oxford to
look something up. I’ll spend the night.”
“Mmphm,” she said, and hung up.
 SHE W ANTED T O HIT Roger over the head with a blunt
object. Something like a champagne bottle, maybe.
“He went wher e? ” sh e asked, th ough she’d heard Annie
MacDonald clearly . Annie lifted both narrow shoulders to the
level of her ears, indicating that she understood the rhetorical
nature of the question.
“T o Oxford,” she said. “T o England .” The tone of h er voice
underlined the sheer outrageou sness of Roger ’ s action. He
hadn’ t simply gone to look up  something in an old book—
which would have been strange enough, though to be sure
himself was a scholar and they’d do anything—but had
abandoned his wife and children without notice and hied away
to a foreign country!
“Himself did say as he’d come home tomorrow ,” Annie
added, with great dubiousness.  She picked up the bottle of
champagne in its carrier bag, gingerly , as though it might
explode. “Ought I put this to the ice, d’ye think?”
“T o the —oh, no, don’ t put it in the freezer . Just in the
fridge. Thank you, Annie.”
Annie disappeared into the kitchen, and Brianna stood in the
drafty h all for a moment, tryi ng to get her feelings firmly
under control before going to fin d Jem and Mandy . Kids being
kids, they had ultra-sensitive radar concerning their parents.
They already knew something was the matter between her and
Roger; having their father s uddenly disappear was not
calculated to give them a feeling of cozy security . Had he even
said goodbye to them? Assured  them  h e’d be back? No, of
course not.
“Bloody selfish,  self-centered …” she muttered. Unable to
find a satisfying noun with which to complete this, she said,
“rat-fink bastar d! ” and then snorted with reluctant laughter .
Not merely at the silliness of the insult, but with a wry
acknowledgment that she’d got what she wanted. Both ways.
Granted, he couldn’ t have stopp ed her going for the job—
and onc e he got past the dislo cations involved, she thoughthe’d be all right with it.
“Men hate things to change,”  her mother had  once casually
told her . “Unless it’ s their idea, of course. But you can make
them think it  is their idea, sometimes.”
Maybe she should have been les s direct about it; tried to get
Roger to  feel that at least he had something to say about her
going to  work, even if not to think it was his idea —that  would
have been pushing it. She’d be en in no mood to be devious,
though. Or even diplomatic.
As f or w hat she’ d done to him …  wel l, sh e’d put up with his
immobility for as long as she could, and then she’d pushed
him of f a clif f. Deliberately .
“And I don’ t feel the least bit guilty about it!” she said to
the coatrack.
She hun g up her coat slowly , taking a little extra time to
check the pockets for used tissues and crumpled receipts.
So, had he gone of f out of pique—to get back at her for
going ba ck to work? Or out of a nger at her having called him a
coward? He hadn’ t liked that on e bit; his eyes had gone dark
and he’d nearly lost his voice—strong emotion choked him,
quite lit erally , fr eezing his larynx. She’d done it on purpose,
though. She knew where Roger ’ s soft spots were—just as he
knew hers.
Her lips tightened at that, jus t as her fingers closed on
something hard in the inner pocket of her jacket. A weathered
shell, turreted and smooth, wo rn white by sun and water .
Roger h ad picked it up on the shingle by Loch Ness and
handed it to her .
“T o live in,” h e’d said, smiling, but given away by the
gruf fness of his damaged voic e. “When ye need a hiding
place.”
She closed her fingers gently over the shell, and sighed.
Roger w asn’ t pe tty . Ever . He w ouldn’ t go of f to Oxford—a
reluctant bubble of amusement floated up at the thought ofAnnie’ s shocked description: to England! —just to worry her .
So he’d gone for some specific reason, doubtless something
jarred loose by their fight—and that  worried her a bit.
He’d be en wres tling with things since they came back. So
had she,  of course: Mandy’ s illness, decisions about where to
live, all the pett y details of relo cating a family in both space
and time—they’d done all that together . But there were things
he wrestled with alone.
She’d gr own up  an only child, just as he had; she knew how
it was, how you live in your ow n head a lot. But damn him,
whatever he was living with in his head was eating him up
before her eyes, and if he would n’ t tell her what it was, it was
either so mething he considered too private to share—which
bugged her , but she could live w ith it—or it was something he
thought too disturbing or too dangerous to share, and she
wasn’ t bloody having  that.
Her fingers had clenched round the shell, and she
deliberately loosened them, trying to calm down.
She cou ld hear the kids upstai rs, in Jem’ s room. He was
reading someth ing to Mandy —The Gingerbr ead Man , she
thought. She couldn’ t hear the  words, but could tell by the
rhythm, counterpointed by Man dy’ s excited shouts of “W un!
W un!”
No point in int errupting them.  T ime enough later to tell
them Daddy’d be away overnight. Maybe they wouldn’ t be
bothered, if she was matter -of-fact about it; he’d never left
them since they’d come back,  but when they lived on the
Ridge, he was often gone with Jamie or Ian, hunting. Mandy
wouldn’ t remember that, but Jem …
She’d m eant to go into her study , but found herself drifting
across the hall, through the ope n door to Roger ’ s. It was the
old speak-a-word room of the house; the room where her uncle
Ian had run the af fairs of the estate for years—her father for a
short time before that, and her grandfather before him.And now it wa s Roger ’ s. He’d asked if she wanted the
room, but she’d said no. She lik ed the little sitting room across
the h all, with its  sunny window and the shadows of the ancient
yellow r ose that flagged that si de of the house with its color
and scen t. Aside from that, though, she just felt that this room
was a man’ s pla ce, with its cle an, scuf fed wooden floor and
comfortably battered shelves.
Roger had managed to find on e of the old farm ledgers,
from 1776; it s at on an upper shelf, its worn cloth binding
sheltering the patient, careful m inutiae of life on a Highland
farm: one-quarter pound of silver fir seed, a he-goat for
br eeding, six rabbits, thirty-weig ht of seed potatoes …  had her
uncle written it? She didn’ t kno w , had never seen a sample of
his writing.
She won dered, w ith an odd little  quiver of the insides, if her
parents had made it back to Scotland—back her e . Had seen
Ian and Jenny again; if her father had sat— would  sit?—here in
this room, at home once more, talking over the matters of
Lallybroch with Ian. And her mother? From the little Claire
had said  about it, she hadn’ t pa rted from Jenny on the best of
terms, and Brianna knew her m other felt sad about that; once,
they had  been close friends. Maybe things could be mended—
maybe they had  been mended.
She glan ced at the wooden box, safe on its high shelf beside
the ledger , the li ttle cherrywood  snake curved in front of it. On
impulse, she took the snake dow n, finding some comfort in the
sleek curve of the body and the comical look of its face,
peering back over its nonexisten t shoulder . She smiled back at
it, involuntarily .
“Thanks, Uncle W illie,” she said softly , out loud, and felt an
extraordinary shiver run through  her . Not fear , or cold—a kind
of delight, but a quiet kind. Recognition.
She’d seen that snake so often—on the Ridge, and now
here, where it h ad first been made—that she never thought of
its m aker , her fa ther ’ s older brother , dead at the age of eleven.
But he was here , too, in the work of his hands, in the roomsthat had known him. When she’d visited Lallybroch before—
in the eighteenth  century—there  had been a painting of him on
the upstairs landing, a small, sturdy red-haired boy , standing
with a hand on t he shoulder of h is baby brother , blue-eyed and
serious.
Wher e is  that now?  s he  wo ndered. And the other p aintings
done by her grandmother? There was the one self-portrait,
which had made it somehow to t he National Portrait Gallery—
she mus t be sure to take the ki ds down to London to see it,
when they were a little older—but the others? There had been
one of a very young Jenny Murray feeding a tame pheasant
who had  her uncle Ian’ s soft bro wn eyes, and she smiled at the
memory .
It had been the right thing. Com ing here, bringing the kids
… h ome. It did n’ t matter if it took a little doing for her and
Roger to  find their places. Though maybe she shouldn’ t speak
for Roger , she thought with a grimace.
She loo ked up at the box again. She wished her parents
were here—either of them—so she could tell them about
Roger , ask their opinion. Not that she wanted advice, so
much…. What she wanted, if sh e was honest, she thought, was
a reassurance that she’d done the right thing.
W ith a heightened flush in her c heeks, she reached up with
both hands and brought down t he box, feeling guilty for not
waiting to share the next letter with Roger . But … she wanted
her mother just now . She took the first letter on top that bore
her mother ’ s writing on the outside.
Offices of L ’Oignon, New Bern, North Car olina
April 12, 1777
Dear Br ee (and Roger and Jem and Mandy , of
course) ,W e’ve made it to New Bern, without major incident.
Y es, I hear you thinking , Major? And it is true that we
wer e held up by  a pair of would-be bandits on the r oad
south of Boone. Given that they wer e pr obably nine and
eleven r espectively , and armed  solely with an ancient
wheel-lock musket that would have blown them both to
bits had they be en able to fir e it, though, we wer en’ t in
any marked danger .
Rollo le apt out of the wagon and knocked one of them
flat, wher eupon his br other dr opped the gun and legged
it. Y our cousin Ian ran him do wn, though, hauling him
back by the scruff of the neck .
It took your father some time to get anything sensible
out of them , but a little food worked wonders. They said
their na mes ar e  Herman and—no, r eally—V ermin. Their
par ents died during the winter— their father went hunting
and didn’ t come back, the moth er died giving birth, and
the baby died a day later , as the  two boys had no way to
feed it. They kno w of no people on their father ’ s side, but
they said their mother ’ s family name was Kuykendall.
Luckily , your father knows a Kuykendall family , near
Bailey C amp, and so Ian took the little vagabonds off to
find the Kuyken dalls and see if  they could be settled. If
not, I suppose h e’ll bring them along to New Bern, and
we’ll try to appr entice them somewher e, or per haps take
them with us to  W ilmington and find them a berth as
cabin boys .
Fer gus and Marsali and the c hildr en seem all to be
doing very well, both physically—bar a family tendency
to enlar ged adenoids and the biggest wart I’ve ever  seen
on Germain’ s left elbow—and financially .
Aside fr om the  W ilmington Gazette, L ’Oignon is the
only r egular newspaper in the colony , and Fer gus thus
gets a gr eat deal of business. Ad d in the printing and sale
of books  and pamphlets, and he’ s doing very well indeed.
The family now owns two milch goats, a flock of chickens,
a pig, and  three mules, counting  Clar ence, whom we ar e
bequeathing to them on our way to Scotland .Conditions and  uncertainties being what they ar e
[ meaning, Brianna thought , that you don’ t know who
might read this letter , or when ] I’d  better not be specific
about  what he’ s prin ting, be sides newspape rs . L ’Oignon
itself is car efully evenha nded, printing rabid
denunciations by both Loyalists and those less loyal, and
publishing sat irical poetry by our good friend
“Anonymous,” lampooning both sides of the pr esent
political conflict. I’ve seldom seen Fer gus so happy .
W ar agr ees with some men, and Fer gus, rather oddly ,
is one of them. Y our cousin Ian is another , though in his
case, I think per haps it keeps him fr om thinking too much .
I d o wonder wh at his mother will make of him. But
knowing her as I do, my guess is that after the first shock
has pass ed, she’ll begin the wo rk of finding him a wife.
Jenny is a very per ceptive woman, all things said—and
just as stubborn as your father .  I do hope he r emembers
that .
Speaking of your father , he’ s out  and about a good deal
with Fer gus, doing bits of “busi ness” (unspecified, which
means he’ s pr obably doing something that would turn my
hair white—or whiter—to know about) and inquiring
among the mer chants for a possible ship—though I think
our chances of finding one will be better in W ilmington,
wher e we’ll go as soon as Ian joins us .
Meanwhile, I’ve set up my shingle—literally . It’ s tacked
to the fr ont of Fer gus’ s printshop, and says, TEETH
PULLED, RASHES, PHLEGM, AND THE AGUE
CURED, this being Marsali’ s w ork. She wanted to add a
line abo ut the pox, but both Fer gus and I dissuaded her—
he fr om a fear that it would lower the tone of his
establishment, self fr om a certain morbid attachment to
truth in advertising, as ther e is in fact nothing I can
pr esently do about any condition they call the pox.
Phlegm … well, ther e’ s always something you can do
about  phlegm, even if it’ s nothing mor e than a cup of hot
tea (these days, that’ s hot water over sassafras r oot,
catnip, or lemon balm) with a dram in it .I called on Dr . Fentiman in Cr oss Cr eek on our way ,
and was  able to buy several necessary instruments and a
few med icines fr om him to r efu rbish my kit (this at the
cost of a bottle of whisky and of being for ced to admir e
the latest addition to his ghastly collection of pickled
curiosities—no, you don’ t want to know; you  really don’ t.
A go od thing h e can’ t see Germain’ s wart, or he’d be
down to New Bern in a fla sh, sneaking r ound the
printshop with an amputation saw) .
I stil l lack a pair of good sur gical scissors, but Fer gus
knows a  silversm ith called Stephen Moray in W ilmington
who he says cou ld make a pair to my specifications. For
the mom ent, I occupy myself lar gely in the pulling of
teeth, as  the barber who used to do it was dr owned last
November , having fallen into the harbor while drunk .
W ith all my love,
 Mama
P .S. Speaking of the  W ilmington Gazette, your father
has it in mind to call ther e and see if he can find out just
who lef t that blasted notice about the fir e. Though I
suppose I oughtn’ t to complain; if you hadn’ t found it, you
might never have come back. And while ther e ar e a lot of
things I wish ha dn’ t happened as a r esult of your coming
—I can’ t ever r egr et that you know your father , and he
you .
  WEE DEMONS
 
I T W ASN’T MUCH DIFFERENT than any of the deer
trails the y’d come across; in fa ct, it had doubtless begun as
one of them. But there was something about this particular
trace that said “people” to I an, and he’d been so long
accustomed to such judgments that he seldom registered them
consciously . He didn’ t now , but gave Clarence’ s leading rein a
twitch, turning his own horse’ s head aside.
“Why’re we stoppin’?” Herman asked suspiciously . “Ain’ t
nothin’ here.”
“There’ s someone living up there.” Ian jerked his chin
toward the wooded slope. “The trail’ s not wide enough for
horses; we’ll tie up here, and walk.”
Herman and V ermin exchanged a wordless glance of deep
skepticism, but slid of f the mule  and trudged after Ian, up the
trail.
He was beginning to have his do ubts; no one he’d spoken to
in th e la st week  knew of any Kuykendalls in the area, and he
couldn’ t take too much more tim e about the matter . He might
have to bring the wee savages down to New Bern with him,
after all , and he had no notion how they’d take to the
suggestion.
He had no notion how they took  much of anything, come to
that. They were not so much shy as secretive, whispering
together behind him as they rod e, then shutting up like clams
the minute he looked at them, regarding him with carefully
bland fa ces, behind which he plainly saw any amount of
reckoning going on. What the devil were they plotting?
If they meant t o run from him, he thought he might not
make an y monstrous great ef fort to chase them down. If, onthe othe r hand, they meant to steal Clarence and the horse
while he slept, that was another matter .
The cab in was there, a curl of smoke coming from its
chimney; Herm an turned a look of surprise on him, and he
smiled at the boy .
“T old ye,” he said, and hallooed.
The door creaked open, and th e barrel of a musket poked
out of it. This was not an uncom mon response to strangers in
the far backcountry , and Ian was not put of f by it. He raised his
voice and stated his business, p ushing Herman and V ermin in
front of him as evidence of his bona fides .
The gun wasn’ t withdrawn, but lifted in a significant
manner . Obeying instinct, Ian flung himself flat, yanking the
boys down with him, as the shot roared overhead. A woman’ s
voice ye lled som ething strident in a foreign tongue. He didn’ t
understand the words, but took the meaning clearly , and
pulling the little boys to their fe et, ushered them hastily back
down the trail.
“Ain’ t gonna live with her ,” V ermin informed him, focusing
a n arrow glare o f dislike over h is shoulder . “T ell you that for
free.”
“No, ye’re not,” Ian agreed. “Keep moving, aye?” For
V ermin had stopped dead.
“Gotta shit.”
“Oh, aye? W ell, be quick about it.” He turned away , having
discovered early on that the boys had an exaggerated
requirement for privacy in such matters.
Herman had gone on already; the tangled mess of his dirty-
blond ha ir was just visible, some  twenty yards down the slope.
Ian had suggested that the boys  might cut, if not comb, their
hair , an d maybe wash their fa ces, as a gesture of civility
toward any relations who might  be faced with the prospect of
taking them in, but this sugge stion had been rejected with
vehemence. Fortunately he was not responsible for forcing the
wee buggers to wash—and to be fair , he thought washingwould make little dif ference to their smell, given the state of
their clo thes, which they had p lainly been living in for some
months. He did make them sleep on the other side of the fire
from himself and Rollo at nig ht, in hopes of limiting his
exposure to the lice both of them crawled with.
Could the notable infestation he sported possibly be where
the younger boy’ s parents had acquired his name? he
wondered. Or had they no notion of its meaning and had only
picked it to rhyme with his elder brother ’ s?
Clarence’ s earsp litting bray pulled him abruptly from his
thoughts. He lengthened his stride, berating himself for having
left his own gun in its saddle  loop. He hadn’ t wanted to
approach the house armed, but—
A shriek  from below sent him d odging of f the path, into the
trees. Another shriek was cut of f suddenly , and he scrambled
down the slope, as quickly as he might without making a
racket. Panther? A bear? Nay , Clarence would be bellowing
like a grampus, if it was that; instead, he was gur gling and
wheezing like he did when he spotted—
Someone he knew .
Ian s topped dead, behind a scre en of poplars, his heart cold
in his chest.
Arch Bug turned his head, hearing the noise, faint as it was.
“Come on out, lad,” he called. “I see ye there.”
Plainly he did; the ancient eyes were looking straight at him,
and Ian came slowly out of the trees.
Arch ha d taken the gun from th e horse; it was slung across
his shou lder . He  had an arm crooked round Herman’ s throat,
and the little boy’ s face was bright red from the choking; his
feet kicked like a dying rabbit’ s, a few inches of f the ground.
“Where’ s the gold?” Arch said, without preamble. His white
hair was  neatly bound up, and h e seemed, so far as Ian could
see, to have taken no harm from the winter . Must have found
folk to bide with. Wher e?  he wondered. Br ownsville, maybe?Bloody dangerous, if he’d told the Browns about the gold—
but h e th ought old Arch was too downy a bird to talk in such
company .
“Where ye’ll never find it,” Ian said bluntly . He was
thinking furiously . He’d a knife in his belt—but it was a good
deal too far to throw it, and if he missed …
“What d’ye want wi’ that wean?” he asked, moving a little
closer . “He’ s naught to do wi’ you.”
“No, but he seems somewhat to do wi’ you .” Herman was
making rasping squeaks, and his  feet, while still kicking, were
slowing.
“No, he ’ s naught to me, either ,” Ian said, striving for
casualness. “I’m  only helping him to find his people. Y e plan
to cut his throat if I dinna tell ye  where the gold is? Go ahead;
I’m no telling ye.”
He didn’ t see Ar ch pull the knife , but it was there, suddenly ,
in h is right hand, held awkwa rdly because of the missing
fingers, but doubtless useful enough.
“All right,” Arch said calmly , and put the point of the knife
under Herman’ s chin.
A scream burst from behind Ian , and V ermin half-ran, half-
fell down the last few feet of the trail. Arch Bug looked up,
startled, and Ian crouched to ru sh him, but was forestalled by
V ermin.
The little boy rushed at Ar ch Bug and gave him a
tremendous kick in the shin, shouting, “Y ou bad old man! Y ou
let her go right now!”
Arch se emed as startled by the  speech as by the kick, but
didn’ t let go.
“Her?” h e said, and looked down at the child in his grasp,
who promptly turned her—her?—head and bit him fiercely in
the wrist. Ian, s eizing the moment, lunged at him, but was
impeded by V ermin, who had n ow seized Arch by the thighand was clinging like grim death, trying to punch the old man
in the balls with one small clenched fist.
W ith a ferociou s grunt, Arch je rked the little girl—if that’ s
what she was—up and flung he r staggering into Ian. He then
brought one big fist down on top of V ermin’ s head, stunning
him. He  shook the child of f his leg, kicked the boy in the ribs
as he staggered back, then turned and ran.
“T rudy , T rudy!”  Herman ran for  his—no, her—brother , who
was lying in the  leaf mold, mouth opening and closing like a
landed trout.
Ian hesitated, wanting to pursue Arch, worried that V ermin
might be badly hurt—but Arch was already gone, vanished
into the wood. G ritting his teeth, he crouched and passed his
hands r apidly over V ermin. No blood, and the wean was
getting back his breath now , gulp ing and wheezing like a leaky
bellows.
“T rudy?” Ian said to Herman, w ho was clinging tightly to
V ermin’ s neck. Not waiting for an answer , he pulled up
V ermin’ s ragged shirt, pulled out the waistband of his too-big
breeches, and peeked inside. He let go hastily .
Herman leapt up, eyes bugged and hands clasped
protectively over her—yes, her!—crotch.
“No!” s he said. “I won’ t let you stick your nasty prick in
me!”
“Y e couldna pay me to,” Ia n assured her . “If this is
T rudy”—he nodded at V ermin, who had rolled up onto his—
no, her—hands and knees and  was vomiting into the grass
—”what the devil’ s your  name?”
“Hermione,” the lassie said, sullen. “She’ s Ermintrude.”
Ian ran a hand  over his face, trying to adjust to this
information. Now he looked … well, no, they still looked like
filthy wee demons rather than  little girls, their slitted eyes
burning through the greasy , matted underbrush of their hair .
They’d have to have their hea ds shaved, he supposed, and
hoped he was nowhere in the neighborhood when it was done.“A ye,” he said, for lack of anything sensible. “W ell, then.”
“Y ou’ve got gold?” said Ermi ntrude, having stopped her
retching. She sat up, wiped a small hand over her mouth, and
spat expertly . “Where?”
“If I wouldna tell him, why wo uld I tell you? And ye can
just for get that  notion right now ,” he assured her , seeing her
eyes dart to the knife in his belt.
Damn. W hat was he to do now? He pushed away the shock
of Arch Bug’ s appearance—time to think of that later—and
ran a hand slow ly through his h air , considering. The fact that
they wer e girls didn’ t change an ything, really , but the fact that
they knew he had gold hidden did. He didn’ t dare leave them
with anyone now , because if he did …
“If you leave us, we’ll tell about the gold,” Hermione said
promptly . “W e don’ t want to live in a stinky cabin. W e want to
go to London.”
“What?” He stared at her , incre dulous. “What d’ye ken of
London, for God’ s sake?”
“Our mam came from there,” Herman—no, Hermione—
said, and bit her lip to stop it trembling at mention of her
mother . It was the first time she had  s po ken of her mother , Ian
noted with interest. Let alone displayed any sign of
vulnerability . “She told us about it.”
“Mmphm. And why would I n o just kill ye myself?” he
demanded, exasperated. T o his astonishment, Herman smiled
at hi m, the first halfway-pleasant expression he’d ever seen on
her face.
“The dog likes y ou,” she said. “ He wouldn’ t like you if you
killed people.”
“That’ s all you know ,” he mut tered, and stood up. Rollo,
who had been of f about his own business, chose this opportune
moment to saunter out of the underbrush, snif fing busily .
“And w here we re you  w hen I needed ye?” Ian dema nded.
Rollo sm elled carefully round the spot where Arch Bug hadstood, then lifted his leg and urinated on a bush.
“W ould that bad old man have killed Hermie?” the little one
asked suddenly , as he boosted her onto the mule behind her
sister .
“No,” h e said, with certainty . B ut as he swung up into his
own saddle, he wondered. He had the very uncomfortable
feeling that Arch Bug understoo d the nature of guilt much too
well. Enough to kill an innocent child, only because her death
would m ake Ian feel guilty for it? And Ian would; Arch knew
that.
“No,” he repeated more strongly . Arch Bug was both
vengeful and vindictive—and had a right to be, he’d admit
that. But Ian had nay grounds to think the man a monster .
Still, he made the little girls ride in front of him, until they
made camp that night.
 
THERE W AS NO further sign of Arch Bug, though Ian
felt now and th en the crawling sensation of being watched,
when th ey camp ed. W as the ma n following him? V ery likely
he was, Ian thought—for surely it wasn’ t accident that had
made him appear so suddenly .
So. He’d gone back to the rui ns of the Big House, then,
thinking to retrieve the gold after Uncle Jamie had left, only to
find it gone. He  wondered briefly whether Arch had managed
to ki ll the white  sow , but dismissed that notion; his uncle said
the crea ture was plainly from the infernal regions and thus
indestructible, and he was himself inclined to believe it.
He glan ced at Rollo, who was dozing by his feet, but the
dog gav e no sign that anyone was near , though his ears were
half cocked. Ian relaxed a little , though he kept the knife on
his person, even while sleeping.
Not entirely in respect of Arc h Bug, marauders, or wild
beasts, either . He looked across the fire, to where Hermione
and T ru dy lay rolled up together in his blank—only theyweren’ t. The blanket was cunningly wadded so as to appear to
contain bodies, but a gust of wind had pulled a corner loose,
and he could see that it lay flat.
He close d his eyes in exasperation, then opened them and
glanced down at the dog.
“Why did ye no say something? ” he demanded. “Surely ye
saw them leave!”
“W e ain’ t gone,” said a gruf f, s mall voice behind him, and
he whirled to find the two of them crouched on either side of
his open saddlebag, busily rifling it for food.
“W e ‘uz hungry ,” said T rudy , matter -of-factly stuf fing the
remains of a journeycake into her face.
“I fed ye!” He’d shot a few quail and baked them in mud.
Granted, it wasn’ t a feast, but—
“W e’ s still  hungry ,” Hermione said, with impeccable logic.
She licked her fingers and burped.
“Have ye drunk all the beer?” he demanded, snatching up a
stone bottle rolling near her feet.
“Mmm-hmm,” she said dreamily , and sat down, quite
suddenly .
“Y e canna be thieving food,” h e said severely , taking the
depleted saddlebag from T rudy .  “If ye eat it all now , we’ll be
starving before I get ye to—wherever we’re going,” he ended,
rather weakly .
“If we don’ t eat  it, we’ll starve  now ,” T rudy said logically .
“Best starve later .”
“Where ar e  we goi ng?” Hermione was sw aying gently to
and fro, like a small filthy flower in the wind.
“T o Cro ss Creek,” he said. “It’ s the first good-sized town
we’ll come to, and I ken folk the re.” Whether he knew anyone
who might be of help in this pr esent circumstance … too bad
about his great-auntie Jocasta. W ere she still at River Run, he
could ea sily hav e left the girls there, but as it was, Jocasta andher husband, Duncan, had immigrated to Nova Scotia. There
was Jocasta’ s body slave, Phaedre … He thought she was
employed as a barmaid in W ilmington. But, no, she couldn’ t—
“Is it as big as London?” Hermione collapsed gently onto
her back  and lay with her arms  spread out. Rollo got up and
came and snif fed her; she giggled—the first innocent sound
he’d heard from her .
“Y ou all right, Hermie?” T rudy scampered over to her sister
and squatted next to her in co ncern. Rollo, having smelled
Hermione thoroughly , turned his attention to T rudy , who
merely pushed aside his inquisitive nose. Hermione was now
humming tunelessly to herself.
“She’ s fine,” Ian said, after a quick glance. “She’ s no but a
bit drunk. It’ll pass.”
“Oh.” R eassured, T rudy sat down next to her sister , hugging
her kne es. “Pap used to get drunk. He hollered and broke
things, though.”
“Did he?”
“Uh-huh. He broke my mam’ s nose once.”
“Oh,” Ia n said, having no idea  how to answer this. “T oo
bad.”
“Y ou think he’ s dead?”
“I hope so.”
“Me, too,” she said, satisfied. She yawned hugely—he
could smell her rotting teeth from where he sat—and then
curled herself on the ground, cuddling close to Hermione.
Sighing, Ian got up and fetched the blanket, and covered
them both, tucking it gently round their small, limp bodies.
Now what? He wondered. The recent exchange was the
closest thing he’d had yet to an  actual conversation with the
girls, and he wa s under no illus ions that their brief foray into
amiability would last past daylight. Where would he find
someone willing and able to deal with them?A ti ny snore, like the buzzing of a bee’ s wings, came from
the blanket, and he smiled involuntarily . W ee Mandy , Bree’ s
daughter , had made a noise like that when she slept.
He’d held Mandy , sleeping, now and then—once for more
than an hour , not wanting to surrender the tiny , warm weight,
watching the flicker of the pulse  in her throat. Imagining, with
longing and a p ain tempered by distance, his own daughter .
Stillborn, her face a mystery to him. Y eksa’a, the Mohawk had
called her—”litt le girl,” too young to have a name. But she did
have a name. Iseabail. That’ s what he’d called her .
He wrap ped him self in the rag ged plaid Uncle Jamie had
given hi m when  he’d chosen to be a Mohawk and lay down by
the fire.
Pray . That’ s what his uncle, his parents, would have
advised. He was unsure who to pray to, really , or what to say .
Should he speak to Christ, or His mother , or perhaps one of the
saints? The spirit of the red ced ar that stood sentinel beyond
the fire, or the life that moved in the wood, whispering on the
night breeze?
“A Dhia,”  he whispered at last to the op en sky , “cuidich
mi,”  and slept.
Whether it was God or the night itself who answered him, at
dawn he woke with a notion.
 
HE’D BEEN EXPECTING the walleyed maid, but Mrs.
Sylvie came to the door hersel f. She recalled him; he saw a
flicker of recognition and—he t hought—pleasure in her eyes,
though it didn’ t go so far as a smile, of course.
“Mr . Mu rray ,” s he said, cool a nd calm. She looked down
then, and lost a trifle of her com posure. She pushed the wire-
rimmed spectacles up on her n ose for a better look at what
accompanied him, then raised her head and fixed him with
suspicion.
“What’ s this?”He’d been expecting this reac tion and was ready for it.
W ithout answer ing, he held up the fat wee pouch he’d made
ready and shook it, so she could hear the metal clink inside.
Her face changed at that, and she stood back to let them in,
though she went on looking wary .
Not so wary as the little heathens—he still had trouble
thinking of them as girls—who  hung back until he took them
each by a scraw ny neck and pr opelled them firmly into Mrs.
Sylvie’ s parlor . They sat—under compulsion—but looked as
though t hey had something in mind, and he kept a beady gaze
on them, even as he talked with the proprietor of the
establishment.
“Maids?” she said, in open disbelief, looking at the girls.
He’d wa shed th em in  th eir clothes—f orcibly , and had several
bites to show fo r it, though luck ily none had festered yet—but
there ha d been nothing to do ab out their hair save chop it of f,
and he wasn’ t about to come near either one with a knife, for
fear of injuring them or himse lf in the subsequent struggle.
They sat and glared through the mats of their hair like
gar goyles, red-eyed and malignant.
“W ell, they dinna want to be wh ores,” he said mildly . “And
I dinna want them to be, either . Not that I’ve any objection to
the profession personally ,” he added for the sake of politeness.
A muscl e twitched by her mouth and she shot him a sharp
glance—tinged with amusement—through her spectacles.
“I’m glad to hear it,” she said d ryly . And dropped her eyes
to his feet and r aised them slowly , almost appraisingly , up the
length o f his body in a way that made him feel suddenly as
though he’d been dipped in hot  water . The eyes came to rest
on his face again, and the look of amusement had intensified
considerably .
He coughed, recollecting—with a mixture of embarrassment
and lust—a number of interesting images from their encounter
more than two years before. Outwardly , she was a plain
woman past thirty , her face and manner much more those of anautocratic nun than a whore. Beneath the unassuming calico
gown and muslin apron, though … she gave fair value, did
Mistress Sylvie.
“I’m no asking as a favor , aye?”  he said, and nodded at the
pouch, which he had put down on the table by his chair . “I had
it in mind to apprentice them, maybe?”
“Apprentice girls. In a brothel.” She didn’ t make it a
question, but her mouth twitched again.
“Y e could start t hem as maids—surely ye’ve cleaning to be
done? C hamber pots to be emp tied, and the like? And then if
they sho uld be clever enough”— he shot them a narrow glance
of his own, and Hermione stuck out her tongue at him—”ye
could m aybe train them up to be cooks. Or sempstresses. Y e
must need a dea l of mending done, aye? T orn sheets and the
like?”
“T orn shifts, more like,” she said, very dryly . Her eyes
flickered toward the ceiling, where a sound of rhythmic
squeaking indicated the presence of a paying customer .
The girls had si dled of f their stools and were prowling the
parlor like wild cats, nosing thi ngs and bristling with caution.
He reali zed sudd enly that they’d never seen a town, let alone a
civilized person’ s house.
Mrs. Sy lvie lea ned forward and picked up the pouch, her
eyes wid ening in  surprise at the weight of it. She opened it and
poured a handful of greasy blac k shot into her hand, glancing
sharply up from it to him. He didn’ t speak, but smiled and,
reaching forwar d, took one of the balls from the palm of her
hand, dug his th umbnail hard into it, and dropped it back into
her han d, the scored line glinting bright gold amid the
darkness.
She pursed her lips, weighing the bag again.
“All of it?” It was, he’d estimated, more than fifty pounds’
worth of gold: half what he’d been carrying.
He made a long  reach and too k a china ornament out of
Hermione’ s hands.“It’ll no be an easy job,” he said. “Y e’ll earn it, I think.”
“I think so, too,” she said, watching T rudy , who—with
extreme noncha lance—had low ered her breeches and was
relieving herself in a corner of the hearth. The secret of their
sex revealed, the girls had quite abandoned their requirements
of privacy .
Mrs. Sylvie rang her silver bell, and both girls turned
toward the sound in surprise.
“Why me?” she asked.
“I couldna think of anyone else who might be able to deal
with them,” Ian said simply .
“I’m very  flattered.”
“Y e should be,” he said, smiling. “Have we a bar gain,
then?”
She drew a deep breath, eyeing the girls, who had their
heads together , whispering, as they viewed her with the
deepest suspicion. She let it out again, shaking her head.
“I think it’ s likely a bad bar gain—but times are hard.”
“What, i n your business? I shou ld think the demand must be
fairly co nstant.” He’d meant to joke, but she rounded on him,
eyes narrowing.
“Oh, the  customers are ready en ough to knock on my door ,
no matte r what,” she said. “But  they’ve no money these days
—no on e does. I’ll take a chicken or a flitch of bacon—but
half of them haven’ t got so much as that. They’ll pay with
proclamation money , or Continentals, or scrip from a militia
unit—want to guess how much any of those are worth in the
market?”
“A ye, I— ” But she was steaming like a kettle, and turned on
him, hissing.
“Or they don’ t pay at all. When times are fair , so are men,
mostly . But pinch them a bit, and they stop seeing just why
they need to pay for their pleasure—after all, what does it costme?  A nd I cannot refuse, or they w ill simply take what they
want and then burn my house or hurt us for my temerity . Y ou
see that, I suppose?”
The bitt erness in her voice s tung like a nettle, and he
abruptly abandoned a half-formed impulse to propose that they
seal their bar gain in a personal way .
“I see that,” he replied, as evenly as he could. “Is such a
thing no t always a risk of your p rofession, though? And ye’ve
prospered so far , aye?”
Her mouth compressed for an instant.
“I had a … patron. A ge ntleman who of fered me
protection.”
“In return for … ?”
A hot flush rose in her thin cheeks.
“None of your business, sir .”
“Is it not?” He nodded at the pouch in her hand. “If I’m
placing my—th ese—well, them ”—he gestured at the girls,
now fingering the fabric of a curtain—”with you, surely I am
entitled to ask whether I might be placing them in danger by
doing so?”
“They’re girls,” she replied briefly . “They were born in
danger a nd will live their lives in that condition, regardless of
circumstance.” But her hand had tightened on the pouch,
knuckles white. He was that b it impressed that she was so
honest, given that she plainly d id need the money badly . In
spite of  her bitterness, though, he was rather enjoying the
joust.
“D’ye think life’ s no dangerous for a man, then?” he asked,
and without pausing, “What happened to your pimp?”
The bloo d washed abruptly from her face, leaving it white
as bleached bone. Her eyes flashed in it like sparks.
“He was  my brother ,” she said, and her voice dropped to a
furious whisper . “The Sons of Liberty tarred and feathered himand left him on  my doorstep to die. Now , sir—have you any
further questions regarding my af fairs, or is our business
done? ”
Before he could make shift to find any response at all to
this, the door opened and a young woman came in. He felt a
visceral shock at seeing her , and the edges of his vision went
white. Then the room steadied  round him and he found he
could draw breath again.
It w asn’ t Emily . The young woman—looking curiously
from him to the little savages wrapped in the curtains—was
part-Indian, small and gracefully built, with Emily’ s long,
thick, raven’ s-wing hair flowing loose down her back. W ith
Emily’ s broad cheekbones and delicate round chin. But she
wasn’ t Emily .
Thank God , he  thought, but at the same time suf fered a
hollowness of the wame. He felt as though the sight of her had
been a cannonball that had struck him and, having passed
straight through his body , left a gaping hole in its wake.
Mrs. Sylvie was giving the Indian girl brisk instructions,
pointing at Hermione and T rud y . The girl’ s black brows rose
briefly , b ut she nodded, and sm iling at the girls, invited them
to accompany her to the kitchen for some food.
The littl e girls promptly disenta ngled themselves from the
curtains; it had been a long time since breakfast, and he’d had
nothing for them then save a bit  of drammach and some jerked
bear meat, hard as shoe leather .
They followed the Indian girl  to the door of the room,
sparing him not a glance. At the door , though, Hermione
turned, and hitching up her baggy-seated breeches, fixed him
with a glare and  pointed a long, skinny finger of accusation at
him.
“If w e turns out to be whores after all, you fucker , I’m
gonna hu nt you down, cut your b alls of f, and stuf f ‘em up your
arse.”He t ook his leav e with what dignity he could, the peals of
Mrs. Sylvie’ s laughter ringing in his ears. PULLING TEETH
 New Bern, colony of North Carolina
 April 1777
 
I  HA TED PULLING TEETH. The figure of speech that
likens something of extreme dif ficulty to pulling teeth is not
hyperbole. Even  in the best of situations—a lar ge person with
a big mouth and a placid temperament, the af fected tooth one
of those  toward  the front of the mouth and in the upper jaw
(less in the way of roots and much easier of access)—it was a
messy , slippery , bone-crack business. And underlying the
sheer physical unpleasantness of the job was usually an
inescapable feeling of depression at the probable outcome.
It was necessary—beyond the p ain of an abscessed tooth, a
bad abscess could release ba cteria into the bloodstream,
causing septicemia and even death—but to remove a tooth,
with no good means of replacing it, was to compromise not
merely the patient’ s appearance but also the function and
structure of the mouth. A missing tooth allowed all those near
it to shift out of place, altering  the bite and making chewing
much less ef ficient. Which in turn af fected the patient’ s
nutrition, general health, and prospects for a long and happy
life.
Not, I reflected grimly , changing  position yet again in hopes
of g aining a vi ew of the toot h I was after , that even the
removal of several teeth would g reatly damage the dentition of
the poor little girl whose mouth I was working on.
She couldn’ t be more than eigh t or nine, with a narrow jaw
and a pronounced overbite. He r canine baby teeth had not
fallen ou t on time, and the permanent ones had come in behind
them, giving her a sinister double-fanged appearance. This
was aggravated by the unusual narrowness of her upper jaw ,
which had forced the two eme r gent front incisors to buckle
inward, turning toward each other in such a way that the front
surfaces of each tooth almost touched each other .I tou ched the ab scessed upper molar and she jerked against
the s traps that b ound her to the  chair , letting out a shriek that
ran under my fingernails like a bamboo splinter .
“Give her a bit more, please, Ian.” I straightened up, feeling
as though my lower back had been squeezed in a vise; I’d been
working for several hours in the front room of Fer gus’ s
printshop, and had a small bow l full of bloodstained teeth at
my elbow and a rapt crowd outside the window to show for it.
Ian mad e a dubious Scottish no ise, but picked up the bottle
of w hisky and made an encoura ging clucking noise toward the
little gir l, who screamed again at sight of his tattooed face and
clamped her mouth shut. The girl’ s mother , out of patience,
slapped her briskly , snatched the bottle from Ian’ s hand, and
inserting it into her daughter ’ s mouth, upended it, pinching the
girl’ s nose shut with the other hand.
The child’ s eyes went round as pennies and an explosion of
whisky droplets sprayed from the corners of her mouth—but
her scrawny little neck bobbed convulsively as she swallowed,
nonetheless.
“I really  think that’ s enough,” I  said, rather alarmed at the
quantity of whisky the child wa s swallowing. It was very bad
whisky , acquired locally , and while Jamie and Ian had both
tasted it  and, after some discussion, decided that it probably
wouldn’ t make anyone go blind, I had reservations about using
it in any great amount.
“Hmm,” said the mother , exami ning her daughter critically ,
but not removing the bottle. “That’ll do it, I suppose.”
The child’ s eyes had rolled b ack in her head, and the
straining little body suddenly relaxed, falling limp against the
chair . Th e mother removed the whisky bottle, wiped the mouth
of it tidily on her apron, and handed it back to Ian with a nod.
I has tily examined her pulse and breathing, but she seemed
in reasonably good shape—so far , at least.
“Carpe diem,”  I mutte red, grabbing my tooth  pliers. “Or
perhaps I mean carpe vinorum?  W atch to see she keepsbreathing, Ian.”
Ian laug hed and tilted the bott le, wetting a tiny swab of
clean cloth with whisky for the mopping up.
“I th ink ye’ll have time to take more than the one tooth,
Auntie, if ye want. Y e could likely pull every tooth in the poor
lassie’ s head and she wouldna twitch.”
“It’ s a thought,”  I said, turning  the child’ s head. “Can you
bring the mirror , Ian?”
I had a tiny square of looking glass which could, with luck,
be used to direct sunlight into a patient’ s mouth. And there
was sunlight streaming throug h the window in abundance,
warm and bright. Unfortunately , there were any number of
curious heads pressed against the window , too, which kept
moving into the path of the sun , frustrating Ian’ s attempts to
beam sunlight where I needed it.
“Marsali!” I called, a thumb on the girl’ s pulse, just in case.
“A ye?” She came through from  the back room where she’d
been cle aning—or , rather , dirty ing—type, wiping inky hands
on a rag. “D’ye need Henri-Christian again?”
“If you—or he—don’ t mind.”
“Not him ,” she assured me. “Likes nothing better , the wee
praise-hog. Joanie! Felicite! Come fetch the wean, will ye?
He’ s wanted out front.”
Felicite and Joan—aka the hell-kittens, as Jamie called them
—came eagerly;  they enjoyed Henri-Christian’ s performances
nearly as much as he did.
“Come on, Bubbles!” Joanie called, holding open the door
to the kitchen. Henri-Christian came scampering out, rolling
from side to side on short, bowed legs, ruddy face beaming.
“Hoopla, hoopla, hoopla!” he shouted, making for the door .
“Put his  hat on him!” Marsali c alled. “The wind will get in
his ears.”It w as a bright d ay , but was  windy , and Henri-Christian had
a tenden cy to ear infection. H e had a woolen hat that tied
under the chin, though, knitted in blue and white stripes and
decorated with a row of red bobbles—Brianna had made it for
him, and the sight of it squeezed my heart a little, warmth and
pain together .
The girls each to ok him by a hand—Felicite stretching up at
the l ast moment to grab an old slouch hat of her father ’ s from
the peg,  to put out for coins—and went out, to cheers and
whistles from the crowd. Thro ugh the window , I could see
Joanie clearing the books displa yed on the table outside, and
Felicite hoisting Henri-Christian up in their stead. He spread
his stubby , powerful arms, beaming, and bowed in
accomplished fa shion to one side and the other . Then he bent,
put h is hands on  the tabletop, and, with a remarkable degree of
controlled grace, stood on his head.
I d idn’ t wait to watch the rest of his show—it was mostly
simple dancing and kicks, interspersed with somersaults and
headstands, but made enchanting by his dwarfed stature and
vivid personalit y . He had shift ed the crowd away from the
window momentarily , though, which was what I wanted.
“Now , Ian,” I said, and wen t back to work. W ith the
flickering light from the mirro r , it was a little easier to see
what I was doing, and I got to grips with the tooth almost at
once. This was the tricky part,  though; the tooth was badly
cracked, and there was a good  chance that it might fracture
when I twisted i t, rather than draw cleanly . And if that should
happen …
But it didn’ t. There was a small, muf fled crack!  as the roots
of the tooth parted from the jaw bone, and I was holding the
tiny white thing, intact.
The child’ s mother , who had been watching intently , sighed
and rela xed a little. The little gir l sighed, too, and settled in the
chair . I checked again, but he r pulse was fine, though her
breathing was shallow . She’d likely sleep for—
A thought struck me.“Y ou kn ow ,” I said to the mothe r , a little hesitantly , “I could
draw one or tw o more teeth w ithout hurting her . See …” I
moved aside, motioning her to look. “These”—I touched the
overdue baby canines—”ought to be drawn at once, to let the
teeth beh ind take their places. And you see these front teeth, of
course…. W ell, I’ve taken the upper bicuspid molar on the
left; if I were to  take the same tooth on the right, I think  that
perhaps her teeth would shift a bit, to fill the empty space. And
if you could pe rsuade her to p ress with her tongue against
those fr ont teeth, whenever she thought of it …” It wasn’ t
orthodontia by any means, and i t did carry some increased risk
of infect ion, but I was sorely tempted. The poor child looked
like a cannibal bat.
“Hmmmm,” sai d the mother , fr owning into her daughter ’ s
mouth. “How much will you give me for them?”
“How much … you want me to pay you ?”
“They’re fine, sound teeth,” the mother replied promptly .
“The tooth-drawer down to the harbor ‘ud give me a shilling
apiece. And Glory’ll need the money for her dowry .”
“Her dowry?” I repeated, surprised. The mother shrugged.
“No one ’ s likely to take the poor creature for her looks,
now , are they?”
I was obliged to admit that this was likely true; her
deplorable dentition quite aside, calling the child homely
would be a compliment.
“Marsali,” I called. “Have you g ot four shillings?” The gold
in my hem swun g heavily round my feet, but I couldn’ t make
use of it in this situation.
Marsali turned from the window , where she’d been keeping
an eye on Henri-Christian and the girls, startled.
“Not cash money , no.”
“It’ s all right, A untie. I’ve some money .” Ian put down the
mirror a nd dug in his sporran,  emer ging with a handful of
coins. “Mind,” he said, fixing the woman with a hard eye,“ye’d no  get more nor thruppence each for sound teeth—and
likely no but a penny for a child’ s.”
The woman, nothing daunted, looked down her nose at him.
“There speaks a grasping Scotchman,” she said. “For all
you’re tattooed like a savage. Si xpence each, then, you penny-
pinching miser!”
Ian grin ned at her , displaying h is own fine teeth, which, if
not entirely straight, were in excellent condition.
“Going to carry the wean down to the quay and let yon
butcher rip her mouth to shreds?” he inquired pleasantly .
“She’ll be awake by then, ken. And screaming. Three.”
“Ian!” I said.
“W ell, I’m no going to let her ch eat ye, Auntie. Bad enough
she’ s wantin’ ye to draw the lassie’ s teeth for nothing, let alone
pay for the honor!”
Emboldened by my intervention, the woman stuck out her
chin and repeated, “Sixpence!”
Marsali, attracted by the altercation, came to peer into the
girl’ s mouth.
“Y e’ll not find t hat one a husband for less than ten pound,”
she informed the woman bluntly . “Not lookin’ like that. A man
would be feart of bein’ bitten when he kissed her . Ian’ s right.
In fact, ye should be payin’ double for it.”
“Y e agr eed to pay when ye came in, no?” Ian pressed.
“T uppence to have the tooth dr awn—and my aunt made ye a
bar gain at that, out of pity for the wean.”
“Bloodsuckers!” the woman exclaimed. “It’ s true what they
say—you Scots ‘ud take the pennies from a dead man’ s eyes!”
Plainly this wasn’ t going to be settled in a hurry; I could
feel both Ian and Marsali settling down to an enjoyable session
of tag-team haggling. I sighed and took the mirror out of Ian’ s
hand. I wouldn’ t need it for th e canines, and perhaps by the
time I got to the other bicuspid, he’d be paying attention again.In fact, the canines were simple; baby teeth, almost without
roots, an d ready  to fall—I could  probably have tweaked them
out with my fingers. One quick  twist each and they were out,
the gum s barely bleeding. Pleased, I dabbed the sites with a
whisky-soaked swab, then considered the bicuspid.
It w as o n the other side of the mouth, which meant that by
tilting th e girl’ s  head back, I could get a bit of light without
using th e mirror . I took Ian’ s hand—he was so engaged in
ar gument that he barely noticed—and put it on the girl’ s head
to hold it back and steady , then carefully insinuated my pliers.
A shado w crossed my light, vanished—then came back,
blocking it utterly . I turned in annoyance, to find a rather
elegant-looking gentleman peering through the window , a look
of interest on his face.
I scowled at him  and motioned h im aside. He blinked at me,
but then nodded apology and stepped aside. Not waiting for
any further interruption, I crouched, got hold of the tooth, and
twisted it free with a lucky wrench.
Humming with satisfaction, I dribbled whisky over the
bleeding hole, then tilted her head to the other side and pressed
a swab gently over the gum, to help drain the abscess. Felt a
sudden extra slackness in the wobbly little neck and froze.
Ian felt it, too; he broke of f in t he middle of a sentence and
shot me a startled look.
“Untie her ,” I said. “Quick.”
He had her loosed in an instant, and I seized her under the
arms an d laid her on the floor ,  her head flopping like a rag
doll’ s. I gnoring startled exclamations from Marsali and the
girl’ s m other , I tilted back her head, swiped the swab out of
her mou th, and, pinching shut he r nose with my fingers, sealed
my mouth to hers and started resuscitation.
It was like blow ing up a small, tough balloon: reluctance,
resistance, then,  finally , a rise of the chest. But chests don’ t
yield like rubber; the blowing didn’ t get easier .I had the fingers of my other hand on her neck, feeling
desperately for a carotid pulse. There … W as it? … Y es, it
was! Her heart was still beating, though faintly .
Breathe. Pause. Breathe. Pause  … I felt the tiny gush of
exhalation, and  then the narro w chest moved by itself. I
waited, blood pounding in my ears, but it didn’ t move again.
Breathe. Pause. Breathe …
Again the chest moved, and this time continued to rise and
fall unde r its own power . I sat u p on my heels, my own breath
coming fast and a cold sweat misting my face.
The girl’ s mother was staring d own at me, her mouth half
open. I noted dimly that her own dentition wasn’ t bad; God
knew what her husband looked like.
“She’ s—is she … ?” the woman asked, blinking and
glancing back and forth between me and her daughter .
“She’ s f ine,” I said flatly . I stood up slowly , feeling light-
headed. “She can’ t go until the whisky’ s worn of f, though; I
think she’ll be all right, but sh e might stop breathing again.
Someone needs to watch her ‘til she wakes. Marsali … ?”
“A ye, I’ll put h er in the trundle,” Marsali said, coming to
look. “Oh, there ye are, Joanie— will ye come and keep an eye
on this poor we an for a bit? She needs to lie down on your
bed.”
The children had come in, red-c heeked and giggling, with a
hatful of small coins and butto ns, but seeing the girl on the
floor , hurried over to look, too.
“Hoopla,” Henri-Christian remarked, impressed.
“Is she deid?” Felicite asked, more practically .
“If she was, Maman  w ouldna be ask ing me to watc h her ,”
Joanie p ointed o ut. “She’ s no g oing to sick up in my bed, is
she?”
“I’ll put a towel down,” Marsali promised, squatting to
scoop the little girl up. Ian be at her to it, lifting the child
gently .“W e’ll just char ge ye tuppence, then,” he said to the mother .
“But we’ll give ye all the teeth for free, aye?”
Looking stunned, she nodded, then followed the crowd into
the back  of the house. I heard the thunder of multiple feet
going up  the stairs, but didn’ t fo llow; my own legs had gone to
water , and I sat down quite suddenly .
“Are you all right, madame ?” I looked up to  find the elegant
stranger inside the shop, looking curiously at me.
I pi cked up the  half-empty bottle of whisky and took a
substantial swallow . It burned like brimstone and tasted like
charred bones. I made wheezing noises and my eyes watered,
but I didn’ t actually cough.
“Fine,” I said hoarsely . “Perfectly fine.” I cleared my throat
and wiped my eyes on my sleeve. “Can I help you?”
A faint look of amusement crossed his features.
“I d o not requir e to have a tooth drawn, which is probably
good luc k for both of us. However—may I?” He withdrew a
slim silver flask from his pocket and handed it to me, then sat
down. “I think it’ s perhaps a little more fortifying than …
that.” He nodded at the unco rked whisky bottle, his nose
wrinkling a little.
I uncorked the flask, and the full-bodied scent of very good
brandy floated out like a genie.
“Thank you,” I said briefly , and drank, closing my eyes.
“V ery much indeed,” I added a  moment later , opening them.
Fortifying, indeed. W armth collected in my center and purled
like smoke through my limbs.
“My pleasure, madame,”  he said, and smiled. He was
undeniably a dandy , and a rich one, too, with a good deal of
lace about his person, gilt buttons on his waistcoat, a
powdered wig, and two black silk beauty patches on his face—
a star beside his left brow , and a rearing horse on his right
cheek. N ot a getup one saw often in North Carolina, especially
not these days.Despite the encrustations, he was a handsome man, I
thought, perhap s forty or so, with soft dark eyes that glinted
with humor , and a delicate, se nsitive face. His English was
very good, though it carried a distinct Parisian accent.
“Have I  the honor of addressin g Mrs. Fraser?” he asked. I
saw his eyes p ass over my scandalously bare head, but he
politely made no comment.
“W ell, you have,” I said dubiou sly . “But I may not be the
one you want. My daughter -in-law is Mrs. Fraser , too; she and
her h usband own this shop. So i f you were wanting something
printed—”
“Mrs. James Fraser?”
I paused instinctively , but there wasn’ t much alternative to
answering.
“I am, yes. Is it my husband y ou want?” I asked warily .
People w anted J amie for a lot of things, and it wasn’ t always
desirable that they find him.
He smiled, eyes crinkling pleasantly .
“It is indeed, M rs. Fraser . The c aptain of my ship said that
Mr . Fras er had come to speak with him this morning, seeking
passage.”
My heart gave a sharp leap at this.
“Oh! Y ou have a ship, Mr…. ?”
“Beauchamp,” he said, and, picking up my hand, kissed it
gracefully . “Perc ival Beaucham p, at your service, madame . I
do—she is called Huntr ess .”
I act ually thought my heart had stopped for a moment, but it
hadn’ t, and resumed beating with a noticeable thump.
“Beauchamp,” I said. “Beechum ?” He’d pronounced it in
the French way , but at this, he nodded, smile growing wider .
“Y es, the English say it that way . Y ou said your daughter -in-
law … so the M r . Fraser who ow ns this shop is your husband’ s
son?”“Y es,” I said again, but automatically . Don’ t be silly , I
scolded myself. It is n’ t an uncommon name. Li kely he hasn’ t
anything at all to do with your family!  A nd yet—a French-
English connect ion. I knew my father ’ s family had come from
France to England sometime in  the eighteenth century—but
that was  all I kn ew about them. I stared at him in fascination.
W as there anything familiar ab out his face, anything I could
match with my faint recollectio ns of my parents, the stronger
ones of my uncle?
He had pale skin, like mine, but then, most upper -class
people did, they taking great pa ins to shelter their faces from
the sun. His eyes were much darker than mine, and beautiful,
but shaped dif ferently , rounder . The brows—had my uncle
Lamb’ s brows had that shape, h eavy near the nose, trailing of f
in a graceful arch … ?
Absorbed in this tantalizing puzzle, I’d missed what he was
saying.
“I beg your pardon?”
“The lit tle boy ,” he repeated, w ith a nod toward the door
through which the children had disappeared. “He was
shouting, ‘Hoopla!’ As French street performers do. Has the
family a French connection of some kind?”
Belated alarms began to go of f, and unease rippled the hairs
on my forearms.
“No,” I said, trying to iron my face into a politely quizzical
expression. “Likely he’ s just heard it from someone. There
was a small trou pe of French ac robats who passed through the
Carolinas last year .”
“Ah, doubtless that’ s it.” He le aned forward a little, dark
eyes intent. “Did you see them yourself?”
“No. M y husband and I … don’ t live here,” I ended
hurriedly . I’d been about to tell him where we did  live, but I
didn’ t kn ow how much—if anything—he knew about Fer gus’ s
circumstances. He sat back, pursing his lips a little in
disappointment.“Ah, to o bad. I thought perha ps the gentleman I am in
search of might have belonge d to this troupe. Though I
suppose you would not have kno wn their names, even had you
seen them,” he added as an afterthought.
“Y ou’re looking for someone? A Frenchman?” I lifted the
bowl of bloodstained teeth an d began to pick through it,
af fecting nonchalance.
“A man named Claudel. He was born in Paris—in a
brothel,” he added, with a faint air of apology for using such
an in delicate term in my presen ce. “He would be in his early
forties now—forty-one or -two, perhaps.”
“Paris,” I repeated, listening for Marsali’ s footfalls on the
stair . “What leads you to suppose that he’ s in North Carolina?”
He lifted one shoulder in a graceful shrug.
“He may well n ot be. I do know that roughly thirty years
ago, he was tak en from the brothel by a Scotsman, and that
this man  was described as of striking appearance, very tall,
with brilliant red hair . Beyond t hat, I encountered a morass of
possibilities …” He smiled wryly . “Fraser was described to me
variously as a w ine merchant, a Jacobite, a Loyalist, a traitor , a
spy , an aristocra t, a farmer , an importer—or a smuggler; the
terms ar e interc hangeable—with connections reaching from a
convent to the Royal court.”
Which was, I thought, an extremely accurate portrait of
Jamie. Though I could see why  it hadn’ t been much help in
finding him. On the other hand … here Beauchamp was.
“I did discover a wine merchant named Michael Murray ,
who, upon hearing this description, told me that it resembled
his uncl e, one James Fraser , who had emigrated to America
more than ten y ears ago.” The dark eyes were less humorous
now , fixed intently upon me.
“When I inquired about the child Claudel, though, Monsieur
Murray professed complete ignorance of such a person. In
rather vehement terms.”“Oh?” I said, and picked up a lar ge molar with serious
caries, squinting  at it. Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ. I knew
Michael only by name; one of Y oung Ian’ s elder brothers, he
had bee n born after my depart ure and had already gone to
France by the time I returned to Lallybroch—there to be
educated and taken into the wi ne business with Jared Fraser ,
an elderly and childless cousin of Jamie’ s. Michael had, of
course, g rown u p with Fer gus a t Lallybroch and knew bloody
well what his or iginal name was. And apparently had detected
or suspected something in this stranger ’ s demeanor that had
alarmed him.
“Do you mean to say that you came all the way to America,
knowing nothin g except a man’ s name and that he has red
hair?” I asked, trying to seem mildly incredulous. “Goodness
—you must have considerab le interest in finding this
Claudel!”
“Oh, I do, madame .” He looked at me, smiling fain tly , head
on o ne side. “T ell me, Mrs. F raser—has your husband red
hair?”
“Y es,” I said. There was no point in denying it, since anyone
in New Bern would tell him so—and likely had already , I
reflected. “So do any number o f his relations—and about half
the popu lation of the Scottish Highlands.” This was a wild
overstatement, but I was reasonably sure that Mr . Beauchamp
hadn’ t been combing the Highlands personally , either .
I cou ld hear voices upstairs; Ma rsali might be coming down
any min ute, and I didn’ t want her walking into the midst of
this particular conversation.
“W ell,” I said, a nd got to my feet in a decided manner . “I’m
sure you’ll be w anting to talk to my husband—and he to you.
He’ s gone on an errand, though, and won’ t be back until
sometime tomorrow . Are you  staying somewhere in the
town?”
“The King’ s Inn,” he said, risin g, as well. “If you will tell
your husband to find me there, madame?  I than k you.”
Bending low , he took my hand a nd kissed it again, then smiledat m e an d backe d out of the shop, leaving a scent of ber gamot
and hyssop mingled with the ghost of good brandy .
 
A GOO D MANY merchants and businessmen had left
New Bern, owing to the chaotic state of politics; with no civil
authority , public  life had come to a standstill, bar the simplest
of m arket transactions, and many people—of both Loyalist
and rebel sympathies—had lef t the colony out of fear of
violence. There were only two good inns in New Bern these
days; th e King’ s  Inn was one, and the W ilsey Arms the other .
Luckily , Jamie and I had a room in the latter .
“W ill you go and talk to him?” I had just finished telling
Jamie about the visit of Mons ieur Beauchamp—an account
that had left him  with a deep crease of concern between his
brows.
“Christ. How did he find out all that?”
“He must have begun with a knowledge that Fer gus was at
that brothel, and started his inquiries there. I imagine it
wouldn’ t have been dif ficult to find someone who’d seen you
there, or heard about the incident. Y ou’re rather memorable,
after all. ” Despite my own agitation, I smiled at the memory of
Jamie, aged twenty-five, who had taken temporary refuge in
the brot hel in question armed— quite coincidentally—with a
lar ge s ausage, and then escaped through a window ,
accompanied by a ten-year -old pickpocket and sometime
child-whore named Claudel.
He shrugged, looking mildly embarrassed.
“W ell, a ye, perhaps. But to disc over quite so much …” He
scratched his head, thinking. “As to speaking with him—not
before I speak to  Fer gus. I think we might want to know a bit
more about this Monsieur Beau champ, before we make him a
present of ourselves.”
“I’d like  to know a bit more about him, too,” I said. “I did
wonder whether  … W ell, it’ s a remote possibility , the nameisn’ t all that unc ommon—but I did wonder whether he might
be c onnected in some way with  a branch of my family . They
wer e  i n Fran ce in the eighteenth century , I know that much.
But not much more.”
He smiled at me.
“And wh at would ye do, Sassne nach, if I discover that he’ s
really your six-times-great-grandfather?”
“I—” I stopped abruptly becau se, in fact, I didn’ t know
what  I’d  do in such a circumstance. “W ell … probably
nothing,” I admitted. “And we p robably can’ t find that out for
sure in any case , since I don’ t recall—if I ever knew—what
my six- times-great-grandfather ’ s first name was. I just—
would be interested to know more, that’ s all,” I finished,
feeling mildly defensive.
“W ell, of course ye would,” he s aid, matter -of-fact. “But not
if my asking might put Fer gus in any danger , would ye?”
“Oh, no! Of course not. But do you—”
I wa s in terrupted by a soft knoc k on the door that struck me
dumb. I raised m y brows at Jamie, who hesitated a moment,
but then shrugged and went to open it.
Small as  the room was, I could  see the door from where I
sat; to my surprise, it was filled with what appeared to be a
deputation of women—the corridor was a sea of white caps,
floating in the dimness like jellyfish.
“Mr . Fraser?” One of the caps bobbed briefly . “I am—my
name is Abigail Bell. My daughters”—she turned, and I
caught a glimpse of a strained white face—”Lillian and
Miriam.” The other two caps—yes, there were only three, after
all—bobbed in turn. “May we speak with you?”
Jamie b owed and ushered them into the room, raising his
eyebrows at me as he followed them in.
“My wife,” he said, nodding as I rose, murmuring
pleasantries. There was only the bed and one stool, so we allremained standing, awkwardly smiling and bobbing at one
another .
Mrs. Be ll was short and rather stout, and had probably once
been as pretty a s her daughters. Her once-plump cheeks now
sagged, though, as though she had lost weight suddenly , and
her skin was creased with worry . Her daughters looked
worried, too; one was twisting her hands in her apron, and the
other kept stealing glances at J amie from downcast eyes, as
though afraid he might do som ething violent if gazed at too
directly .
“I be g y our pard on, sir , for comi ng to you in this bold way .”
Mrs. Bell’ s lips were trembling;  she had to stop and compress
them briefly before continuing. “ I—I hear that you are looking
for a ship bound to Scotland.”
Jamie nodded warily , plainly wondering where this woman
had learned of it . He’d said everyone in the town would know
within a day or two—evidently he’d been right about that.
“Do ye ken som eone with such a voyage in view?” he asked
politely .
“No. N ot exactly . I … that is … perhaps—it is my
husband,” she blurted, but the s peaking of the word made her
voice br eak, and she clapped a handful of apron to her mouth.
One of the dau ghters, a dark-haired girl, took her mother
gently by the elb ow and drew her aside, standing up bravely to
face the fearsome Mr . Fraser herself.
“My father is in Scotland, Mr . Fraser ,” she said. “My
mother is in hopes that you might find him, when you go
there, and assist him to return to us.”
“Ah,” Jamie said. “And your father would be … ?”
“Oh! Mr . Richard Bell, sir , of W ilmington.” She curtsied
hastily , as though further politeness would help to make her
case. “He is—he was— ”
“He is !” her sister hissed, low-voiced but emphatic, and the
first sister , the dark one, gave her a glare.“My father was a merchant in W ilmington, Mr . Fraser . He
had considerabl e business interests, and in the course of his
business he … had reason to have contact with various British
of ficers, who came to him for su pplies. It was entirely a matter
of business!” she assured him.
“But business in these dreadful times is never only
business.” Mrs. Bell had got hol d of herself, and came to stand
shoulder to shoulder with her daughter . “They said—my
husband’ s enemies—they put it about that he was a Loyalist.”
“Only b ecause he was,” put in the second sister . This one—
fair -haired and blue-eyed—was n’ t trembling; she faced Jamie
with a lifted chin and blazing ey es. “My father was true to his
King! I for one do not think that is something to be excused
and apologized for! Nor do I think it right to pretend
otherwise, only to get the help of a man who has broken every
oath—”
“Oh, Miriam !” said her sister , exasperated. “ Could you not
keep quiet for one second?  Now you’ve spoilt everything!”
“I haven’ t,” Miriam snapped. “Or if I have, it wasn’ t ever
going to work in  the first place! Why should someone like him
hel—”
“Y es, it would! Mr . Forbes said—”
“Oh, bother Mr . Forbes! What would he  know?”
Mrs. Bell moaned softly into her apron.
“Why did your f ather go to Scotland?” Jamie asked, cutting
through the confusion.
T aken by surprise, Miriam Bell actually answered him.
“He didn’ t go  t o Scotland. He  was abducted in the street and
thrust onto a ship bound for Southampton.”
“By whom?” I asked, wiggling my way through the
obstructing fore st of skirts on my way to the door . “And
why?”I stuck my head out into the corridor and gestured to the boy
cleaning boots on the landing t hat he should go down to the
taproom and bring up a jug of wine. Given the apparent state
of the Bells, I thought som ething to restore the social
amenities might be a good idea.
I poppe d back inside in time to hear Miss Lillian Bell
explaining that they didn’ t actually know who had abducted
her father .
“Or not by name, at least,” she said, face flushed with fury
at th e telling. “The villains wore  hoods over their heads. But it
was the Sons of Liberty , I know it!”
“Y es, it was,” M iss Miriam said decidedly . “Father had had
threats from them—notes pinned to the door , a dead fish
wrapped in a bit  of red flannel and left upon the porch to make
a stink. That sort of thing.”
The matter had gone beyond threats at the end of the
previous Augus t. Mr . Bell had been on his way to his
warehouse, whe n a group of hooded men had rushed out from
an alleyw ay , seized him, and ca rried him down the quay , then
flung him  bodily  aboard a ship that had just cast of f its hawser ,
sails filling as it drew slowly away .
I had heard of  troublesome Loyalists being summarily
“deported” in this manner , but hadn’ t run into an actual
occurrence of the practice before.
“If the ship was  bound for Eng land,” I inquired, “how did
he end up in Scotland?”
There was a certain amount of confusion as all three Bells
tried to explain at once what ha d happened, but Miriam won
out once again.
“He arri ved in England penniless, of course, with no more
than the  clothes on his back, and owing money for food and
passage on the s hip. But the ship’ s captain had befriended him,
and took  him from Southampto n to London, where my father
knew so me men with whom he had done business in the past.
One of these advanced him a su m to cover his indebtedness tothe captain, and promised him passage to Geor gia, if he would
oversee the car go on a voyage from Edinbur gh to the Indies,
thence to America.
“So he traveled to Edinbur gh under the auspices of his
patron, only to discover there that the intended car go to be
picked up in the Indies was a shipload of Negroes.”
“My hus band is  an abolitionist, Mr . Fraser ,” Mrs. Bell put
in, with  timid pride. “He said he could not countenance
slavery , nor assist in its practice, no matter what the cost to
himself.”
“And Mr . Forbes told us what you had done for that woman
—Mrs. Cameron’ s body slave,” Lillian put in, anxious-faced.
“So we thought … even if you were …” She trailed of f,
embarrassed.
“An oath-breaking rebel, aye,” Jamie said dryly . “I see. Mr .
Forbes—this would be … Neil Forbes, the lawyer?” He
sounded faintly incredulous, and with good reason.
Some years before, Forbes had  been a suitor for Brianna’ s
hand—encouraged by Jocasta Cameron, Jamie’ s aunt. Bree
had rejected him, none too gently , and he had taken his
revenge some time later by havi ng her abducted by a notorious
pirate. A very messy state of af fairs had ensued, involving
Jamie’ s reciprocal abduction of Forbes’ s elderly mother—the
old lady had loved the adventure—and the cutting of f of
Forbes’ s ear by Y oung Ian. T ime might have healed his
external wounds , but I couldn’ t imagine anyone less likely to
have been singing Jamie’ s praises.
“Y es,” said Miriam, but I didn’ t miss the uncertain look that
passed between Mrs. Bell and Lillian.
“What, exactly , did Mr . Forbes s ay about me?” Jamie asked.
All three of them went pale, and his eyebrows went up.
“What?” he repeated, with a definite edge. He said it
directly to Mrs. Bell, whom he had instantly identified as the
weakest link in the family chain.“He said what a good thing it was that you were dead,” that
lady replied faintly . Whereupon her eyes rolled up into her
head and she slumped to the floor like a bag of barleycorn.
 
FOR TUNA TEL Y , I HAD got a bottle of spirits of
ammonia from Dr . Fentiman. This roused Mrs. Bell promptly
into a sneezing fit, and her daughters helped her , gasping and
choking, onto the bed. The wi ne fortunately arriving at this
juncture, I served liberal helpings to everyone in sight,
reserving a sizable mugful for myself.
“Now , then,” Jamie said, giving  the women the sort of slow ,
penetrating look intended to cause miscreants to go weak in
the k nees and co nfess everything, “tell me where ye heard Mr .
Forbes say about my being dead.”
Miss Li llian, settled on the bed  with a protective hand on
her mother ’ s shoulder , spoke up.
“I he ard him. In  Symond’ s ordinary . While we were still in
W ilmington—before we came here to live with Aunt Burton.
I’d gone  to get a pitcher of hot cider—it was sometime in
February; it was still very cold  out. Anyway , the woman—
Faydree, she’ s called—she works there, and went to draw and
heat the  cider for me. Mr . Forb es came in while I was there,
and spoke to me . He knew about Father , and was sympathetic,
asking how we were managing … then Faydree came out with
the pitcher , and he saw her .”
Forbes had, of course, recognized Phaedre, whom he’d seen
many times at River Run, Jocasta’ s plantation. Expressing
great surprise at her presence, he had inquired for an
explanation and received a suitably modified version of the
truth—in which Phaedre had apparently made much of Jamie’ s
kindness in securing her freedom.
I g ur gle d briefly in my mug at this. Phaedre knew exactly
what had happened to Neil Forb es’ s ear . She was a very quiet,soft-spoken person, Phaedre, but not above sticking pins in
people she didn’ t like—and I knew she didn’ t like Neil Forbes.
“Mr . Forbes was rather flushed—perhaps it was from the
cold,” Lillian said tactfully , “and he said, yes, he understood
that Mr .  Fraser had always had a great regard for Negroes….
I’m afra id he said that rather nastily ,” she added, with an
apologetic look at Jamie. “And then he laughed, though he
tried to pretend he was coughing, and said what a pity it was
that you  and your family had al l been burnt to cinders, and no
doubt there would be great lamentations in the slave quarter .”
Jamie, who had been taking a swallow of wine, choked.
“Why did he think that?” I demanded. “Did he say?”
Lillian nodded earnestly .
“Y es, ma’am. Faydree asked him that, too—I think she
thought he was only saying it to upset her—and he said he’d
read it in the newspaper .”
“The W ilmington Gazette ,” Miriam put in, plainly not liking
her sister to b e hogging the limelight. “W e don’ t read
newspapers, of course, and sinc e Daddy … well, we seldom
have ca llers anymore.” She glanced down involuntarily , her
hand automatically pulling her neat apron straight, to hide a
lar ge pa tch on her skirt. The  Bells were tidy and well-
groomed, and their clothes had o riginally been of good quality
but were growing noticeably threadbare round the hems and
sleeves. I imagined that Mr . Be ll’ s business af fairs must have
been substantial ly impaired, both by his absence and by the
interference of war .
“My daughter had told me abo ut the meeting.” Mrs. Bell
had recovered herself so far as to sit up, her cup of wine
clasped carefull y in both hands. “So when my neighbor told
me last night that he had met you by the docks … well, I
didn’ t know quite what to think,  but supposed there had been a
stupid mistake of some kind —really , you cannot believe
anything you read these days, the newspapers are grown quite
wild. And my neighbor mentioned that you were seekingpassage to Scotland. So we b egan to think …” Her voice
trailed o f f, and she dipped he r face toward her wine cup,
embarrassed.
Jamie rubbed a finger down his nose, thinking.
“A ye, w ell,” he said slowly . “It’ s true that I mean to go to
Scotland. And of course I shou ld be pleased to inquire after
your hu sband and assist him if I can. But I’ve no immediate
prospect of obtaining passage. The blockade—”
“But we  can get you a ship!” Lillian interrupted eagerly .
“That’ s the point!”
“W e thin k we can get you to  a ship,”  Miriam  corrected. She
gave Jamie a considering, narrow-eyed sort of look, judging
his character . He smiled faintly at her , acknowledging the
scrutiny , and after a moment she returned the smile, grudging.
“Y ou remind me of someone,” she said. Evidently , whoever
it wa s, it  was someone she liked, though, for she nodded to her
mother , giving permission. Mrs. Bell sighed, her shoulders
slumping a little in relief.
“I do still have friends,” she said, with a tinge of defiance.
“In spite of … everything.”
Among these friends was a man named DeLancey Hall,
who owned a fishing ketch, and—like half the town, probably
—augmented his income with the odd bit of smuggling.
Hall had  told Mrs. Bell that he expected the arrival of a ship
from England, coming into W i lmington sometime within the
next week or so—always assuming that it hadn’ t been seized
or sunk en r oute . As both ship a nd car go were the property of
one of the local Sons of Liberty , it could not venture into the
W ilmington har bor , where two British warships were still
crouched. It would, therefore, lurk just outside the harbor ,
where assorted small local craft would make rendezvous with
it, unloading the car go for surreptitious transport to shore.
After wh ich, the ship would sail north to New Haven, there to
retrieve a car go.“And th en will sail for Edinbur gh!” Lillian put in, her face
bright with hope.
“My father ’ s kinsman there is named Andrew Bell,” Miriam
put in, lifting her chin a little. “He is very well known, I
believe. He is a printer , and—”
“W ee Andy Bell?” Jamie’ s face had lighted up. “Him who
printed the great encyclopedia?”
“The very man,” Mrs. Bell sa id, surprised. “Y ou do not
mean to say you know him, Mr . Fraser?”
Jamie actually laughed, startling the Bells.
“Many’ s the evening I’ve passed in a tavern wi’ Andy Bell,”
he a ssured them. “In fact, he’ s the man I mean to see in
Scotland, for he’ s got my printing press, safe in his shop. Or at
least I hope he does,” he added, though his cheerfulness was
unimpaired.
This news—along with a fresh round of wine—heartened
the Bell women to an amazing extent, and when they left us at
last, they were flushed with animation and chattering amongst
themselves like a flock of amiable magpies. I glanced out the
window and saw them making  their way down the street,
clustered together in hopeful excitement, staggering into the
street occasionally from the ef fects of wine and emotion.
“W e don ’ t only sing but we dan ce just as good as we walk,”
I murmured, watching them go.
Jamie gave me a startled look.
“Archie Bell and the Drells,” I explained. “Never mind. Do
you think it’ s safe? This ship?”
“God, n o.” He shuddered, and kissed the top of my head.
“Put aside the question of storms, woodworm, bad caulking,
warped timbers, and the like, th ere’ s the English warships in
the harbor , privateers outside the harbor—”
“I didn’ t  mean that,” I interrupt ed. “That’ s more or less par
for t he course, is n’ t it? I meant the owner—and this DeLancey
Hall. M rs. Bell thinks she know s what their politics are, but…” But the thought of delivering ourselves—and our gold—
so completely into the hands of unknown persons was
unsettling.
“But,” he agreed. “A ye, I mean to go and speak to Mr . Hall
first th ing tomorrow morni ng. And maybe Monsieur
Beauchamp, as well. For now , though—” He ran a hand lightly
down my back and cupped my bottom. “Ian and the dog willna
be back  for an hour , at least. W ill ye have another glass of
wine?”
 
HE LOOKED LIKE a Frenchm an, Jamie thought. Which
was to say , thor oughly out of place in New Bern. Beauchamp
had just come out of Thorogood Northrup’ s warehouse and
stood in casual conversation with Northrup himself, the breeze
of f the water flu ttering the silk ribbon that tied back his dark
hair . Ele gant, Claire had described him as, and he was that: not
—not quite—foppish, but dressed with taste and expense. A
good deal of expense, he thought.
“He looks like a Frenchman,” Fer gus observed, echoing his
thoughts. They were seated next to the window in the
Whinbush, a middling tavern that catered to the needs of
fishermen and warehouse laborers, and whose atmosphere was
composed of equal parts beer , sweat, tobacco, tar , and aged
fish guts.
“Is t hat his ship ?” Fer gus asked, a frown creasing his brow
as he  no dded tow ard the very tri m black-and-yellow sloop that
rocked gently at anchor , some distance out.
“It’ s the ship he  travels in. Coul dna say whether he owns it.
Y e dinna ken his face, though?”
Fer gus leaned into the window , nearly flattening his own
face aga inst the wavery panes in an attempt to get a better look
at Monsieur Beauchamp.
Jamie, beer in hand, studied Fe r gus’ s face in turn. Despite
having lived in Scotland since t he age of ten, and in Americafor the last ten  years or more, Fer gus himself still looked
French, he thought. It was something more than a matter of
feature; something in the bone itself, perhaps.
The bon es of Fer gus’ s face were pronounced, with a jaw
sharp enough to cut paper , an imperiously beaked nose, and
eye sock ets set deep under the ri dges of a high brow . The thick
dark hai r brushed back from tha t brow was threaded with gray ,
and it gave Jamie a queer moment to see that; he carried
within himself a permanent image of Fer gus as the ten-year -
old orphaned pickpocket he had rescued from a Paris brothel,
and that image sat oddly on the gaunt, handsome face before
him.
“No,” Fer gus said at last, sitting back on the bench and
shaking his head. “I have never seen him.”
Fer gus’ s deep-set dark eyes were alive with interest and
speculation. “N o one else in the town knows him, either .
Though I have  heard that he had made inquiries for this
Claudel Fraser”— his nostrils flared with amusement; Claudel
was his own birth name, and the only one he had, though
Jamie thought likely no one had ever used it outside Paris or
anytime in the l ast thirty years—”in Halifax and Edenton, as
well.”
Jamie opened his mouth to ob serve that he hoped Fer gus
had been careful in his inquirie s, but thought better of it, and
drank his beer instead. Fer gus  hadn’ t been surviving as a
printer in these troublous times by having a lack of discretion.
“Does he remind ye of anyone ?” he asked instead. Fer gus
gave him a brief look of surprise, but returned to his neck-
craning before settling back, shaking his head.
“No. Should he?”
“I d inna think so.” He didn’ t,  but was glad of Fer gus’ s
corroboration. Claire had told him her thought—that the man
might be some r elation of hers, perhaps a direct ancestor . She
had tried  to be casual about it,  dismiss the idea even as she
spoke it , but he’d seen the eag er light in her eyes and beentouched. The fact that she had no family or close kin in her
own time had a lways struck him as a dreadful thing, even
while he realized that it had much to do with her devotion to
him.
He’d loo ked as carefully as he could, with that in mind, but
saw nothing in Beauchamp’ s face or carriage that reminded
him much of Claire—let alone Fer gus.
He didn’ t think that  thought—that Beauchamp might be
some actual relation to himself—had crossed Fer gus’ s mind.
Jamie was reasonably sure that Fer gus thought of the Frasers
of L allybroch as his only fami ly , other than Marsali and the
children, whom he loved with a ll the fervor of his passionate
nature.
Beauchamp was taking his leave of Northrup now , with a
very Pa risian bo w , accompanie d by a graceful flutter of his
silk handkerchief. Fortuitous that the man had happened to
step out of the w arehouse just in front of them, Jamie thought.
They’d p lanned to go and have a keek at him later in the day ,
but his timely appearance saved them having to go and look
for him.
“It’ s a good ship,” Fer gus observed, his attention deflected
to the sloop called Huntr ess . He glanced back at Jamie,
considering. “Y ou’re sure you d o not wish to investigate the
possibility of passage with Monsieur Beauchamp?”
“A ye, I’ m sure,” Jamie said dryl y . “Put myself and my wife
in the power of a man I dinna ken and whose motives are
suspect, in a we e boat on a wide sea? Even a man who didna
suf fer from seasickness might boggle at that prospect, no?”
Fer gus’ s face split in a grin.
“Milady proposes to stick you full of needles again?”
“She does,” Jamie replied, rather crossly . He hated being
stabbed repeatedly , and disliked being obliged to appear in
public—even w ithin the limited confines of a ship—bristling
with spines like some outlandish porcupine. The only thingthat would make him do it was the sure knowledge that if he
didn’ t, he’d be puking his guts out for days on end.
Fer gus didn’ t notice his discontent, though; he was leaning
into the window again.
“Nom d’nom …”  he said softly , with such an expression of
apprehension that Jamie turned on the bench at once to look.
Beauchamp had proceeded some way down the street, but
was still  in sight. He had come to a stop, though, and appeared
to be executing  a sort of ungainly jig. This was suf ficiently
odd, but what was more distu rbing was that Fer gus’ s son
Germain was crouched in the street directly in front of the
man, and  seemed to be hopping to and fro in the manner of an
agitated toad.
These peculiar gyrations continued for a few seconds longer
and then came t o an end, Beauchamp now standing still, but
waving h is arms in expostulation, while Germain seemed to be
groveling in front of the man . The boy stood up, though,
tucking something into his shirt, and after a few moments’
conversation, Beauchamp laughed and put out his hand. They
exchanged a brief bow and handshake, and Germain came
down the street toward the Whinbush while Beauchamp
continued on his course.
Germain came in and, spotting them, slid onto the bench
beside his father , looking pleased with himself.
“I’ve m et that man,” he said w ithout preamble. “The man
who wants Papa.”
“A ye, we saw ,” Jamie said, bro ws raised. “What the devil
were ye doing with him?”
“W ell, I saw him coming, but I did not think he would stop
and talk to me if I only shouted at him. So I tossed Simon and
Peter into his path.”
“Who—” Jamie  began, but Ge rmain was already groping
within the depths of his shirt. Before Jamie could finish the
sentence, the boy had produced two sizable frogs, one greenand one a sort of vile yellow color , who huddled together on
the bare boards of the table, goggling in a nervous manner .
Fer gus cuf fed Germain round the ear .
“T ake those accursed creatures of f the table, before we are
thrown out of here. No wonder you are covered in warts,
consorting with les gr enouilles !”
“Grandmer e  told  me to,” Germain proteste d, nonetheless
scooping up his pets and returning them to captivity .
“She did ?” Jam ie was not usua lly startled anymore by his
wife’ s cures, but this seemed odd, even by her standards.
“W ell, she said there was nothing to do for the wart on my
elbow except rub it with a dead frog and bury it—the frog, I
mean—at a crossroads at midnight.”
“Oh. I think she  might possibly have been being facetious.
What did the Frenchman say to ye, then?”
Germain looked up, wide-eyed and interested.
“Oh, he’ s not a Frenchman, Grandper e .”
A brief pulse of astonishment went through him.
“He’ s not? Y e’re sure?”
“Oh, aye. He cursed most blasphemous when Simon landed
on h is shoe—but not the way Papa does.” Germain aimed a
bland look at h is father , who looked disposed to cuf f him
again, b ut desisted at Jamie’ s gesture. “He is an Englishman.
I’m sure.”
“He cursed in  Englis h?” Jamie asked. It was true;
Frenchmen ofte n invoked vegetables when cursing, not
infrequently min gled with sacred references. English cursing
generally had nothing to do with saints, sacraments, or
cucumbers, but dealt with God, whores, or excrement.
“He did . But I cannot say what  h e said, or Pa pa will be
of fended. He has very pure ears,  Papa,” Germain added, with a
smirk at his father .“Leave of f deviling your father and tell me what else the
man said.”
“A ye, well,” Germain said obligingly . “When he saw it was
no but a pair o’ wee froggies, he laughed and asked me was I
taking them home for my dinner . I said no, they were my pets,
and asked him was it his ship ou t there, because everyone said
so a nd it was a bonny thing, no? I was making out to be
simple, aye?” he explained, in c ase his grandfather might not
have grasped the stratagem.
Jamie suppressed a smile.
“V erra clever ,” he said dryly . “What else?”
“He said no, the ship is not his but belongs to a great
nobleman in France. And I of c ourse said, oh, who was that?
And he said it is the Baron Amandine.”
Jamie exchanged looks with Fer gus, who looked surprised
and raised one shoulder in a shrug.
“I as ked then ho w long he migh t remain, for I should like to
bring my brother down to see the ship. And he says he will sail
tomorrow on the evening tide, and asked me—but he was
joking, I could t ell—if I wished to come and be a cabin boy on
the v oyage. I tol d him no, my frogs suf fer from seasickness—
like my grandfather .” He turned  the smirk on Jamie, who eyed
him severely .
“Has yo ur father taught ye ‘Ne pete z pas plus haute que
votr e cul’ ?”
“Mama will wash your mouth out with soap if you say
things like that,” Germain informed him virtuously . “Do you
want me  to pick his pocket? I saw him go into the inn on
Cherry Street. I could—”
“Y ou could not,” Fer gus said ha stily . “And do not say such
things where people can hear . Y our mother will assassinate
both of us.”
Jamie fe lt a cold prickle at the back of his neck, and glanced
hastily round to make sure that no one had  heard.“Y e’ve been teaching him to—”
Fer gus looked mildly shifty .
“I thoug ht it a pity that the sk ills should be lost. It is a
family l egacy , y ou might say . I do not let him steal things, of
course. W e put them back.”
“W e’ll h ave a word in private later , I think,” Jamie said,
giving t he pair of them a look full of menace. Christ, if
Germain had been caught at it … He’d best put the fear of God
into the two of them before they both ended up pilloried, if not
hanged from a tree outright for theft.
“What about the man you were actually sent to  find?”
Fer gus asked his son, seizing th e chance of deflecting Jamie’ s
ire.
“I found  him,” Germain said, and nodded toward the door .
“There he is.”
 
DELANCEY HALL W AS a small, neat man, with the
quiet, nose-twit ching manner of a church mouse. Anything
less like a smuggler to look at could scarcely have been
imagined—which, Jamie thought, was likely a valuable
attribute in that line of business.
“A shipper of dry goods” wa s the way Hall discreetly
described his business. “I facil itate the finding of ships for
specific car goes. Which is no easy matter these days,
gentlemen, as you may well suppose.”
“I do  ind eed.” Ja mie smiled at th e man. “I have nay car go to
ship, bu t I am in hopes that ye might know of a situation that
would s uit. Myself, my wife, an d my nephew seek passage to
Edinbur gh.” His hand was under the table, in his sporran. He
had take n some of the gold sph eres and flattened them with a
hammer , into irregular disks. He took three of these and,
moving only slightly , placed them on Hall’ s lap.The man  didn’ t change expression in the slightest, but Jamie
felt the hand dart out and seize the disks, weigh them for an
instant, and then vanish into his pocket.
“I think that mig ht be possible,” he said blandly . “I know a
captain departing from W ilmington in about two weeks’ time,
who m ight be induced to carry passengers—for a
consideration.”
Sometime later , they walked back toward the printshop,
Jamie and Fer gus together , discussing the probabilities of
Hall’ s being able to produce a ship. Germain wandered
dreamily in front of them, zigza gging to and fro in response to
whatever was going on inside his remarkably fertile brain.
Jamie’ s own brain was more than occupied. Baron
Amandine. He knew the name, but had no face to go with it,
nor did he recall  the context in which  he knew  it. Only that he
had enco untered it at some point, in Paris. But when? When he
had attended the universite  th ere … or later , when he an d
Claire—yes. Th at was it; he’d heard the name at court. But no
matter how he c udgeled his brain, it would give up no further
information.
“D’ye w ant me to speak to this Beauchamp?” Jamie asked
abruptly . “I could perhaps find out what he means toward
you.”
Fer gus’ s mouth drew in a bit, then relaxed as he shook his
head.
“No,” he said. “I said I had heard this man had made
inquiries concerning me in Edenton?”
“Y e’re sure it is  y ou?” Not th at the ground in North
Carolina crawled with Claudels, but still …
“I think so, yes.” Fer gus spoke very softly , with an eye on
Germain, who had started emitting soft croaks, evidently
conversing with the frogs in hi s shirt. “The person who told
me of this said that man had not only a name, but a small
information, of sorts. That the Claudel Fraser he sought hadbeen taken from Paris by a tall red-haired Scotsman. Named
James Fraser . So I think you cannot speak to him, no.”
“Not without exciting his attention, no,” Jamie agreed. “But
… w e d inna ken  what his purpo se is, but it may be something
of g reat advantage to ye, aye? H ow likely is it that someone in
France would go to the trouble and expense of sending
someone like him to do ye harm, when they could be content
just to leave ye be in America?”  He hesitated. “Perhaps … the
Baron Amandine is some relation to ye?”
The notion seemed the stuf f of romances, and likely the
sheerest moonshine. But at the same time, Jamie was at a loss
to th ink of some sensible reason  for a French nobleman to be
hunting a brothel-born bastard across two continents.
Fer gus n odded, but didn’ t reply at once. He was wearing his
hook today , rather than the bran-stuf fed glove he wore for
formal occasions, and delicately scratched his nose with the tip
before answering.
“For a long time,” he said at last, “when I was small, I
pretended to myself that I was the bastard of some great man.
All orphans do this, I think,” he added dispassionately . “It
makes life easier to bear , to pretend that it will not always be
as it is, that someone will co me and restore you to your
rightful place in the world.”
He shrugged.
“Then I  grew older , and knew  this was not true. No one
would c ome to rescue me. But t hen—” He turned his head and
gave Jamie a smile of surpassing sweetness.
“Then I grew old er still, and discovered that, after all, it was
true. I am  the son of a great man.”
The hook touched Jamie’ s hand, hard and capable.
“I wish for nothing more.” AE FOND KISS
 W ilmington, colony of North Carolina
 April 18, 1777
 
T HE HEADQUAR TERS of the W ilmington Gazette
were ea sy to find. The embers  had cooled, but the all-too-
familiar reek of burning was still thick in the air . A roughly
dressed gentlem an in a slouch  hat was poking through the
charred timbers in a dubious way , but left of f at Jamie’ s hailing
him and made his way out of the wreckage, lifting his feet
high in ginger avoidance.
“Are ye  the proprietor of the ne wspaper , sir?” Jamie asked,
extending a hand to help him over a pile of half-burnt books
that sprawled over the threshold. “My sympathies, if so.”
“Oh, no,” the man replied, wiping smudges of soot from his
fingers onto a la r ge, filthy handkerchief, which he then passed
to Jamie . “Amos Crupp, he’d be  the printer . He’ s gone, though
—lit out when t hey burnt the shop. I’m Herbert Longfield; I
own the land. D id own the shop,” he added, with a rueful
glance behind him. “Y ou woul dn’ t be a salvor , would you?
Got a nice lump of iron, there.”
Fer gus and Marsali’ s printing press was now evidently the
sole press in operation between Charleston and Newport. The
Gazette’ s  pr ess stood twisted and b lackened amid the
wreckage: still recognizable, but beyond salvage as anything
save scrap.
“How long ago did it happen?” I asked.
“Night b efore la st. Just after m idnight. It was well a-gone
before the bucket brigade could get started.”
“An accident with the furnace?” Jamie asked. He bent and
picked up one of the scattered pamphlets.
Longfield laughed cynically .
“Not from around here, are you?  Y ou said you were looking
for Amo s?” He glanced warily from Jamie to me and backagain. He wasn’ t likely to confide anything to strangers of
unknown political af filiations.
“James Fraser ,” Jamie said, reaching out to shake his hand
firmly . “My wife, Claire. Who was it? The Sons of Liberty?”
Longfield’ s eyebrows arched high.
“Y ou really aren’ t from around here.” He smiled, but not
happily . “Amos was with the Sons. Not quite one of ‘em,
maybe, but of t heir mind. I tol d him to walk a narrow road
with wh at he wrote and what h e printed in the paper , and he
mostly t ried. But these days, it doesn’ t take much. A whisper
of tr eason, and a  man’ s beaten h alf to death in the street, tarred
and feathered, burnt out—killed, even.”
He eyed Jamie consideringly .
“So you  didn’ t know Amos. Ma y I ask what your business
with him was?”
“I ha d a question regarding a bit of news that was published
in the Gazette . Y e  say Crupp’ s gone. D’ye ken where I might
find him? I mean him nay ill,” he added.
Mr . Lo ngfield glanced thoug htfully at me, apparently
gauging the prospects that a man bound on political violence
would b ring his wife along. I smiled, trying to look as
respectably charming as possib le, and he smiled uncertainly
back. He had a long upper lip that gave him the aspect of a
rather worried camel, this being substantially enhanced by his
eccentric dentition.
“No, I don’ t,” he said, turning back to Jamie with the air of
a ma n making u p his mind. “He did have a business partner ,
though, and a devil. Might be that one of them would know
what you’re looking for?”
Now it was Jamie’ s turn to size up Longfield. He made his
own mind up in an instant, and handed the pamphlet to me.
“It might be. A small item of news regarding a house fire in
the mountains was published last year . I wish to discover who
might have given that item to the newspaper .”Longfield frowned, puzzled, and scratched at his long upper
lip, leaving a smudge of soot.
“I do n’ t recall th at, myself. But then—well, I tell you what,
sir . I was bound to see Geor ge Humphries—that’ s Amos’ s
business partne r—after looking  over the premises …” He
looked over his shoulder , grimacing. “Why don’ t you come
along with me and ask your question?”
“That’ s most obliging of ye, sir .” Jamie flicked an eyebrow
at me, as a sign al that I was no longer required for window
dressing and thus might go abo ut my own business. I wished
Mr . Lon gfield good day , accordingly , and went to forage in the
fleshpots of W ilmington.
Business here was somewhat better than it was in New
Bern. W ilmington had a deepwater harbor , and while the
English blockade had of necessity af fected importing and
exporting, local  boats and coastal packets still came into the
port. W ilmington also was substantially lar ger and still boasted
a t hrivin g market in the town square, where I spent a pleasant
hour collecting herbs and picking up local gossip, before
acquiring a cheese roll for my lunch, whereupon I wandered
down to the harbor to eat it.
I str olled casually along, hoping to spot the vessel that
might b e carrying us to Scotlan d, but saw nothing at anchor
that look ed in any way lar ge eno ugh for such a voyage. But of
course—DeLancey Hall had said that we would need to
embark on a sm all ship, perhaps his own fishing ketch, and
slip out of the harbor to rendezvous with the lar ger ship at sea.
I s at down on a  bollard to eat,  drawing a small crowd of
interested seagulls, who floa ted down like overweight
snowflakes to surround me.
“Think again, mate,” I said, pointing a monitory finger at
one par ticularly intransigent specimen, who was sidling
toward my feet, eyeing my bask et. “It’ s my  lunch.” I still had
the half-burnt pamphlet Jamie had handed me; I flapped it
vigorously at the gulls, who whirled up in a screech of alarmbut then resettled round me, at a slightly more respectful
distance, beady eyes all focused on the roll in my hand.
“Ha,” I said to t hem, and moved the basket behind my feet,
just in case. I ke pt a good grip on my roll and one eye on the
gulls. Th e other was free to survey the harbor . A British man-
of-war was anchored a little w ay out, and the sight of the
Union Jack flying from its bow gave me a peculiarly
paradoxical feeling of pride and unease.
The prid e was reflexive. I’d been an Englishwoman all my
life. I’d served Great Britain in hospitals, on battlefields—in
duty and with honor—and I’d seen many of my countrymen
and wom en fall in that same service. While the Union Jack I
saw now was sl ightly dif ferent in design to the one I’d lived
with, it was ide ntifiably the same flag, and I felt the same
instinctive lift of the heart at sight of it.
At the same time, I was all too aware of the menace that that
flag now posed to me and mine. The ship’ s upper gunports
were open; evidently some dri ll was being conducted, for I
saw the cannon rolled rapidly in  and out, in succession, blunt
snouts poking out, then drawing in, like the heads of
pugnacious gop hers. There had been two  m en-of -war in the
harbor t he day before; the other had gone … where? On a
particular missio n—or merely cruising restlessly up and down
outside the harbor mouth, ready  to board, seize, fire upon, or
sink any ship that looked suspicious?
I couldn’ t think of anything that would look more
suspicious than the ship belonging to Mr . Hall’ s smuggling
friend.
I thought again of the mysterious Mr . Beauchamp. France
was still neutral; we would be a good deal safer in a ship
flying French colors. Safer from the depredations of the
British Navy , at least. As for B eauchamp’ s own motives … I
reluctantly accep ted Fer gus’ s desire to have nothing to do with
the man, but still wondered what on earth Beauchamp’ s
interest in Fer gus could be.I a lso still wond ered whether he might have any connection
to m y own fam ily of Beauchamps, but there was no way of
knowing; Uncle Lamb had done a rudimentary family
genealogy , I knew—mostly for my sake—but I’d paid no
attention to it. W here was it now ? I wondered. He’d given it to
me a nd Frank w hen we married, neatly typed up and put in a
manila folder .
Perhaps I’d mention Mr . Beauchamp in my next letter to
Brianna. She’d have all our old  family records—the boxes of
ancient income -tax forms, the collections of her own
schoolwork and  art projects…. I smiled at the memory of the
clay dinosaur she’d made at the age of eight, a toothy creature
leaning drunkenly to one side, a small cylindrical object
hanging from its jaws.
“That’ s a mammal he’ s eating,” she had informed me.
“What happened to the mammal’ s legs?” I’d asked.
“They fell of f when the dinosaur stepped on it.”
The memory had distracted me for a moment, and a bold
gull sw ooped low and struck my hand, knocking the last
remnant of my roll to the ground, where it was instantly
engulfed by a shrieking crowd of its fellows.
I sa id a bad word—the gull had left a bleeding scratch
across the back of my hand—a nd, picking up the pamphlet,
flung it into the midst of the scrabbling birds. It hit one of
them in the head, and the bird rolled over in a mad flutter of
wings and pages that dispersed the mob, who all flapped of f,
yelling gull curses, leaving not a crumb behind.
“Ha,” I said ag ain, with a certain grim satisfaction. W ith
some ob scure twentieth-century inhibition against littering—
certainly no such notions ex isted here—I retrieved the
pamphlet, which  had come apart into several pieces, and tidied
them back into a rough rectangle.
An Examination  of Mer cy , it was titled, with a subtitle
reading, Thoughts upon the Natur e of D ivine Compassion, its
Manifestation within the Human Bosom, and the Instruction ofits Inspiration to the Impr ovement of the Individual and
Mankind . Possib ly not one of Mr . Crupp’ s bestselling titles, I
thought, stuf fing it into the end of my basket.
Which led me to another thought. I wondered whether
Roger would see it in an archiv e someday . I rather thought he
might.
Did that mean that we—or I—ought to be doing things on
purpose to ensure our appearan ce in said record? Given that
most of the things that made th e press in any era were war ,
crime, tragedy , and other hideous disasters, I rather thought
not. My few bru shes with notoriety had not been pleasant, and
the last thing I wanted Roger to find was a report of my being
hanged for bank robbery , executed for witchcraft, or having
been pecked to death by vengeful gulls.
No, I conclud ed. I’d best just tell Bree about Mr .
Beauchamp and the Beauchamp family genealogy , and if
Roger wanted to poke about in that , well and good. Granted,
I’d never know if he found Mr . Percival in the list, but if so,
Jem and  Mandy would have a little further knowledge of their
family tree.
Now , wh ere was  it, that folder?  The last time I’d seen it, it
had been in Frank’ s of fice, sitting on his filing cabinet. I
remembered it distinctly , because Uncle Lamb had rather
whimsically drawn what I assumed to be the family coat of—
“I beg your pardon, madam,” a deep voice said respectfully
behind me. “I see that you—”
Jarred abruptly from my memory , I turned blankly toward
the voice, thinking vaguely that I knew—
“Jesus H . Roose velt Christ!” I blurted, leaping to my feet.
“Y ou!”
I took a step backward, stumbled over the basket, and nearly
fell into the harbor , saved only  by T om Christie’ s instinctive
grab for my arm.
He jerke d me away from the e dge of the quay and I fell
against his chest. He recoiled as  though I were made of moltenmetal, th en seized me in his arms, pressed me hard against
himself, and kissed me with passionate abandon.
He broke of f, p eered into my face, and gasped, “Y ou’re
dead!”
“W ell, no,” I said, stunned into apology .
“I beg— I beg your pardon,” he managed, letting his arms
drop. “I —I—I—” He looked white as a ghost, and I rather
thought he  might fall into the harbor . I doubted that I looked
much better , but I did at least have my feet under me.
“Y ou’d better sit down,” I said.
“I—not here,” he said abruptly .
He was right. The quay was a  very  public place, and our
little r encontr e  had attracted considerable notice. A couple of
idlers were staring openly , nud ging each other , and we were
collecting slightly less-obvious glances from the traf fic of
merchants, seamen, and dock  laborers going about their
business. I was beginning to re cover from the shock, enough
to think.
“Y ou have a roo m? Oh, no—that won’ t do, will it?” I could
imagine all too well what sor ts of stories would be flying
round to wn with in minutes of ou r leaving the docks; if we left
and repaired to Mr . Christie’ s—I couldn’ t think of him
presently as anything but “Mr . Christie”—room …
“The ordinary ,” I said firmly . “Come on.”
 
IT W AS ONL Y A FEW minutes’ walk to Symonds’
ordinary , and we passed those m inutes in total silence. I stole
occasional glances at him, though, both to assure myself that
he wasn’ t  a ghost and to assess his current situation.
The latt er seem ed tolerable; he was decently dressed in a
dark gray suit, w ith clean linen, and if he was not fashionable
—I b it my lip at the thought of T om Christie being fashionable
—he was at least not shabby .Otherwise, he looked very much as I’d last seen him—well,
no, I corrected m yself. He actually looked much better . I’d last
seen him in the extremity of exhausted grief, shredded by the
tragedy of his daughter ’ s death and its subsequent
complications. My last sight of him had been on the Cruizer ,
the Briti sh ship on which Governor Martin had taken refuge
when he was driven out of the colony , almost two years ago.
At that point, M r . Christie had declared, first, his intent to
confess to the murder of his daughter—of which I was accused
—secondly , his love for me, and thirdly , his intent to be
executed in my place. All of which made his sudden
resurrection not merely surpri sing but more than slightly
awkward.
Adding to the awkwardness was the question as to what—if
anything—he knew about the fate of his son, Allan, who had
been responsi ble for Malva Christie’ s death. The
circumstances were nothing that any father ought to have to
hear , and panic gripped me at the thought that I might have to
tell him.
I g lance d at him again. His face was deeply lined, but he
was neither gaunt nor overtly haunted. He wore no wig,
though his wiry salt-and-pepper hair was close-clipped as
always, matching his neatly trimmed beard. My face tingled,
and I barely kep t myself from scrubbing my hand across my
mouth to  erase the feeling. He w as clearly disturbed—well, so
was I—but had g ot himself back under control, and opened the
door of the ordinary for me w ith impeccable courtesy . Only
the twitch of a muscle beside his left eye betrayed him.
I fel t as though my entire body was twitching, but Phaedre,
serving in the taproom, glanced at me with no more than mild
interest and a cordial nod. Of course, she’d never met Thomas
Christie, and while she’d doubtless heard about the scandal
following my arrest, she wouldn’ t connect the gentleman
accompanying me with it.
W e found a table by the window in the dining room, and sat
down.“I thought you were dead,” I said abruptly . “What did you
mean, you thought I  was dead?”
He opened his mouth to answ er but was interrupted by
Phaedre, who came to serve us, smiling pleasantly .
“I get you something, sir , ma’am? Y ou wanting food?
W e’ve a nice h am today , roast taters, and Mrs. Symonds’ s
special mustard ‘n raisin sauce to go along of it.”
“No,” Mr . Christie said. “I— just a cup of cider , if ye
please.”
“Whisky ,” I said. “A lot of it.”
Mr . Christie looked scandalized, but Phaedre only laughed
and whisked of f, the grace of her movement attracting the
quiet admiration of most of the male patrons.
“Y e haven’ t changed,” he observed. His eyes traveled over
me, intense, taking in every deta il of my appearance. “I ought
to have known ye by your hair .”
His voice was disapproving, but tinged with a reluctant
amusement; he had always been vociferous in his disapproval
of my refusal t o wear a cap or otherwise restrain my hair .
“W anton,” he’d called it.
“Y es, you should,” I said, reaching up to smooth the hair in
question, which was considerably the worse for recent
encounters. “Y ou didn’ t recognize me ‘til I turned round,
though, did you? What made you speak to me?”
He h esitated, but then nodded toward my basket, which I’d
set on the floor beside my chair .
“I saw that ye had one of my tracts.”
“What?” I said blankly , but looked where he was looking
and saw  the singed pamphlet on Divine Compassion  sticking
out from  under a cabbage. I reached down and pulled it out,
only now noticing the author:  by M r . T . W . Christie, MA,
University of Edinbur gh .
“What does the ‘W’ stand for?” I asked, laying it down.He blinked.
“W arren,” he replied rather gruf fly . “Where in God’ s name
did ye come from?”
“My father always claimed he’d  found me under a cabbage
leaf in the gard en,” I replied flippantly . “Or did you mean
today? If so—the King’ s Arms.”
He was beginni ng to look a little less shocked, his normal
irritation at my lack of womanly decorum drawing his face
back into its usual stern lines.
“Don’ t be facetious. I was told that ye were dead,” he said,
accusingly . “Y ou and your entire family were burnt up in a
fire.”
Phaedre, delive ring the drinks, glanced at me, eyebrows
raised.
“She ain’ t looking too crispy r ound the edges, sir , if you
pardon my mention of it.”
“Thank ye for t he observation,”  he said between his teeth.
Phaedre exchanged a glance of amusement with me, and went
of f again, shaking her head.
“Who told you that?”
“A man named McCreary .”
I m ust have look ed blank, for he added, “from Brownsville.
I met him here— in W ilmington, I mean—in late January . He
had just come d own from the mountain, he said, and told me
of the fire. W as  there a fire?”
“W ell, yes, there was,” I said slowly , wondering whether—
and how  much— to tell him of the truth of that . V ery little, in a
public place, I decided. “Mayb e it was Mr . McCreary , then,
who placed the notice of the f ire in the newspaper—but he
can’ t have.” The original notice  had appeared in 1776, Roger
had said—nearly a year before the fire.
“I placed it,” Christie said. Now it was my turn to blink.“Y ou what? When?” I took a good-sized mouthful of
whisky , feeling that I needed it more than ever .
“Directly I heard of it. Or—well, no,” he corrected. “A few
days thereafter . I … was very m uch distressed at the news,” he
added, lowering  his eyes and looking away from me for the
first time since we’d sat down.
“Ah. I’m sorry ,” I said, lowering  my own voice, and feeling
rather apologetic—though why I should feel apologetic for not
having been burnt up …
He cleared his throat.
“Y es. W ell. It, er , seemed to me that some … something
should be done. Some formal observance of your—your
passing.” He looked up then, g ray eyes direct. “I could not
abide th e thought that you—all of you,” he added, but it was
clearly an afterthought, “should simply vanish from the earth,
with no formal marking of the—the event.”
He took a deep breath, and a tentative sip of the cider .
“Even if  a proper funeral had b een held, there would be no
point in my ret urning to Fraser ’ s Ridge, even if I—well. I
could not. So I thought I would at least make a record of the
event here. After all,” he adde d more softly , looking away
again, “I could not lay flowers on your grave.”
The whisky had steadied me a bit, but also rasped my throat
and mad e it dif ficult to talk when hampered by emotion. I
reached out and touched his h and briefly , then cleared my
throat, finding momentarily neutral ground.
“Y our hand,” I said. “How is it?”
He look ed up, surprised, but the taut lines of his face
relaxed a bit.
“V ery well, I thank you. See?” He turned over his right
hand, di splaying a lar ge Z-shaped scar upon the palm, well
healed but still pink.
“Let me see.”His hand was cold. W ith an assumption of casualness, I took
it in mine, turn ing it, bending the fingers to assess their
flexibility and degree of movem ent. He was right: it was  doing
well; the movement was nearly normal.
“I—did the exercises you set m e,” he blurted. “I do them
every day .”
I looked up to find him regarding me with a sort of
anguished solemnity , his cheeks now flushed above his beard,
and realized that this ground was not nearly so neutral as I’d
thought. Before I could let go  his hand, it turned in mine,
covering my fingers—not tig htly , but suf ficiently that I
couldn’ t free myself without a noticeable ef fort.
“Y our h usband.” He stopped dead, having obviously not
thought of Jamie at all to this point. “He is alive, too?”
“Er , yes.”
T o his credit, he didn’ t grimace at this news, but nodded,
exhaling.
“I am—glad to hear it.”
He sat in silence  for a moment, looking at his undrunk cider .
He was still holding my hand. W ithout looking up, he said in a
low voic e, “Doe s he … know? What I—how I—I did not tell
him the reason for my confession. Did you?”
“Y ou mean your”—I groped for some suitable way of
putting it—”your , um, very gallant feelings toward me? W ell,
yes, he does; he was very s ympathetic toward you. He
knowing from experience what it’ s like to be in love with me, I
mean,” I added tartly .
He a lmost laughed at that, whic h gave me an opportunity to
extricate my fingers. He did no t, I noticed, inform me that he
wasn’ t  in love with me any longer . Oh, dear .
“W ell, a nyway , we aren’ t dead,” I said, clearing my throat
again. “What about you? Last time I saw you …”
“Ah.” He looked less than happy , but gathered himself,
changing gears, and nodded. “Y our rather hasty departure fromthe Cruizer  left  Gover nor Martin withou t an amanuensis.
Discovering that I was to some degree literate”—his mouth
twisted a little—”and could write a fair hand, thanks to your
ministrations, he had me removed from the brig.”
I wasn’ t surprised at that. Dri ven completely out of his
colony , Governor Martin was obliged to conduct his business
from the tiny ca ptain’ s cabin of the British ship on which he
had taken refuge. Such business perforce consisted entirely of
letters—all of which must be not only composed, drafted, and
fair -copied but then reproduced several times each. A copy
was required first for the  governor ’ s own of ficial
correspondence files, then for each person or entity having
some interest in the subject of the letter , and, finally , several
additional copies of any letters going to England or Europe
must be made, because they would be sent by dif ferent ships,
in ho pes that at least one copy would make it through, should
the o thers be sun k, seized by pirates or privateers, or otherwise
lost in transit.
My hand ached at the mere memory of it. The exigencies of
bureaucracy in a time before the  magic of Xerox had kept me
from rotting in a  cell; no wonde r they had freed T om Christie
from durance vile as well.
“Y ou se e?” I said, rather pleas ed. “If I hadn’ t fixed your
hand, he’d likely have had you either executed on the spot or
at least sent back to shore and immured in some dungeon.”
“I am  duly grate ful,” he said, with extreme dryness. “I was
not, at the time.”
Christie had spent several mon ths as de facto  secretary to
the gove rnor . In late November , though, a ship had arrived
from England, bearing orders to the governor—essentially
ordering him to subdue the colo ny , though of fering no troops,
armament, or useful suggestions as to how this might be
managed—and an of ficial secretary .
“At this point, the governor was faced with the prospect of
disposing of me. W e had … become acquainted, working in
such close quarters …”“And as you we re no longer quite an anonymous murderer ,
he didn’ t want to yank the quill out of your hand and hang you
from the yardarm,” I finished for him. “Y es, he’ s actually
rather a kind man.”
“He is,” Christie said thoughtfu lly . “He has not had an easy
time of it, poor fellow .”
I nodded. “He told you about his little boys?”
“A ye, he  did.” His lips compress ed—not out of anger , but to
control his own emotion. Martin and his wife had lost three
small sons, one after another , to  the plagues and fevers of the
colony; small wonder if hearin g of the governor ’ s pain had
reopened T om Christie’ s own w ounds. He shook his head a
little, though, and returned to the subject of his deliverance.
“I had … told him a bit about … about my daughter .” He
picked up the barely touched cup of cider and drank half of it
of f a t a swallow , as if dying of thirst. “I admitted privately to
him that my confession had be en false—though I stated also
that I was certain of your innoc ence,” he assured me. “And if
you shou ld ever be arrested agai n for the crime, my confession
would stand.”
“Thank you for that,” I said, and wondered with still greater
uneasiness whether he knew who had  killed Malva. He had to
have suspected,  I thought—but that was a long way from
having t o know , let alone having to know why . And no one
knew where Allan was now—save me, Jamie, and Y oung Ian.
Governor Martin had received this admission with some
relief, and decided that the only thing to do in the
circumstances was to put Christie ashore, there to be dealt with
by the civil authorities.
“There ar en’ t  any  civil authorities anymore,” I said. “Are
there?”
He shook his head.
“None capable of dealing with s uch a matter . There are still
gaols and sherif fs, but neither courts nor magistrates. Under
the circ umstances”—he almost smiled, dour though theexpression was—”I thought it a waste of time to try to find
someone to whom to surrender myself.”
“But you  said you had sent a copy of your confession to the
newspaper ,” I said. “W eren’ t you, er , received coldly by the
people in New Bern?”
“By the grace of divine Providence, the newspaper there
had ceased its operations before my confession was received
by t hem, the pri nter being a Loyalist. I believe Mr . Ashe and
his frien ds called upon him, a nd he wisely decided to find
another mode of business.”
“V ery wise,” I said dryly . Jo hn Ashe was a friend of
Jamie’ s, a leading light of the local Sons of Liberty , and the
man who had instigated the b urning of Fort Johnston and
ef fectively driven Governor Martin into the sea.
“There was some gossip,” he sa id, looking away again, “but
it was overwhelm ed by the rush  of public events. No one quite
knew wh at had happened on Fraser ’ s Ridge, and after a time it
became fixed in everyone’ s mind simply that some personal
tragedy had befallen me. People came to regard me with a sort
of … sympathy .” His mouth t wisted; he wasn’ t the sort to
receive sympathy with any graciousness.
“Y ou seem to be  thriving,” I said , with a nod at his suit. “Or
at least you aren’ t sleeping in the gutter and living of f
discarded fish heads from the docks. I had no idea that the
tract-writing business was profitable.”
He’d gone back to his normal  color during the previous
conversation, but flushed up again at this—with annoyance,
this time.
“It isn’ t, ” he snapped. “I take pupils. And I—I preach of a
Sunday .”
“I can’ t imagine anyone better for the job,” I said, amused.
“Y ou’ve always had a talent for telling everyone what’ s wrong
with them in Biblical terms. H ave you become a cler gyman,
then?”His color grew deeper , but he c hoked down his choler and
answered me evenly .
“I w as nearly de stitute upon my arrival here. Fish heads, as
you say—and the occasional bi t of bread or soup given by a
New Light congregation. I cam e in order to eat, but remained
for t he s ervice o ut of courtesy . I  thus heard a sermon given by
the Reverend Peterson. It—remained with me. I sought him
out, and we … spoke. One thing led to another .” He glanced
up at me, his eyes fierce. “The Lord does answer prayer , ye
know .”
“What had you prayed for?” I asked, intrigued.
That too k him back a bit, though it had been an innocent
question, asked from simple curiosity .
“I—I—” He broke of f and stare d at me, frowning. “Y ou are
a most uncomfortable woman!”
“Y ou w ouldn’ t be the first per son to think so,” I assured
him. “And I don’ t mean to pry . I just … wondered.”
I c ould see the ur ge to get up and leave warring with the
compulsion to bear witness to whatever had happened to him.
But he was a stubborn man, and he stayed put.
“I … asked why ,” he said at last, very evenly . “That’ s all.”
“W ell, it worked for Job,” I observed. He looked startled,
and I nearly lau ghed; he was al ways startled at the revelation
that any one other than himself had read the Bible. He got a
grip, though, and glowered at m e in something more like his
usual fashion.
“And now you are here,” he sa id, making it sound like an
accusation. “I suppose your husband has formed a militia—or
joined o ne. I have had enough o f war . I am surprised that your
husband has not.”
“I d on’ t think it ’ s precisely a ta ste for war ,” I said. I spoke
with an edge, but something in him compelled me to add, “It’ s
that he feels he was born to it.”Something flickered deep in T om Christie’ s eyes—surprise?
Acknowledgment?
“He is,” he said  quietly . “But surely—” He didn’ t finish the
thought, but instead asked abruptly , “What are you doing here,
though? In W ilmington?”
“Looking for a ship,” I said. “W e’re going to Scotland.”
I’d always had a talent for star tling him, but this one took
the biscuit. He h ad lifted his m ug to drink, but upon hearing
my declaration, abruptly spewed cider across the table. The
subsequent choking and wheezing attracted a good bit of
attention, and I sat back, trying to look less conspicuous.
“Er … we’ll be going to Ed inbur gh, for my husband’ s
printing press,” I said. “Is there  anyone you’d like me to see
for y ou? Deliver a message, I mean? Y ou have a brother there,
I think you said.”
His head  shot up and he glared at me, eyes streaming. I felt
a spasm  of horror at the sudden recollection and could have
bitten my tongue of f at the root. His brother had had an af fair
with T om ’ s wife  while T om wa s imprisoned in the Highlands
after the  Rising, and his wife had then poisoned his brother
and subsequently been executed for witchcraft.
“I’m so sorry ,” I said, low-voiced. “For give me, please. I
didn’ t—”
He seized my hand in both of his, so hard and so abruptly
that I gasped, and a few he ads turned curiously in our
direction. He paid no attention, but leaned toward me across
the table.
“Listen to me,” he said, low and  fierce. “I have loved three
women. One was a witch and  a whore, the second only a
whore. Y e well may be a witch yourself, but it makes nay whit
o’ d if ference. The love of you h as led me to my salvation, and
to what I thought was my peace, once I thought ye dead.”
He s tared at me and shook his h ead slowly , his mouth going
tight for a moment in the seam of his beard.“And here you are.”
“Er … yes.” I felt once more a s though I should apologize
for not being dead, but didn’ t.
He drew a deep breath and let it out in a sigh.
“I shall have no peace while ye live, woman.”
Then he lifted m y hand and kissed it, stood up, and walked
away .
“Mind,” he said, turning at the door to look back at me over
his shoulder , “I dinna say I regret it.”
I picked up the glass of whisky and drained it.
I WE NT ABOUT THE REST o f my errands in a daze—
not entirely induced by whisky . I hadn’ t any idea what to think
of the resurrection of T om Christie, but was thoroughly
unsettled by it. S till, there seemed nothing, really , to do  about
him, and so I went on to the  shop of Stephen Moray , a
silversmith from Fife, to commission a pair of sur gical
scissors. Luckily , he proved an intelligent man, who appeared
to understand both my specifications and the purpose behind
them, an d promised to have the scissors made within three
days. Heartened by this, I ventured a slightly more problematic
commission.
“Needles?” Moray knit his white brows in puzzlement. “Y e
dinna require a silversmith for—”
“Not sewing needles. These are longer , quite thin, and
without an eye. They have a medical purpose. And I should
like you to make them from this.”
His eyes  went wide as I laid what appeared to be a gold
nugget the size of a walnut on the counter . It was in fact a bit
of one of the Fr ench ingots, hacked of f and hammered into a
lump, then rubbed with dirt by way of disguise.
“My husband won it in a card game,” I said, with the tone of
mingled pride and apology that seemed appropriate to such an
admission. I didn’ t want anyone thinking that there was goldon Fraser ’ s Ridge—in any form . Boosting Jamie’ s reputation
as a card  player  wasn’ t likely to  do any harm; he was already
well known—if not quite notorious—for his abilities in that
line.
Moray f rowned a bit over the written specifications for the
acupuncture needles, but agreed to make them. Luckily , he
appeared never to have heard of voodoo dolls, or I might have
had a bit more trouble.
W ith the visit to the silversmith and a quick trip through the
market square for spring onion s, cheese, peppermint leaves,
and anything else available in  the herbal line, it was late
afternoon before I came back to the King’ s Arms.
Jamie was playing cards in the  taproom, with Y oung Ian
watching over his shoulder , but he saw me come in and, giving
over his hand to Ian, came to take my basket, following me up
the stairs to our room.
I turned  round inside the door , b ut before I could speak, he
said, “I know T om Christie’ s alive. I met him in the street.”
“He kissed me,” I blurted.
“A ye, I heard,” he said, eyeing me with what might have
been amusement. For some reason, I found that very annoying.
He saw that , and the amusement deepened.
“Like it, did ye?”
“It wasn’ t funny!”
The amusement didn’ t go away , but it retreated a bit.
“Did  ye like it?” he repeated, but now there was curiosity in
his voice, rather than teasing.
“No.” I turned a way abruptly . “That—I hadn’ t time to … to
think about it.”
W ithout warning, he put a hand behind my neck and kissed
me b riefly . And by simple reflex , I slapped him. Not hard—I’d
tried to pull back even as I struck—and clearly I hadn’ t hurthim. I was as surprised and discomfited as though I’d knocked
him flat.
“Doesna take much thought, do es it?” he said lightly , and
stepped back, surveying me with interest.
“I’m so rry ,” I said, feeling simultaneously mortified and
angry—and ang rier still in that I didn’ t understand why I was
angry in the slightest. “I didn’ t mean to—I’m sorry .”
He tilted his head to one side, eyeing me.
“Had I better go and kill him?”
“Oh, don’ t be ridiculous.” I fidgeted, untying my pocket,
not wanting to meet his eyes. I was prickly , discomfited,
irritated—and the more discomfited by not really knowing
why .
“It was an honest question, Sassenach,” he said quietly .
“Not a serious o ne, maybe—but  honest. I think ye maybe owe
me an honest answer .”
“Of course I don’ t want you to kill him!”
“D’ye want me to tell you why ye slapped me, instead?”
“Why—” I stood with my mouth open for a second, then
closed it. “Y es. I do.”
“I to uched ye ag ainst your will,” he said, his eyes intent on
mine. “Didn’ t I?”
“Y ou did,” I sai d, and breathed a little easier . “And so did
T om Christie. And, no, I didn’ t like  it.”
“But not on T om’ s account,” he finished. “Poor fellow .”
“He wo uldn’ t want your sympathy ,” I said tartly , and he
smiled.
“He would not. But he’ s got it,  nonetheless. Still, I’m glad
of it,” he added.
“Glad of what? That he’ s alive—or—surely not that he
thinks he’ s in love with me?” I said, incredulous.“Dinna belittle his feelings, S assenach,” he said, more
quietly . “He’ s laid down his life for ye once. I’d trust him to do
it again.”
“I didn’ t want him to do it the first time!”
“Y ou’re bothered,” he said, in a tone of clinical interest.
“Y es, I am bloody bothered!” I said. “And”—the thought
struck m e and I gave him a hard look—”so are you.” I recalled
suddenly that he’d said he’d m et T om Christie in the street.
What had T om said to him?
He tilted his head in mild negation, but didn’ t deny it.
“I willna say I like  T homas  Christie,” he said cons ideringly ,
“but I respect him. And I am  ver ra m uch ple ased to find him
alive. Y e didna do wrong to grieve him, Sassenach,” he said
gently . “I did, too.”
“I ha dn’ t even th ought of that.” In the shock of seeing him, I
hadn’ t remembered, but I’d wept for him—and for his
children. “I don’ t regret it, though.”
“Good. The thing about T om Ch ristie,” he went on, “is that
he wants ye. Badly . But he doesna ken a thing about you.”
“And you do.” I left it somew here between question and
challenge, and he smiled. He turned and shot the bolt on the
door , the n crosse d the room and  drew the calico curtain on the
one small window , casting th e room into a pleasant blue
dimness.
“Oh, I’v e need and want in plen ty—but I’ve knowing, too.”
He w as standing very close, close enough that I had to look up
to him. “I’ve never kissed ye without knowing who ye were—
and that’ s a thin g poor T om will never know .” God, what had
T om told him?
My pulse, which had been jum ping up and down, settled
down to a quick, light thump, discernible in my fingertips.
“Y ou didn’ t know a thing about me when you married me.”
His hand closed gently on my behind.“No?”
“Besides that, I mean!”
He made a small Scottish sound in his throat, not quite a
chuckle.
“A ye, well, it’ s a wise man who kens what he doesna know
—and I learn fast, a nighean .”
He drew  me gently close then, and kissed me—with thought
and tenderness, with knowing—and with my full consent. It
didn’ t o bliterate my memory of T om Christie’ s impassioned,
blundering embrace, and I thought it wasn’ t meant to; it was
meant to show me the dif ference.
“Y ou can’ t  be jealous,” I said, a moment later .
“I can,” he said, not joking.
“Y ou can’ t possibly think—”
“I don’ t.”
“W ell, then—”
“W ell, then.” His eyes were dark as seawater in the dimness,
but t he expression in them was e ntirely readable, and my heart
beat faster . “I ke n what ye feel for T om Christie—and he told
me plai n what he feels for you. Surely ye ken that love’ s
nothing to do wi’ logic, Sassenach?”
Knowing a rhetorical question when I heard one, I didn’ t
bother answering that, but instead reached out and tidily
unbuttoned his shirt. There was nothing I could reasonably say
about T om Christie’ s feelings, but I had another language in
which to express my own. His heart was beating fast; I could
feel it as though I held it in my hand. Mine was, too, but I
breathed deep and took comfort in the warm familiarity of his
body , the soft crispness of the cinnamon-colored hairs of his
chest, and the g ooseflesh that raised them under my fingers.
While I was thus engaged, he slid his fingers into my hair ,
separating a lock which he viewed appraisingly .“It’ s not gone white yet. I suppose I’ve a little time, then,
before ye get too dangerous for me to bed.”
“Dangerous, forsooth,” I said, setting to work on the buttons
of his breeks. I wished he had on his kilt. “Exactly what do
you think I might do to you in bed?”
He scratched his chest consideringly , and rubbed absently at
the tiny knot o f scar tissue where he’d cut Jack Randall’ s
brand from his flesh.
“W ell, s o far , ye’ve clawed me, bitten me, stabbed me—
more than once—and—”
“I have not stabbed you!”
“Y e did , too,” he informed m e. “Y e stabbed me in the
backside wi’ your nasty wee needle spikes—fifteen times! I
counted—and th en a dozen tim es or more in the leg with a
rattlesnake’ s fang.”
“I was saving your bloody life!”
“I didna  say otherwise, did I? Y e’re no going to deny ye
enjoyed it, though, are ye?”
“W ell … not t he rattlesnake fang, so much. As for the
hypodermic …” My mouth twitched, despite myself. “Y ou
deserved it.”
He gave me a look of profound cynicism.
“Do nay harm, is it?”
“Besides, you were counting wh at I’d done to you in bed,” I
said, neatly returning to the point. “Y ou can’ t count the shots.”
“I was in bed!”
“I wasn’ t!”
“A ye, ye took unfair advantage,” he said, nodding. “I
wouldna hold that against ye, though.”
He’d go t my jacket of f and was busily untying my laces,
head bent in absorption.“How’d you like it if I  w ere jealous?” I asked the crow n of
his head.
“I’d like that fin e,” he replied, breath warm on my exposed
flesh. “And ye were. Of Laoghaire.” He looked up, grinning,
eyebrow raised. “Maybe ye still are?”
I sla pped him ag ain, and this tim e I meant it. He could have
stopped me but didn’ t.
“A ye, th at’ s what I thought,” he said, wiping a watering eye.
“W ill ye come to bed wi’ me, then? It’ll be just us,” he added.
 
IT W AS LA TE WHEN I wo ke; the room was dark,
though a slice of fading sky showed at the top of the curtain.
The fire hadn’ t y et been lit and the room was chilly , but it was
warm and cozy u nder the quilts, snug against Jamie’ s body . He
had turned onto his side, and I curled spoonlike against his
back and  put my arm over him, feeling the gentle rise and fall
of his breath.
It had  been just us. I’d worried, at the start, that the memory
of T om Christie and his awkward passion might fall between
us—but Jamie, evidently thinking the same thing and
determined to avoid any echo of T om’ s embrace that might
remind me, had started at the other end, kissing my toes.
Given the size of the room and the fact that the bed was
jammed tightly into one end o f it, he had been obliged to
straddle me in order to do this, and the combination of having
my f eet nibbled and the view fro m directly behind and beneath
a n aked Scotsman had been suf f icient to remove anything else
from my head.
W arm, safe, and calm now , I c ould think about the earlier
encounter witho ut feeling threatened, though. And I had  felt
threatened. Jamie had seen that. D’ye wa nt me to tell you why
ye slapped me? … I touched ye against your will .
He w as right; it was one of the  minor afteref fects of what
had happened to me when I h ad been abducted. Crowds ofmen made me nervous with no cause, and being grabbed
unexpectedly made me recoil and jerk away in panic. Why
hadn’ t I seen that?
Because I didn’ t want to think  about it, that’ s why . I still
didn’ t. W hat good would thinking do? Let things heal on their
own, if they would.
But even things that heal leave scars. The evidence of that
was literally in front of my face—pressed against it, in fact.
The scar s on Jamie’ s back had faded into a pale spiderweb,
with only a slight raised bit here or there, ridged under my
fingers when we made love, like  barbed wire beneath his skin.
I remembered T om Christie taunting him about them once, and
my jaw tightened.
I lai d a hand so ftly on his back , tracing one pale loop with
my thumb. He twitched in his sleep and I stilled, hand flat.
What m ight be coming? I won dered. For him. For me. I
heard T om Christie’ s sarcastic voice: I have had enough of
war . I am surprised that your husband has not .
“W ell e nough for you ,” I muttered under my breath.
“Coward.” T om Christie had been imprisoned as a Jacobite—
which he was, but not a sold ier . He’d been a commissary
supply of ficer in Charles Stuart’ s army . He’d risked his wealth
and his position—and lost both—but not his life or body .
Still, Ja mie did  respect him—which meant something,
Jamie being no mean judge of character . And I knew enough
from watching Roger to realize that becoming a cler gyman
was not the easy path that some people thought it. Roger was
not a coward, either , and I wondered how he would find his
path in the future?
I turned  over , restless. Supper was being prepared; I could
smell th e rich, saltwater smell of  fried oysters from the kitchen
below , borne on a wave of woodsmoke and roasting potatoes.
Jamie stirred a little and rolled  onto his back, but didn’ t
wake. T ime enough. He was  dreaming; I could see themovement of his eyes, twitchin g beneath sealed lids, and the
momentary tightening of his lips.
His body tightened, too, sudde nly hard beside me, and I
jerked back, startled. He growl ed low in his throat, and his
body arched with ef fort. He was making strangled noises,
whether shouting or screaming in his dream I didn’ t know , and
didn’ t wait to find out.
“Jamie—wake up!” I said sharply . I didn’ t touch him—I
knew better than to do that w hile he was in the grip of a
violent dream; he’d nearly bro ken my nose once or twice.
“W ake up!”
He gasped, caught his breath, and opened unfocused eyes.
Plainly he didn’ t know where he was, and I spoke to him more
gently , r epeating his name, reassuring him that he was all
right. He blinked, swallowed heavily , then turned his head and
saw me.
“Claire,” I said helpfully , seeing him groping for my name.
“Good,” he said hoarsely . He closed his eyes, shook his
head, and then opened them again. “All right, Sassenach?”
“Y es. Y ou?”
He nodded, closing his eyes again briefly .
“A ye, fine. I was dreaming about the house burning.
Fighting.” He snif fed. “Is something burning?”
“Supper , at a guess.” The savory smells from below had in
fact bee n interrupted by the acrid stench of smoke and
scorched food. “I think the stewpot boiled over .”
“Perhaps we’ll eat elsewhere tonight.”
“Phaedre said Mrs. Symonds had baked ham with mustard
and raisi n sauce at noon. There m ight be some left. Are you all
right?” I asked again. The roo m was cold, but his face and
breast were sheened with sweat.
“Oh, aye,” he replied, sitting up and rubbing his hands
vigorously through his hair . “That sort of dream, I can livewith.” H e shoved his hair out of his face and smiled at me. “Y e
look like a milkweed puf f, Sassenach. W ere ye sleeping
restless, too?”
“No,” I told him, getting up and  pulling my shift on before
groping for my hairbrush. “It w as the restless part befor e  we
fell asleep. Or do you not remember that bit?”
He l aughed, wiped his face, and  got up to use the chamber
pot, then pulled his shirt on.
“What about the other dreams?” I asked abruptly .
“What?” He emer ged from the shirt, looking quizzical.
“Y ou sai d, ‘That  sort of dream, I can live with.’ What about
the ones you can’ t live with?”
I s aw the lines of his face shiver like the surface of water
when you’ve thrown a pebble into it, and on impulse, reached
out and clutched his wrist.
“Don’ t hide,” I said softly . I held his eyes with mine,
keeping him from raising his mask. “T rust me.”
He d id look away then, but only to gather himself; he didn’ t
hide. When he g lanced back at me, it was all still there in his
eyes—confusion, embarrassment, humiliation, and the
vestiges of a pain long suppressed.
“I dream … som etimes …” he said haltingly , “about things
that were done to me against my will.” He breathed through
his nose, deep, exasperated. “ And I wake from it with a
cockstand and my balls throbbing and I want to go and kill
someone, starting with myself,” he ended in a rush, grimacing.
“It d oesna happen often,” he add ed, giving me a brief, direct
look. “A nd I never … I would n ever turn to you in the wake of
such a thing. Y e should know that.”
I tig htened my g rip on his wrist. I wanted to say , “Y ou could
—I wouldn’ t mind,”  for that was th e truth, and onc e I would
have said it without hesitation. But I knew a great deal more
now , and  had it been me, had I ever dreamed of Harley Boble
or the heavy , soft-bodied man and wakened from it aroused—and thank God  I never had—no, the last thing I would ever
have do ne woul d be to take that feeling and turn to Jamie, or
use his body to pur ge it.
“Thank you,” I said instead, q uietly . “For telling me,” I
added. “And for the knife.”
He nodded, and turned to pick up his breeks.
“I like ham,” he said. I REGRET …
 Long Island, colony of New Y ork
 September 1776
 
W ILLIAM WISHED he could speak to his father . It
wasn’ t, he assured himself, that  he wanted Lord John to exert
any influence; certainly not. He just wanted a bit of practical
advice. Lord John had returned to England, though, and
W illiam was on his own.
W ell, no t precisely on his own. He was at the moment in
char ge of a detachment of soldiers guarding a customs
checkpoint on the edge of Long Island. He slapped viciously at
a m osqu ito that lighted on his wrist, and, for once, obliterated
it. He wished he could do the same to Clarewell.
Lieutenant Edw ard Markham, Marquis of Clarewell.
Otherwise known—to W illiam and a couple of his more
intimate friends—as Chinless Ned, or the Ponce. W illiam
swatted at a cra wling sensation on his own prominent jaw ,
noticed that two of his men had  momentarily disappeared, and
stalked toward the wagon they had been inspecting, bellowing
their names.
Private W elch appeared from behind the wagon like a jack-
in-the-box, look ing startled and wiping his mouth. W illiam
leaned forward, snif fed his breath, and said briefly , “Char ges.
Where’ s Launfal?”
In th e w agon, ha stily concluding  a bar gain with the wagon’ s
owner for three bottles of the contraband brandywine that
gentleman was seeking to illicitly import. W illiam, grimly
slapping at the man-eating hordes of mosquitoes that swarmed
out of the nearby marshes, arrested the wagoneer , summoned
the othe r three men of his deta il, and told them of f to escort
the smug gler , W elch, and Launfal to the ser geant. He took up a
musket then and stood in the m iddle of the road, alone and
ferocious, his attitude daring anyone to try to pass.Ironically , thoug h the road had been busy all morning, no
one did try for some time, givi ng him opportunity to refocus
his bad temper on the thought of Clarewell.
Heir of a very  infl uential family , and one with  intimate ties
to Lord North, C hinless Ned had arrived in New Y ork a week
before W illiam and likewise been placed on Howe’ s staf f,
where he had nestled cozily into the woodwork, smarming
round General Howe—who, to his credit, tended to blink and
stare hard at the  Ponce, as thoug h trying to remember who the
devil he was—and Captain Pickering, the general’ s chief aide-
de-camp, a vain man, and one m uch more susceptible to Ned’ s
enthusiastic arse-creeping.
As a  result, Chinless had been routinely bagging the choicer
assignments, riding with the general on short exploratory
expeditions, atte nding him in meetings with Indian dignitaries
and the like, while W illiam and several other junior of ficers
were lef t to shuf fle papers and kick their heels. Hard cheese,
after the freedoms and excitements of intelligencing.
He coul d have stood the constr aints of life in quarters and
army bureaucracy . His father had schooled him thoroughly in
the necessity of restraint in trying circumstances, the
withstanding of boredom, the handling of dolts, and the art of
icy politeness as a weapon. Someone lacking W illiam’ s
strength of character , though, had snapped one day and, unable
to resist the po ssibilities for caricature conjured up by a
contemplation of Ned’ s profile, had drawn a cartoon of
Captain Pickering with his breeches round his ankles, engaged
in lectu ring the junior staf f and apparently ignorant of the
Ponce, emer gent headfirst and smirking from Pickering’ s arse.
W illiam had not drawn this bit of diversion—though he
rather wished he had—but had been discovered laughing at it
by Ned himself, who—in a rare show of manliness—had
punched W illiam in the nose. T he resultant brawl had cleared
the junior of ficers’ quarters, broken a few inconsequent items
of furniture, and resulted in W illiam, dripping blood onto his
shirtfront, standi ng to attention i n front of a cold-eyed CaptainPickering, the scurrilous cartoon laid out in evidence on the
desk.
W illiam had, of course, denied authorship of the thing but
declined to identify the artist. He’d used the icy-politeness
thing, which had worked to the extent that Pickering had not in
fact sent W illiam to the stockade. Merely to Long Island.
“Frigging fart-catcher ,” he muttered, glaring at an
approaching milkmaid with such ferocity that she stopped
dead, then edged past him, eyein g him with a wide-eyed alarm
that suggested she thought he might explode. He bared his
teeth at her , and  she emitted a startled squeak and scuttled of f
so fast that some of her milk slopped out of the buckets she
carried on a yoke across her shoulders.
That made him repentant; he w ished he could follow her
and apol ogize. But he couldn’ t; a pair of drovers were coming
down the road toward him, brin ging in a herd of pigs. W illiam
took one look a t the oncoming mass of heaving, squealing,
spotted hog flesh, tatter -eared and mud-besmeared, and
hopped nimbly up onto the bucket that served as his command
post. The drovers waved gaily a t him, shouting what might be
either greetings or insults—he wasn’ t sure they were even
speaking English, and didn’ t care to find out.
The pig s passed, leaving him amid a sea of hoof-churned
mud, liberally scattered with fresh droppings. He slapped at
the clou d of mosquitoes that had regathered inquisitively
round his head, and thought that he’d had just about enough.
He’d be en on Long Island for tw o weeks—which was thirteen
and a half days too long. Not quite long enough yet to make
him apologize to either Chinless or the captain, though.
“Lickspittle,” he muttered.
He did have an a lternative. And  the longer he spent out here
with the mosquitoes, the more attractive it began to look.
It w as far too long a ride fro m his customs outpost to
headquarters to make the journey twice each day . In
consequence, he’d been temporarily billeted on a man calledCulper a nd his two sisters. Culp er wasn’ t best pleased; his left
eye began to tw itch whenever he saw W illiam, but the two
elderly ladies made much of h im, and he returned the favor
when he could, bringing them the odd confiscated ham or flask
of cambric. He’d come in the night before with a flitch of good
bacon, t o have Miss Abigail Cu lper inform him in a whisper
that he had a visitor .
“Out a-smoking in the yard,” she’d said, inclining her
bonneted head toward the side of the house. “Sister wouldn’ t
let him smoke in the house, I’m afraid.”
He’d expected to find one of his friends, come to bear him
company or perhaps with new s of an of ficial pardon that
would bring him back from exile  on Long Island. Instead, he’d
found Captain Richardson, pipe in hand, meditatively
watching the Culpers’ rooster tread a hen.
“Pleasures of a bucolic life,” the captain remarked, as the
rooster f ell of f backward. The c ock staggered to his feet and
crowed in disheveled triumph, while the hen shook her
feathers into order and resumed pecking as though nothing had
happened. “V ery quiet out here, is it not?”
“Oh, yes,” W illiam said. “Y our servant, sir .”
In fa ct, it was not. Miss Beulah Culper kept a half-dozen
goats, w ho blatted day and night, though Miss Beulah assured
W illiam that they served to keep thieves out of the corncrib.
One of the crea tures at this point gave a wild braying laugh
from its pen, ca using Captain Richardson to drop his tobacco
pouch. S everal more of the goats commenced to utter loud
mehs , as though jeering.
W illiam bent and picked the p ouch up, keeping his face
tactfully blank, though his heart was pounding. Richardson
hadn’ t come all the way out to Long Island simply to pass the
time.
“Christ,” Richar dson muttered, with a look at the goats. He
shook his head, and gestured to ward the road. “W ill you walk
a bit with me, Lieutenant?”W illiam would, gladly .
“I heard a bit regarding your present situation.” Richardson
smiled. “I’ll have a word with Captain Pickering, if you like.”
“That’ s very kind of you, sir ,” W illiam said. “But I’m afraid
I can’ t apologize for something I haven’ t done.”
Richardson waved his pipe, dismissing it. “Pickering’ s got a
short temper , but he doesn’ t hold a grudge. I’ll see to it.”
“Thank you, sir .” And wha t do you want in r eturn ? W illiam
thought.
“There is a Captain Randall-Isaacs,” Richardson said
casually , “who is traveling withi n the month to Canada, where
he h as some military business to  transact. While there, though,
it is possible that he will meet with … a certain person who
may provide the army with valuable information. I have some
reason to  suppose that this person has little English, though—
and Captain Randall-Isaacs, alas, has no French. A traveling
companion fluent in that language might be … useful.”
W illiam nodded, but asked no questions. T ime enough for
that, if he decided to accept Richardson’ s commission.
They exchanged  commonplace s for the remainder of the
walk back, whereupon Richardson politely declined Miss
Beulah’ s invitation to take supper , and left with a reiterated
promise to speak to Captain Pickering.
Should h e do it? W illiam wondered later , listening to Abel
Culper ’ s wheezing snores below . The moon was full, and
while th e loft had no windows, he could feel its pull; he never
could sleep when the moon was full.
Ought he to ha ng on in New Y ork, in hopes either of
improving his position, or at le ast of eventually seeing some
action? Or cut his losses and take Richardson’ s new
commission?
His father would doubtless advise the former course of
action; an of ficer ’ s best chance of advancement and notice lay
in distinguishing himself in battle, not in the shady—andvaguely disreputable—realm of intelligencing. Still … the
routine and constraints of the army chafed, rather , after his
weeks of freedom. And he had  been useful, he knew .
What dif ference could one lieutenant make, buried under
the crus hing weight of the ranks above him, perhaps given
command of his own companies but still obliged to follow
orders, never allowed to act acco rding to his own judgment….
He g rinned up at the rafters, dimly visible a foot above his
face, thi nking what his uncle Ha l might have to say regarding
the judgment of junior of ficers.
But Uncle Hal w as much more than simply a career soldier;
he c ared passionately for his re giment: its welfare, its honor ,
the m en under his command. W illiam had not really thought
beyond the immediate future in terms of his own career with
the army . The American campaign wouldn’ t last long; what
next?
He w as rich—or would be, when he achieved his majority ,
and that  wasn’ t far of f, though it seemed like one of those
pictures his father was fond of, with a vanishing perspective
that led the eye into an impossible infinity . But when he did
have his  money , he could buy a better commission where he
liked—perhaps a captaincy in the Lancers…. It wouldn’ t
matter whether he’d done anything to distinguish himself in
New Y ork.
His father—W il liam could hear him now , and put the pillow
over his face to drown him out—would tell him that reputation
depended often on the smallest of actions, the daily decisions
made w ith honor and responsibility , not the huge drama of
heroic battles. W illiam wa s not interested in daily
responsibility .
It was, however , much too hot to stay under the pillow , and
he threw it of f onto the floor with an irritable grunt.
“No,” h e said aloud to Lord John. “I’m going to Canada,”
and flopped back into his damp  and lumpy bed, shutting eyes
and ears against any further wise counsel.
 
A WEEK LA TER, the nights ha d grown chilly enough to
make W illiam welcome Miss Beulah’ s hearth and her oyster
stew—and, thank God, cold enough to discourage the damned
mosquitoes. The days were still very warm, though, and
W illiam found it almost a pleasu re when his detail was told of f
to c omb the sho re in search of a supposed smuggler ’ s cache
that Captain Hanks had caught wind of.
“A cach e of what?” Perkins asked, mouth hanging half open
as usual.
“Lobsters,” W il liam answered flippantly , but relented at
Perkins’ s look of confusion. “I don’ t know , but you’ll probably
recognize it if you find it. Don’ t drink it, though—come fetch
me.”
Smugglers’ boa ts brought almost everything into Long
Island, b ut the odds of the current rumor concerning a cache of
bed linens or boxes of Dutch platters were low . Might be
brandy , might be ale, but almost certainly something
drinkable; liquor was by far the most profitable contraband.
W illiam sorted the men into pairs and sent them of f, watching
until they were a decent distance away before heaving a deep
sigh and leaning back against a tree.
Such trees as grew near the shore here were runty twisted
pines, but the sea wind moved pleasantly among their needles,
soughing in his ears with a soothing rush. He sighed again, this
time in pleasure, remembering just how much he liked
solitude; he hadn’ t had any in a month. If he took Richardson’ s
of fer , tho ugh … W ell, there’d be Randall-Isaacs, of course, but
still—weeks on the road, free o f the army constraints of duty
and routine. Silence in which to think. No more Perkins!
He won dered idly whether he m ight be able to sneak into
the junior of ficers’ quarters an d pound Chinless to a pulp
before v anishing into the wilderness like a red Indian. Need he
wear a disguise ? Not if he waited ‘til after dark, he decided.
Ned might suspect, but couldn’ t  prove anything if he couldn’ t
see W ill iam’ s fa ce. W as it cowa rdly to attack Ned in his sleep,though? W ell, that was all right ; he’d douse Chinless with the
contents of his chamber pot to wake him up before setting in.
A tern swept by  within inches of his head, startling him out
of these enjoyable cogitations. His movement in turn startled
the bird,  which let out an indignant shriek at finding him not
edible after all and sailed of f over the water . He scooped up a
pinecone and flung it at the bir d, missing by a mile, but not
caring. He’d send a note to Richardson this very evening,
saying y es. The thought of it m ade his heart beat faster , and a
sense of exhilaration filled him, buoyant as the tern’ s drift
upon the air .
He rubbed sand of f his fingers onto his breeches, then
stif fened, seeing movement on the water . A sloop was tacking
to and fro, just of fshore. Then he relaxed, recognizing it—that
villain Rogers.
“And what are you  a fter , I should  like to know ?” he
muttered. He stepped out onto th e sandy edge of the shore and
stood amid the marram grass, fists on his hips, letting his
uniform be seen—just in case Rogers had somehow missed the
sight of W illiam ’ s men strung al l down the shore, reddish dots
crawling over the sandy dunes like bedbugs. If Rogers had
heard about the smuggler ’ s cache, too, W illiam meant to make
sure Rogers knew that W illiam’ s soldiers had rights over it.
Robert Rogers was a shady character who’d come slinking
into New Y ork a  few months before and somehow wangled a
major ’ s commission from General Howe and a sloop from his
brother , the admiral. Said he w as an Indian fighter , and was
fond of dressing up as an Indi an himself. Ef fective, though:
he’d recruited men enough to form ten companies of nattily
uniformed rang ers, but Rogers continued to prowl the
coastline in his sloop with a  small company of men as
disreputable-looking as he was , looking for recruits, spies,
smugglers, and—W illiam was convinced—anything that
wasn’ t nailed down.
The sloop came in a little closer , and he saw Rogers on
deck: a dark-skinned man in his late forties, seamed andbattered-looking, with an evil cast to his brow . He spotted
W illiam, though, and waved genially . W illiam raised a civil
hand in  reply; if his men found anything, he might need
Rogers to carry the booty ba ck to the New Y ork side—
accompanied by a guard to keep it from disappearing en r oute .
There were a lo t of stories about Rogers—some plainly put
about b y Rogers himself. But so far as W illiam knew , the
man’ s chief qualification was  that he had at one point
attempted to pay his respects to General W ashington, who not
only declined to receive him but had him slung
unceremoniously out of the Continentals’ camp and refused
further entry . W illiam consid ered this evidence of good
judgment on the part of the V ir ginian.
Now what? The sloop had d ropped her sails, and was
putting out a sm all boat. It was Rogers, rowing over on his
own. W illiam’ s wariness was roused at once. Still, he waded in
and grab bed the gunwale, helping Rogers to drag the boat up
onto the sand.
“W ell m et, Lieutenant!” Rogers grinned at him, gap-toothed
but self-confident. W illiam saluted him briefly and formally .
“Major .”
“Y our fellows looking for a cache of French wine, by
chance?”
Damn, he’d alr eady found it!
“W e had word of smuggling ac tivities taking place in this
vicinity ,” W illiam said stif fly . “W e are investigating.”
“‘Course you are,” Rogers agreed amiably . “Save you a bit
of time? T ry up the other way …” He turned, lifting his chin
toward a cluster of dilapidated f ishing shacks a quarter mile in
the distance. “It’ s—”
“W e did,” W illiam interrupted.
“It’ s buried in the sand behind the shacks,” Rogers finished,
ignoring the interruption.“Much obliged , Major ,” W illiam said, with as much
cordiality as he could manage.
“Saw two fellows a-burying it last evening,” Rogers
explained. “But I don’ t think they’ve come back for it yet.”
“Y ou’re keeping an eye on th is stretch of shore, I see,”
W illiam observe d. “Anything in particular you’re looking for?
Sir ,” he added.
Rogers smiled.
“Since you mention it, sir , I  am. T here’ s a fellow walkin g
round asking questions of a damnable inquisitive sort, and I
should very much like to talk t o him. If might be as you or
your men should spot the man … ?”
“Certainly , sir . Do you know his name, or his appearance?”
“Both, as it happens,” Rogers replied promptly . “T all fellow ,
with scars upon his face from a gunpowder explosion. Y ou’d
know him if you saw him. A rebel, from a rebel family in
Connecticut—Hale is his name.”
W illiam experienced a sharp jolt to the midsection.
“Oh, you have  seen him?” Rogers spoke mildly , but his dark
eyes had sharpened. W illiam fe lt a stab of annoyance that his
face should be so readable, but inclined his head.
“He pas sed the customs point yesterday . V ery voluble
fellow ,” he added, trying to reca ll the details of the man. He’d
noticed the scars: faded welts that mottled the man’ s cheeks
and forehead. “Nervous; he was sweating and his voice shook
—the p rivate who stopped him thought he had tobacco or
something else concealed, and made him turn out his pockets,
but he hadn’ t any contraband.” W illiam closed his eyes,
frowning in the ef fort of recall. “He had papers…. I saw
them.” He’d seen them, all right, but had not had the chance to
examine them himself, as he’d been concerned with a
merchant bringing in a cartload of cheeses, bound—he said—
for t he British c ommissary . By the time he’d done with that,
the man had been waved on.“The man who spoke with him  …” Rogers was peering
down th e shore toward the desultory searchers in the distance.
“Which is he?”
“A p rivate soldier named Huds on. I’ll call him for you if
you like ,” W illiam of fered. “But I doubt he can tell you much
about the papers; he can’ t read.”
Rogers looked vexed at this, but nodded for W illiam to call
Hudson anyway . Thus summoned, Hudson verified W illiam’ s
account of the m atter , but could recall nothing regarding the
papers, save that one of the s heets had had some numbers
written upon it. “And a drawing, I think,” he added. “Didn’ t
notice what it was, though, sir , I’m afraid.”
“Numbers, eh? Good, good,” Rogers said, all but rubbing
his hands together . “And did he say whence he was bound?”
“T o visit a frien d, sir , as lived near Flushing.” Hudson was
respectful, but looked curiously at the ranger; Rogers was
barefoot and dressed in a pair of ratty linen breeches with a
short wa istcoat made of muskrat fur . “I didn’ t ask the friend’ s
name, sir . Didn’ t know as it might be important.”
“Oh, I doubt it is, Private. Dou bt the friend exists at all.”
Rogers chuckled, seeming delighted at the news. He stared
into the hazy d istance, eyes narrowed as though he might
distinguish the spy among the dunes, and nodded slowly in
satisfaction.
“V ery good,” he said softly , as though to himself, and was
turning to go when W illiam stopped him with a word.
“My tha nks for the information regarding the smuggler ’ s
cache, sir .” Perkins had overseen the digging whilst W illiam
and Rogers were interviewing Hudson, and was now chivying
a small group of soldiers along, several sand-caked casks
rolling bumpily down the dunes before them. One of the casks
hit a hard spot in the sand, bounced into the air , and landed
hard, rol ling of f at a crazy angle, pursued with whoops by the
soldiers.W illiam flinched slightly , seeing this. If the wine survived
its rescue, it wouldn’ t be drinkable for a fortnight. Not that that
was likely to stop anyone trying.
“I should like to request perm ission to bring the seized
contraband aboard your sloop for transport,” he said formally
to Rogers. “I will accompany and deliver it myself, of course.”
“Oh, of course.” Rogers see med amused, but nodded
agreement. He scratched his nos e, considering something. “W e
shan’ t be sailing back until tomorrow—d’you want to come
along of us tonight? Y ou might be of help, as you’ve actually
seen the fellow we’re after .”
W illiam’ s heart leapt with exci tement. Miss Beulah’ s stew
paled in comparison with the pr ospect of hunting a dangerous
spy . And  being in at the capture  could do nothing but good to
his reputation, even if the m ajor share of the credit was
Rogers’ s.
“I should be m ore than pleased to assist you in any way ,
sir!”
Rogers grinned, then eyed him up and down.
“Good. But you can’ t go spy-catching like that, Lieutenant.
Come aboard, and we’ll fit you out proper .”
 
WILLIAM PROVED T O BE six inches taller than the
tallest of Rogers’ s crew , and thu s ended up awkwardly attired
in a flapping shirt of rough linen—the tails left out by
necessity , to disguise the fact th at the top buttons of his flies
were le ft undone—and canvas breeches that threatened to
emasculate him should he make any sudden moves. These
could not be buckled, of course, and W illiam elected to
emulate Rogers and go barefoot, rather than suf fer the
indignity of striped stockings that left his knees and four
inches of hairy shin exposed between stocking-top and
breeches.The sloop had sailed to Flushing, where Rogers, W illiam,
and four men disembarked. Rogers maintained an informal
recruiting of fice here, in the back room of a merchant’ s shop in
the hig h road of the village. He vanished into this
establishment m omentarily , returning with the satisfactory
news that Hale had not been seen in Flushing and was likely
therefore stoppi ng at one of the two taverns to be found at
Elmsford, two or three miles from the village.
The men accordingly walked in that direction, dividing for
the sake of caution into smaller groups, so that W illiam found
himself walking  with Rogers, a  ragged shawl slung round his
shoulders again st the evening chill. He had not shaved, of
course, and fancied that he look ed a proper companion for the
ranger , w ho had added a slouch hat with a dried flying fish
stuck through the brim to his costume.
“Do we pose as oystermen, or carters, perhaps?” W illiam
asked. Roger grunted in brief amusement and shook his head.
“Y ou’d not pass for either , sho uld anyone hear you talk.
Nay , lad, keep your mouth shu t, save to put something in it.
The boy s and I ‘ull manage the  business. All you need do is
nod, if you spot Hale.”
The wind had come onshore a nd blew the scent of cold
marshes toward them, spiced with a distant hint of chimney
smoke. No habitation was y et in sight, and the fading
landscape was desolate around them. The cold, sandy dirt of
the r oad was so othing to his ba re feet, though, and he did not
find the bleakness of their surroundings depressing in the least;
he was too eager at thought of what lay ahead.
Rogers was silent for the most  part, pacing with his head
down against the cold breeze.  After a bit, though, he said
casually , “I carried Captain Richardson over from New Y ork.
And back.”
W illiam thoug ht momentarily of saying, “Captain
Richar dson?”  i n tones  of polite ignorance, but realized in time
that this wouldn’ t do.“Did you?” he said instead, and kept his own silence.
Rogers laughed.
“Fly cove, aren’ t you? Perhaps he’ s right, then, choosing
you.”
“He told you that he had chosen me for … something?”
“Good lad. Never give anyt hing away for free—but
sometimes it pays to oil the wh eels a bit. Nay , Richardson’ s a
downy bird—he said not a word about you. But I know who
he i s, and what he does. And I know where I left him. He
wasn’ t calling upon the Culpers, I’ll warrant that.”
W illiam made an indeterminate sound of interest in his
throat. Plainly , Rogers meant to say something. Let him say ,
then.
“How old are you, lad?”
“Nineteen,” W illiam said, with an edge. “Why?”
Rogers shrugged, his outline little more than a shadow
among many in the gathering dusk.
“Old enough to risk your neck on purpose, then. But you
might w ant to think twice before saying yes to whatever
Richardson’ s suggesting to you.”
“Assuming that  he did indeed suggest something—again,
why?”
Rogers touched his back, ur ging him forward.
“Y ou’re about to see that for yourself, lad. Come on.”
 
THE W ARM SMOKY LIGHT of the tavern and the
smell of food embraced W illiam. He had not been really
conscious of cold, dark, or hu nger , his mind intent on the
adventure at hand. Now , thoug h, he drew a long, lingering
breath, filled with the scent of fresh bread and roast chicken,
and felt like an i nsensible corpse , newly roused from the grave
and restored to full life upon the day of Resurrection.The next breath stopped dead in  his throat, though, and his
heart gave a tremendous squeeze that sent a sur ge of blood
through his body . Rogers, next to him, made a low warning
hum in his throat, and glanced casually round the room as he
led the way to a table.
The man, the sp y , was sitting near the fire, eating chicken
and chat ting wit h a couple of farmers. Most of the men in the
tavern h ad glanc ed at the door when the newcomers appeared
—more than one of them blinked at W illiam—but the spy was
so a bsorbed in h is food and conversation that he didn’ t even
look up.
W illiam had taken little notice of the man when first seen,
but would have known him again at once. He was not so tall as
W illiam himself, but several inches more than the average, and
striking in appearance, with flax-blond hair and a high
forehead, this displaying the flash-mark scars of the
gunpowder accident Rogers had mentioned. He had a round,
broad-brimmed hat, which lay on the table beside his plate,
and wore an unremarkable plain brown suit.
Not in uniform …  W il liam swallowed heavily , no t entirely
in respect of his hunger and the smell of food.
Rogers s at down at the next table, motioning W illiam to a
stool across from him, and r aised his brows in question.
W illiam nodded silently , but didn’ t look again in Hale’ s
direction.
The landlord brought them food and beer , and W illiam
devoted himself  to eating, glad that he was not required to join
in conversation. Hale himself was relaxed and voluble, telling
his companions that he was a D utch schoolmaster from New
Y ork.
“Conditions there are so unsettled, though,” he said, shaking
his head, “that the majority of my students have gone—fled
with the ir families to relatives in  Connecticut or New Jersey . I
might suppose similar—or perh aps worse—conditions obtain
here?”One of the men  at his table merely grunted, but the other
blew out his lips with a derisive sound.
“Y ou might say so. Goddam lo bsterbacks seize everything
as hasn’ t been buried. T ory , Wh ig, or rebel, makes no goddam
dif ference to those greedy basta rds. Speak a word of protest,
and you ’re like to be struck over  the head or dragged of f to the
goddam stockade, so as to mak e it easier for ‘em. Why , one
hulking brute stopped me at the  customs point last week, and
took my whole load of apple ci der and the goddam wagon to
boot! He—”
W illiam choked  on a bite of bread, but didn’ t dare cough.
Christ, he hadn’ t recognized the man—the man’ s back was to
him—but he recalled the apple cider well enough. Hulking
brute?
He r eached for his beer and gu lped, trying to dislodge the
chunk of bread; it didn’ t work a nd he coughed silently , feeling
his face go pu rple and seeing Rogers frowning at him in
consternation. He gestured feebly at the cider farmer , struck
himself in the ch est, and, rising, made his way out of the room
as q uietly as pos sible. His disguise, excellent as it was, would
in no way conc eal his essential hulkingness, and if the man
were to recognize him as a British soldier , bang went the
whole enterprise.
He managed not to breathe u ntil he was safely outside,
where he coughed until he thought the bottom of his stomach
might fo rce its way out of his mouth. At last he stopped,
though, and leaned against the s ide of the tavern, taking long,
gasping breaths. He wished he’d had the presence of mind to
bring some beer with him, instead of the chicken leg he held.
The last  of Rogers’ s men had co me along the road, and with
a baf fled glance at W illiam, went inside. He wiped his mouth
with the  back of his hand and, straightening up, crept round
the side of the building until he reached a window .
The new  arrivals were taking up their own spot, near to
Hale’ s table. Standing carefull y to one side to save being
spotted, he saw that Rogers ha d now insinuated himself intoconversation with Hale and the two farmers, and appeared to
be tellin g them a joke. The apple-cider fellow hooted and
pounded the table at the end; H ale made an attempt at a grin,
but looked frankly shocked; the jest must have been indelicate.
Rogers leaned back, casually including the whole table with
the swe ep of a hand, and said something that had them
nodding and murmuring agreement. Then he leaned forward,
intent, to ask Hale something.
W illiam could catch only sna tches of the conversation,
above the general noise of the tavern and the whistling of the
cold wind past his ears. So far as he could gather , Rogers was
professing to be a rebel, his own men nodding agreement from
their table, gathering closer t o form a secretive knot of
conversation about Hale. Hale looked intent, excited, and very
earnest. He might easily have been a schoolmaster , W illiam
thought—though Rogers had s aid he was a captain in the
Continental army . W illiam shook his head; Hale didn’ t look
any sort of a soldier .
At the same time, he hardly looked the part of a spy , either .
He was noticeable, with his fair  good looks, his flash-scarred
face, his … height.
W illiam felt a small, cold lump in the pit of his stomach.
Christ. W as that what Rogers had meant? Saying that there
was something W illiam should be warned of, with regard to
Captain Richardson’ s errands, and that he would see for
himself, tonight?
W illiam was quite accustomed b oth to his own height and to
people’ s automa tic responses to it; he quite liked being looked
up to. But on h is first errand for Captain Richardson, it had
never st ruck him for a moment that folk might recall him on
account of it—or that they could describe him with the
greatest of ease. Hulking brute was no compliment, but it was
unmistakable.
W ith a sense of incredulity , he heard Hale not only reveal
his own  name and the fact that he held rebel sympathies, but
also confide that he was making observations regarding thestrength of the British presence—this followed by an earnest
inquiry as to w hether the fellows he spoke with might have
noticed any redcoated soldiers in the vicinity?
W illiam was so shocked by this recklessness that he put his
eye to the edge of the window frame, in time to see Rogers
glance round the room in exaggerated caution before leaning
in confidentially , tapping Hale upon the forearm, and saying,
“Why , now , sir , I have, indeed I have, but you must be more
wary of what you say in a public place. Why , anyone at all
might hear you!”
“Pshaw ,” said Hale, laughing. “I am among friends here.
Have we not all  just drunk to General W ashington and to the
King’ s c onfusion?” Sobering, bu t still eager , he pushed his hat
aside and waved to the landlord  for more beer . “Come, have
another , sir , and tell me what you have seen.”
W illiam had a sudden overwhelming impulse to shout,
“Shut yo ur mouth, you ninnyhammer!” or  t o throw  someth ing
at Hale through the window . But it was far too late, even could
he actua lly have done it. The chicken leg he had been eating
was still in his hand; noticing, he tossed it away . His stomach
was knotted, and there was a ta ste of sick at the back of his
throat, though his blood still boiled with excitement.
Hale was making still more damaging admissions, to the
admiring encouragements and patriotic shouts of Rogers’ s
men, all of whom were playing out their parts admirably , he
had to admit. How long would R ogers let it go on? W ould they
take him here, in the tavern? Probably not—some others of
those present were doubtless rebel sympathizers, who might be
moved t o intervene on Hale’ s b ehalf, did Rogers go to arrest
him in their midst.
Rogers a ppeared in no hurry . Ne arly half an hour of tedious
raillery followed, Rogers giving what appeared to be small
admissions, Hale making much lar ger ones in return, his slab-
sided cheeks glowing with beer and excitement over the
information he was gaining. W illiam’ s legs, feet, hands, and
face were numb, and his shou lders ached with tension. Acrunching soun d nearby distracted him from his close
attendance on the scene within, and he glanced down,
suddenly aware of a penetrating aroma that had somehow
insinuated itself without his cognizance.
“Christ!” He jerked back, nearly putting his elbow through
the w indow , and fell into the w all of the tavern with a heavy
thump. T he skunk, disturbed in its enjoyment of the discarded
chicken leg, instantly elevated its tail, the white stripe making
the movement clearly visible. W illiam froze.
“What was that?” someone said inside, and he heard the
scrape of a benc h being pushed back. Holding his breath, he
edged one foot t o the side, only to be frozen in place again by
a faint thumping noise and the quivering of the white stripe.
Damn, the thing was stampin g its feet. An indication of
imminent attack, he’d been told—and told by people whose
sorry condition made it apparent that they spoke from
experience.
Feet were coming toward the door , someone coming to
investigate. Christ, if they found him eavesdropping outside …
He gritt ed his teeth, nerving h imself to what duty told him
must be a self- sacrificial lunge out of sight—but if he did,
what then? He c ould not rejoin Rogers and the others, reeking
of skunk. But if—
The opening of the door put  paid to all speculations.
W illiam lunged for the corner of  the building by simple reflex.
The skunk also acted by reflex—but, startled by the opening of
the door , apparently adjusted its aim in consequence. W illiam
tripped o ver a branch and sprawled at full length into a heap of
discarded rubbish, hearing a full-throated shriek behind him as
the night was made hideous.
W illiam coughed, choked, and tried to stop breathing long
enough to get ou t of range. He gasped from necessity , though,
and his lungs w ere filled with a substance that went so far
beyond the concept of smell as  to require a completely new
sensory description. Gagging and spluttering, eyes burning and
watering from the assault, he stumbled into the darkness on theother side of the  road, from which vantage point he witnessed
the skunk making of f in a h uf f and the skunk’ s victim
collapsed in a heap on the tavern’ s step, making noises of
extreme distress.
W illiam hoped it wasn’ t Hale. Beyond the practical
dif ficulties involved in arresting and transporting a man who
had suf fered such an assault, simple humanity compelled one
to think that hanging the victim would be adding insult to
injury .
It wasn ’ t Hale. He saw the flaxen hair shining in the
torchlight among the heads that were thrust out in inquiry , only
to be drawn hastily back again.
V oices reached  him, discussing how best to proceed.
V inegar , it was agreed, was needed, and in quantity . The
victim h ad by now suf ficiently recovered himself as to crawl
of f i nto the wee ds, from which the sounds of violent retching
proceeded. This, added to the mephitis still tainting the
atmosphere, caused a number of other gentlemen to vomit, as
well, an d W illia m felt his own gor ge rise, but controlled it by
vicious nose-pinching.
He was nearly chilled through, though thankfully aired out,
by th e time the victim’ s friends saw him of f—driving him like
a cow along the  road, as no one would touch him—and the
tavern emptied, no one having f urther appetite for either food
or d rink in such  an atmosphere. He could hear the landlord
cursing to himself as he leaned out to take down the torch that
burned b eside the hanging sign a nd plunge it, sizzling, into the
rain barrel.
Hale bade a general good night, his educated voice
distinctive in the dark, and se t of f along the road toward
Flushing, where doubtless he meant to seek a bed. Rogers—
W illiam knew him by the fur waistcoat, identifiable even by
starlight—lingered near the roa d, silently collecting his men
about him as the  crowd departed. Only when everyone was out
of sight did W illiam venture to join them.“Y es?” Rogers said, seeing him. “All present, then. Let’ s
go.” An d they moved of f, a silent pack coursing down the
road, intent upon the track of their unknowing prey .
 
THEY SA W THE FLAMES fro m the water . The city was
burning, mostly  the district near the East River , but the wind
was up, and the  fire was spreading. There was much excited
speculation amo ng Rogers’ s men; had rebel sympathizers fired
the city?
“Just as likely drunken soldiers,” Rogers said, his voice
grimly dispassionate. W illiam felt queasy , seeing the red glow
in the sky . The prisoner was silent.
They found General Howe—eventually—in his
headquarters at Beekman House outside the city , red-eyed
from smoke, lack of sleep, and  a rage that was buried bone-
deep. It stayed b uried, though, for the moment. He summoned
Rogers and the prisoner into the library where he had his
of fice, and—after one brief, astonished look at W illiam’ s attire
—sent him to his bed.
Fortnum was in the attic, watch ing the city burn from the
window . There was nothing to b e done about it. W illiam came
to st and beside h im. He felt stra ngely empty , somehow unreal.
Chilled, though the floor was warm under his bare feet.
An occa sional fountain of sparks shot up now and then, as
the flames struck something par ticularly flammable, but from
such a distance there was really little to be seen but the bloody
glow against the sky .
“They’ll blame us, you know ,” Fortnum said after a bit.
 
THE AIR W AS STILL THICK with smoke at noon the
next day .He cou ldn’ t take his eyes of f Hale’ s hands. They had
clenched involuntarily as a private soldier tied them, though he
had put them behind his back w ith no protest. Now his fingers
were cla sped tight together , so h ard that the knuckles had gone
white.
Surely the flesh protested, W illiam thought, even if the
mind ha d resigned itself. His own flesh was protesting simply
being here, his skin twitching lik e a horse plagued by flies, his
bowels cramping  and loosening in horrid sympathy—they said
a hanged man’ s bowels gave way; would Hale’ s? Blood
washed through  his face at the thought, and he looked at the
ground.
V oices m ade him look up again. Captain Moore had just
asked Hale whether he wished to make any remarks. Hale
nodded; evidently he had been prepared for this.
W illiam felt that he should him self have been prepared by
now; Hale had spent the last two hours in Captain Moore’ s
tent, writing notes to be delivered to his family , while the men
assembled for the hasty execution shifted their weight from
foot to foot, waiting. He wasn’ t prepared at all.
Why was it dif ferent? He’d se en men die, some horribly .
But this preliminary courtesy , this formality , this … obscene
civility , all conducted with the certain knowledge of imminent
and shameful death. Deliberation. The awful deliberation, that
was it.
“At last!” Clarewell muttered in his ear . “Bloody get on
with it; I’m starving.”
A young black man named Billy Richmond, a private
soldier whom W illiam knew casually , was sent up the ladder to
tie the rope to the tree. He came down now , nodding to the
of ficer .
Now Hale was mounting the ladder , the ser geant major
steadying him. The noose was round his neck, a thick rope,
new-looking. Di dn’ t they say ne w ropes stretched? But it was
a high ladder …W illiam was sweating like a pig , though the day was mild.
He m ustn’ t close his eyes or lo ok away . Not with Clarewell
watching.
He tightened the muscles of his throat and concentrated
again on Hale’ s hands. The fingers were twisting, helplessly ,
though the man’ s face was calm. They were leaving faint
damp marks on the skirt of his coat.
A grunt of ef for t and a grating noise; the ladder was pulled
away , and there was a startled whoof!  from Hale as he
dropped. Wheth er it was the newness of the rope or something
else, his neck did not break cleanly .
He’d refused the hood, and so th e spectators were obliged to
watch h is face for the quarter o f an hour it took him to die.
W illiam stifled a horrific ur ge to laugh from pure nerves,
seeing the pale blue eyes bulge to bursting point, the tongue
thrust out. So surprised. He looked so surprised.
There was only a small group of men assembled for the
execution. He saw Richardson a little way away , watching
with a look of remote abstraction. As though aware of his
glance, Richardson looked sharply up at him. W illiam looked
away . THE MINISTER’S CA T
 Lallybroch
 October 1980
 
S HE W AS UP EARL Y , before the children, though she
knew this was foolish—whatever Roger had gone to Oxford
for , it would take him a good fo ur or five hours to drive there,
and the same back. Even if he had left at dawn—and he might
not be able to, if he hadn’ t arri ved in time to do whatever it
was the day befo re—he couldn’ t be home before midday at the
earliest. But she’d slept restlessly , dreaming one of those
monotonous an d inescapably unpleasant dreams, this one
featuring the sight and sound o f the tide coming in, lapping
wave by lapping wave by lappin g … and wakened at first light
feeling dizzy and unwell.
It ha d occurred to her for one  nightmare instant that she
might be pregnant—but she’d s at up abruptly in bed, and the
world ha d settled at once into place around her . None of that
sense of having shoved one foot through the looking glass that
early pre gnancy entails. She set one foot cautiously out of bed,
and the world—and her stomach—stayed steady . Good, then.
Still, th e feelin g of unease—whether from the dream,
Roger ’ s absence, or the specter of pregnancy—stayed with
her , and she went about the daily business of the household
with a distracted mind.
She was sorting socks toward midday when she became
aware that things were quiet. Quiet in a way that made the hair
rise on the back of her neck.
“Jem?” she called. “Mandy?”
T otal silence. She stepped out o f the laundry , listening for
the usual thumps, bangings, and screeches from above, but
there wa s not the slightest sound of trampling feet, toppling
blocks, or the high-pitched voices of sibling warfare.
“Jem!” she shouted. “Where are you?”No r eply . The la st time this had happened, two days before,
she’d di scovered her alarm clock in the bottom of the bathtub,
neatly disassembled into its component parts, and both
children at the far end of the g arden, glowing with unnatural
innocence.
” I  di dn’ t do it!” Je m had declared virtuously , hauled into the
house and faced with the evidence. “And Mandy’ s too little.”
“T oo wi ddle,” Mandy had agreed, nodding her mop of black
curls so ferociously as to obscure her face.
“W ell, I don’ t th ink Daddy did i t,” Bree said, raising a stern
brow . “A nd I’m sure it wasn’ t Annie Mac. Which doesn’ t
leave very many suspects, does it?”
“Shussspects, shussspects,” Mandy said happily , enchanted
by the new word.
Jem shook his head in resigned fashion, viewing the
scattered gears and dismembered hands.
“W e must have got piskies, Mama.”
“Pishkies, pishk ies,” Mandy chirped, pulling her skirt up
over her head and yanking at her frilly underpants. “Needa go
pishkie, Mama!”
In the midst of the ur gency occasioned by this statement,
Jem had faded artfully , not to be seen again until dinner , by
which ti me the af fair of the alarm clock had been superseded
by th e u sual fier ce rush of daily events, not to be recalled until
bedtime, when Roger remarked the absence of the alarm clock.
“Jem doesn’ t usually lie,” Roger had said thoughtfully ,
having been shown the small po ttery bowl now containing the
clock’ s remains.
Bree, br ushing out her hair for  bed, gave him a jaundiced
look.
“Oh, you think we have pixies, too?”
“Piskies,” he said absently , stirri ng the small pile of gears in
the bowl with a finger .“What? Y ou mean they really are called ‘piskies’ here? I
thought Jem was just mispronouncing it.”
“W ell, no—’pisky’ is Cornish; they’re called pixies in other
parts of the W est Country , though.”
“What are they called in Scotland?”
“W e hav en’ t really got any . Sco tland’ s got its fair share of
the fairy  folk,” he said, scooping up a handful of clock innards
and letting them tinkle musically back into the bowl. “But
Scots t end toward the grimmer manifestations of the
supernatural—water horses, ban-sidhe , blue hags, and the
Nuckelavee, aye? Piskies are a wee bit frivolous for Scotland.
W e have  got brownies, mind,” h e added, taking the brush from
her hand, “but they’re more of a household help, not mischief-
makers like piskies. Can ye put the clock back together?”
“Sure—if the piskies didn’ t lose any of the parts. What on
earth is a Nuckelavee?”
“It’ s fro m the Orkneys. Nothing ye want to hear about just
before bed,” he assured her . And, bending, breathed very
softly on her neck, just below the earlobe.
The faint tingle engendered by  the memory of what had
happened after that momentarily overlaid her suspicions of
what the  childre n might be up to, but the sensation faded, to be
replaced by increasing worry .
There was no si gn of either Jem or Mandy anywhere in the
house. Annie MacDonald didn’ t come on Saturdays, and the
kitchen … At first glance, it seemed undisturbed, but she was
familiar with Jem’ s methods.
Sure enough, the packet of chocolate biscuits was missing,
as w as a bottle of lemon squash, though everything else in the
cupboard was in perfect order—and the cupboard was six feet
of f t he ground. Jem showed grea t promise as a cat bur glar , she
thought. At least he’d have a c areer if he got chucked out of
school for good one of these da ys after telling his classmates
something espe cially picturesq ue he’d picked up in the
eighteenth century .The mis sing food allayed her uneasiness. If they’d taken a
picnic, t hey were outside, and while they might be anywhere
within a half mile of the house—Mandy wouldn’ t walk farther
than that—chances were they wouldn’ t have gone far before
sitting down to eat biscuits.
It was a beautiful fall day , and despite the need to track
down he r miscr eants, she was glad to be out in the sun and
breeze. S ocks co uld wait. And so could turning the vegetable
beds. And speaking to the plumber about the geyser in the
upstairs bath. And …
“It d oesna matter how many thi ngs ye do on a farm, ther e’ s
always m or e tha n ye  can do. A wonder the place doesna rise
up about my ears and swallow me, like Jonah and the whale.”
For an instant , she heard h er father ’ s voice, full of
exasperated resignation at enc ountering another unexpected
chore. She glanced round at him, smiling, then stopped,
realization and longing sweeping over her in waves.
“Oh, Da,” she said softly . She walked on, more slowly ,
suddenly seeing not the albatross of a big, semi-decayed
house, but the l iving or ganism that was Lallybroch, and all
those of her blood who had been part of it—who still were.
The Frasers and Murrays who had put their own sweat and
blood an d tears into its buildin gs and soil, woven their lives
into its land. Uncle Ian, Aunt Jenny—the swarm of cousins
she h ad known s o briefly . Y oung Ian. All of them dead now …
but, curiously enough, not gone.
“Not gone at all,” she said aloud, and found comfort in the
words. She’d reached the back gate of the kailyard and paused,
glancing up the hill toward the  ancient broch that gave the
place its name; the burying ground was up on that same hill,
most of its stone s so weathered that the names and their dates
were ind ecipherable, the stones  themselves mostly obliterated
by creep ing gorse and sweet broom. And amidst the splashes
of gray , black-green, and brilliant yellow were two small
moving splotches of red and blue.The pathway was badly over grown; brambles ripped at her
jeans. She found the children on  hands and knees, following a
trail of ants—who were in tur n following a trail of cookie
crumbs, careful ly placed so as to lead the ants through an
obstacle course of sticks and pebbles.
“Look, Mama!”  Jem barely glanced up at her , absorbed in
the sight before him. He pointed at the ground, where he had
sunk an  old teacup into the di rt and filled it with water . A
black gl ob of ants, lured to their doom by chocolate crumbs,
were struggling in the midst of it.
“Jem! That’ s mean! Y ou mustn’ t drown ants—unless
they’re in the house,” she add ed, with vivid memories of a
recent infestation in the pantry .
“They’re not drowning, Mama. Look—see what they do?”
She crouched beside him, look ing closer , and saw that, in
fact, the  ants weren’ t drowning. Single ants that had fallen in
struggled madly  toward the center , where a lar ge mass of ants
clung together , making a ball th at floated, barely denting the
surface. The ants in the ball wer e moving, slowly , so that they
changed places constantly , and while one or two near the edge
of the mass wer e motionless, possibly dead, the majority were
clearly in no immediate danger of drowning, supported by the
bodies of their fellows. And the mass itself was gradually
drawing closer to the rim of  the cup, propelled by the
movements of the ants in it.
“That’ s really cool,” she said, fa scinated, and sat beside him
for some time, watching the ants, before finally decreeing
mercy a nd mak ing him scoop the ball of ants out on a leaf,
where on ce laid on the ground, they scattered and at once went
back to their business.
“Do you think they do it on purpose?” she asked Jem.
“Cluster togethe r like that, I mean. Or are they just looking for
anything to hang on to?”
“Dinna ken,” he said, shrugging. “I’ll look in my ant book
and see does it say .”She gathered up the remnants o f the picnic, leaving one or
two biscuit fragments for the a nts, who had, she felt, earned
them. Mandy had wandered of f while she and Jem watched the
ants in the teacup, and was presently squatting in the shade of
a bush some way uphill, engaged in animated conversation
with an invisible companion.
“Mandy wanted to talk to Grandda,” Jem said matter -of-
factly . “That’ s why we came up here.”
“Oh?” s he said slowly . “Why is here a good place to talk to
him?”
Jem looked surprised, and glan ced toward the weathered,
tipsy stones of the burying ground.
“Isn’ t he here?”
Something much too powerful to be called a shiver shot up
her spine. It w as as much Je m’ s matter -of-factness as the
possibility that it might be true that took her breath away .
“I—don’ t know , ” she said. “I suppose he could be.” While
she tried  not to think too much about the fact that her parents
were no w dead,  she had someh ow vaguely assumed that they
would h ave been buried in North Carolina—or somewhere
else in the Colo nies, if war had taken them away from the
Ridge.
But she remembered the letters suddenly . He’d said he
meant to come back to Scotlan d. And Jamie Fraser being a
determined man , more than likely he’d done just that. Had he
never left again? And if he hadn’ t—was her mother here, too?
W ithout really meaning to, she found herself making her
way upward, past the foot of t he old broch and through the
stones o f the burying ground. S he’d come up here once, with
her aunt Jenny . It had been early evening, with a breeze
whispering in the grass, and an air of peace upon the hillside.
Jenny had shown her the graves of her grandparents, Brian and
Ellen, together under a marriage stone; yes, she could still
make ou t the curve of it, over gr own and mossy as it was, the
names weathere d away . And the child who had died with Ellenwas buried with her—her third son. Robert, Jenny said; her
father , Brian, had insisted he b e baptized, and her wee dead
brother ’ s name was Robert.
She was  standing among the sto nes now; so many of them.
A good many o f the later ones were still readable, these with
dates in the late 1800s. Murrays and McLachlan’ s and
McLean’ s, for the most part. He re and there the odd Fraser or
MacKenzie.
The earlier ones, though, were a ll too weathered to read, no
more than the shadows of letters showing through the black
stains of lichen and the soft, obliterating moss. There, next to
Ellen’ s grave, was the tiny square stone for Caitlin Maisri
Murray , Jenny and Ian’ s sixth child, who had lived only a day
or so . Jenny had shown Briann a the stone, stooping to run a
gentle hand across the letters and laying a yellow rose from the
path be side it. There had bee n a small cairn there, too—
pebbles left by those who visited the grave. The cairn had been
scattered long since, but Brianna stooped and found a pebble
now and placed it by the little stone.
There was another , she saw , bes ide it. Another small stone,
as fo r a child. Not quite as weathered, but plainly almost as
old. Only two w ords on it, she thought, and, closing her eyes,
ran her fingers s lowly over the stone, feeling out the shallow ,
broken l ines. Th ere was an “E ” in the first line. A “Y ,” she
thought, in the second. And maybe a “K.”
What sort of Highland name begins with “Y”?  she thought,
puzzled. Ther e’ s McKay , but that’ s in the wr ong or der …
“Y ou—er—don’ t know which grave might be Grandda’ s, do
you?” she asked Jem hesitantly . She was almost afraid to hear
the answer .
“No.” He looked surprised, and glanced where she was
looking, toward the assemblage of stones. Obviously he hadn’ t
connected their presence with his grandfather . “He just said
he’d like  to be buried here, and if I came here, I should leave
him a stane. So I did.” His accent slid naturally into the word,and she heard he r father ’ s voice again, distinctly , but this time
smiled a little.
“Where?”
“Up ther e. He likes to be up high, ken? Where he can see,”
Jem said  casually , pointing up th e hill. Just beyond the shadow
of th e br och, she  could see the traces of something not quite a
trail through a m ass of gorse, heather , and broken rock. And
poking out of th e mass at the crest of the hill, a big, lumpy
boulder , on whose shoulder sa t a tiny pyramid of pebbles,
barely visible.
“Did you leave all those today?”
“No, I put one whenever I come. That’ s what ye’re meant to
do, aye?”
There was a small lump in her throat, but she swallowed it
and smiled. “A ye, it is. I’ll go up and leave one, too.”
Mandy was now sitting on one  of the fallen gravestones,
laying o ut burd ock leaves as p lates around the dirty teacup,
which she had unearthed and set in the middle. She was
chatting to the guests at her  invisible tea party , politely
animated. There was no need to  disturb her , Brianna decided,
and followed Jem up the rocky  trail—the last of the journey
accomplished on hands and knees, owing to the steepness.
It w as w indy , so  near the crest of the hill, and they weren’ t
much bothered by the midgies. Damp with perspiration, she
added he r own pebble ceremoniously to the wee cairn, and sat
down fo r a moment to enjoy the  view . Most of Lallybroch was
visible f rom her e, as was the road that led to the highway . She
looked that way , but no sign yet of Roger ’ s bright-orange
Morris Mini. She sighed and looked away .
It was nice, up s o high. Quiet, w ith just the sigh of the cool
wind an d the buzz of bees busy working in the yellow
blossoms. No wonder her father liked—
“Jem.” He was slumped comfortably against the rock,
looking out over the surrounding hills.“A ye?”
She hesitated, but had to ask.
“Y ou … can’ t see  your grandda, can you?”
He shot her a startled blue look.
“No. He’ s dead.”
“Oh,” she said, at once relieved and slightly disappointed. “I
know . I … just wondered.”
“I think maybe Mandy can,” Je m said, nodding toward his
sister , a bright red blot on the landscape below . “But ye can’ t
really te ll. Babie s talk to lots of people ye can’ t see,” he added
tolerantly . “Grannie says so.”
She didn ’ t know whether to wis h he would stop referring to
his gran dparents in the present tense or not. It was more than
slightly unnervin g, but he had said he couldn’ t see Jamie. She
didn’ t w ant to ask whether he could see Claire—she supposed
not—but she felt her parents cl ose, whenever Jem or Mandy
mentioned them, and she certainly wanted Jem and Mandy to
feel close to them, as well.
She and Roger had explained things to the kids as well as
such things could be explained. And evidently her father had
had his own private talk with Jem; a good thing, she thought.
Jamie’ s blend of devout Catholicism and matter -of-fact
Highland acceptance of life, death, and things not seen was
probably a lot better suited to explaining things like how you
could be dead on one side of the stones, but—
“He said  he’d look after us. Grandda,” he added, turning to
look at her .
She bit her tong ue. No, he was  not reading her mind, she
told herself firmly . They’d just been talking of Jamie, after all,
and Jem had ch osen this particular place in which to pay his
respects. So it w as only natural that his grandfather would be
still in his mind.
“Of cou rse he will,” she said, a nd put a hand on his square
shoulder , massa ging the knobby bones at the base of his neckwith her  thumb. He giggled an d ducked out from under her
hand, th en hopped suddenly down the trail, sliding on his
bottom partway , to the detriment of his jeans.
She pau sed for a last look round before following him, and
noticed the jumble of rock on to p of a hill a quarter mile or so
away . A  jumble of rock was exactly what one might expect to
see on any Highland hilltop—but there was something slightly
dif ferent about this particular assortment of stones. She shaded
her eyes with her hand, squinti ng. She might be wrong—but
she was  an engineer; she knew the look of a thing built by
men.
An Ir on Age fortr ess, maybe?  she thought, intrigued. There
were layered stones at the bottom of that heap, she’d swear it.
A foundation, perhaps. She’d have to climb up there one of
these days for a  closer look—maybe tomorrow , if Roger …
Again, she glanced at the road, and again found it empty .
Mandy h ad grow n tired of her tea party and was ready to go
home. Holding her daughter firm ly by one hand and the teacup
in the other , Bri anna made her way down the hill toward the
big white-harled  house, its wind ows fresh-washed and glinting
companionably .
Had Annie done that? she wondered. She hadn’ t noticed,
and surely window-washing on that scale would have entailed
a good bit of fu ss and bother . B ut then, she’d been distracted,
what wi th the anticipations and apprehensions of the new job.
Her hear t gave a small hop at the thought that on Monday she
would fit back one more piece of who she’d once been, one
more stone in the foundation of who she now was.
“Maybe the piskies did it,” she said aloud, and laughed.
“Piskies diddit,” Mandy echoed happily .
Jem had nearly reached the bottom, and turned, impatient,
waiting for them.
“Jem,” she said, the thought occurring as they came even
with him. “Do you know what a Nuckelavee is?”Jem’ s eyes went huge, and he clapped his hands over
Mandy’ s ears. Something with a hundred cold tiny feet
skittered up Brianna’ s back.
“A ye,” he said, his voice small and breathless.
“Who told you about it?” she asked, keeping her voice
calm. She’d kill  Annie MacDonald, she thought.
But Jem’ s eyes slid sideways, as he glanced involuntarily
over her shoulder , up at the broch.
“He did,” he whispered.
“He?”she  said sharply , an d grabbed Mandy by the arm as
the l ittle girl wig gled free and turned furiously on her brother .
“ Don’ t  kick your brother , Mandy! Who do you mean,
Jemmy?”
Jem’ s lower teeth caught his lip.
“Him,” he blurted. “The Nuckelavee.”
 
“THE CREA TURE’S HOME was in the sea , but it
ventur ed upon land to feast upon humans. The Nuckelavee
r ode a horse on land, and its horse was sometimes
indistinguishable fr om its own body . Its head was ten times
lar ger than that of a man, and its mouth thrust out like a pig’ s,
with a wide, gaping maw . The cr eatur e had no skin, and its
yellow veins, muscle structur e, and sinews could clearly be
seen, co ver ed in  a r ed slimy film. The cr eatur e was armed with
venomous br eath  and gr eat str ength. It did, however , have one
weakness: an aversion to fr eshwater . The horse on which it
r ode is describe d as having one  r ed eye, a mouth the size of a
whale’ s, and flappers like fins ar ound its for elegs.”
“Ick!” Brianna put down the book—one of Roger ’ s
collection of Scottish folklore—and stared at Jem. “Y ou saw
one of these? Up by the broch?”
Her son shifted from foot to foo t. “W ell, he said he was. He
said if I didna c lear straight of f, he’d change into himself, andI didna want to see that , so I cleared.”
“Neither would I.” Brianna’ s h eart began to slow down a
little. Al l right. He’d met a man , then, not a monster . Not that
she’d ac tually believed … but t he fact that someone had been
hanging around the broch was worrying enough.
“What did he look like, this man?”
“W ell … big,” J em said dubiously . Given that Jem was not
quite nine, most men would be.
“As big as Daddy?”
“Maybe.”
Further catechis m elicited relatively few details; Jem knew
what a Nuckelavee was—he’d read most of the more
sensational item s in Roger ’ s collection—and had been so
terrified at meeting someone who might at any moment shed
his skin and ea t him that his impressions of the man were
sparse. T all, with a short beard, hair that wasn’ t very dark, and
clothes “like Mr . MacNeil wears.” W orking clothes, then, like
a farmer .
“Why didn’ t you tell me or Daddy about him?”
Jem looked about to cry .
“He said he’d come back and eat Mandy if I did.”
“Oh.” She put an arm around him and pulled him to her . “I
see. Don’ t be afraid, honey . It’ s all right.” He was trembling
now , as much w ith relief as with memory , and she stroked his
bright h air , soothing him. A tramp, most likely . Camping in
the b roch? Likely he was gone  by now—so far as she could
tell from Jem’ s story , it had been more than a week since he
had seen the man—but …
“Jem,” she said slowly . “Why did you and Mandy go up
there today? W eren’ t you afraid the man would be there?”
He look ed up at her , surprised, and shook his head, red hair
flying.“Nay , I cleared, but I hid and watched him. He went away to
the west. That’ s where he lives.”
“He said so?”
“No. Bu t things like that all live  in the west.” He pointed at
the book . “When they go away to the west, they dinna come
back. And I’ve not seen him again; I watched, to be sure.”
She nearly laughed, but was stil l too worried. It was true; a
good many Highland fairy tales did end with some
supernatural cre ature going away to the west, or into the rocks
or the water where they lived. A nd of course they didn’ t come
back, since the story was over .
“He was just a nasty tramp,” she said firmly , and patted
Jem’ s back before releasing him. “Don’ t worry about him.”
“Sure?” he said, obviously wanting to believe her , but not
quite ready to relax into security .
“Sure,” she said firmly .
“Okay .” He heaved a deep sigh  and pushed away from her .
“Besides,” he added, looking happier , “Grandda wouldn’ t let
him eat Mandy or me. I should have thought o’ that.”
 
IT W AS  NEARL Y SUNSET by the time she heard the
chugging of Roger ’ s car on the farm road. She rushed outside,
and he’d  barely got out of the car before she flung herself into
his arms.
He didn’ t waste time with questions. He embraced her
passionately and  kissed her in a way that made it clear that
their ar gument was over; the details of mutual apology could
wait. F or an instant, she al lowed herself to let go of
everything, feeling weightless in his arms, breathing the scents
of petrol and dust and libraries full of old books that overlay
his natural smell, that indefinable faint musk of sun-warmed
skin, even when he hadn’ t been in the sun.“They say women can’ t really identify their husbands by
smell,” she remarked, reluctantly coming back to earth. “I
don’ t be lieve it. I could pick you out of King’ s Cross tube
station in the pitch-dark.”
“I did have a bath this morning, aye?”
“Y es, an d you stayed in colleg e, because I can smell the
horrible industr ial-strength soa p they use there,” she said,
wrinkling her nose. “I’m surprised it doesn’ t take your skin
of f. And you ha d black pudding for your breakfast. W ith fried
tomato.”
“Right, Lassie,” he said, smiling. “Or do I mean Rin-T in-
T in? Saved any small children or tracked any robbers to their
lairs today , have ye?”
“W ell, y es. Sort of.” She glanc ed up at the hill behind the
house, where the broch’ s shadow had grown long and black.
“But I thought I ’d better wait until the sherif f came back from
town before I went any further .”
 
ARMED WITH A ST OUT blackthorn walking stick and
an electric torch, Roger approached the broch, angry but
cautious. It wasn’ t likely the man was armed, if he was still
there, bu t Brianna was at the kitchen door , the telephone—at
the full stretch of its long cord—beside her , and two nines
already dialed. She’d wanted to come with him, but he’d
convinced her that one of them had to stay with the kids. Still,
it would have been a comfort to have her at his back; she was
a tal l, muscular woman, and no t one to shrink from physical
violence.
The doo r of the broch hung askew; the ancient leather
hinges had long since rotted a way and been replaced with
cheap ir on, which had rusted in turn. The door was still
attached to its frame, but barely . He lifted the latch and
maneuvered the heavy , splinte ring wood inward, pulling it
away from the floor so it swung without scraping.There was still plenty of light outside; it wouldn’ t be full
dark for half an hour yet. Inside the broch, though, it was black
as a  wel l. He shone his torch on the floor and saw fresh drag
marks in  the dirt that crusted the stone floor . A ye, someone
had been  here, then. Jem might be able to move the door , but
the kids weren’ t allowed to go in the broch without an adult,
and Jem swore he hadn’ t.
“Halloooo!” he shouted, and was answered by a startled
movement somewhere far above. He gripped his stick in
reflex, but recognized the flutt er and rustle for what it was
almost at once. Bats, hanging up under the conical roof. He
flashed h is light round the ground floor and saw a few stained
and crumpled newspapers by th e wall. He picked one up and
smelled it: old, but the scent of fish and vinegar was still
discernible.
He hadn’ t thought Jem was making up the Nuckelavee
story , but this evidence of recent human occupation renewed
his anger . That s omeone should not only come and lurk on his
property , but threaten his son …  He almost hoped the fellow
was still here. He wanted a word.
He wasn ’ t, though. No one with  sense would have gone to
the uppe r floors of the broch; the boards were half rotted, and
as his eyes adjusted, he could see the gaping holes, a faint light
coming through  them from the slit windows higher up. Roger
heard nothing, but an ur ge to b e certain propelled him up the
narrow s tone stair that spiraled round the inside of the tower ,
testing each step for loose stone s before trusting his weight to
it.
He d isturbed a quantity of pig eons on the top floor , who
panicked and whirled round the inside of the tower like a
feathery tornad o, shedding down feathers and droppings,
before finding their way out of the windows. He pressed
himself against the wall, heart pounding as they battered
blindly p ast his face. Something —a rat, a mouse, a vole—ran
over his foot, a nd he jerked convulsively , nearly losing his
torch.The broch was alive, all righ t; the bats up above were
shifting around, uneasy at all th e racket below . But no sign of
an intruder , human or not.
Coming down, he put his head o ut to signal to Bree that all
was wel l, then closed the door a nd made his way down to the
house, brushing dirt and pigeon feathers of f his clothes.
“I’ll put a new hasp and a padlock on that door ,” he told
Brianna, lounging against the old stone sink as she started the
supper . “Though I doubt he’ll be back. Likely just a traveler .”
“From t he Orkn eys, do you thi nk?” She was reassured, he
could tell, but there was still a line of worry between her
brows. “Y ou said that’ s where  they have stories about the
Nuckelavee.”
He shrugged.
“Possible. But ye find the stories written down; the
Nuckelavee’ s not so popular as kelpies or fairies, but anyone
might come across him in print.  What’ s that?” She had opened
the refrigerator to get the butter out, and he’d glimpsed the
bottle of champagne on the shelf, its foiled label gleaming.
“Oh, tha t.” She looked at him, ready to smile, but with a
certain a pprehension in her eyes. “I, um, got the job. I thought
we migh t … celebrate?” The tentative question smote him to
the heart, and he smacked himself on the forehead.
“Christ, I for got to ask! That ’ s great, Bree! I knew ye
would, mind,” he said, smiling with every bit of warmth and
conviction he could muster . “Never a doubt.”
He could see the tension leave her body as her face lit up,
and felt a certain peace descend on him, as well. This pleasant
feeling l asted through the rib-cracking hug she gave him and
the very  nice kiss that followed , but was obliterated when she
stepped back and, taking up a s aucepan, asked with elaborate
casualness, “So … did you find what you were looking for in
Oxford?”
“Y eah.” It came out in a gruf f croak; he cleared his throat
and tried again. “Y eah, more o r less. Look—can the supperwait a bit, d’ye think? I think I’d  have more appetite if I tell ye
first.”
“Sure,” she said slowly , putting down the saucepan. Her
eyes were fixed on him, interest ed, maybe a bit fearful. “I fed
the kids before you got home. If you’re not starving …”
He was;  he hadn’ t stopped for lunch on the way back and
his stom ach was flapping, but it  didn’ t matter . He reached out
a hand to her .
“Come o n out. The evening’ s fine.” And if she took it badly ,
there were no saucepans out of doors.
 
“I WENT ROUND to Old St. Stephen’ s,” he said
abruptly , as soon as they’d left the house. “T o talk to Dr .
W eatherspoon; he’ s rector there. He was a friend of the
Reverend’ s—he’ s known me since I was a lad.”
Her han d had tightened on his a rm as he spoke. He risked a
glance at her and saw her looking anxious but hopeful.
“And … ?” she said, tentative.
“W ell …  the upshot of it is I’ve  got a job, too.” He smiled,
self-conscious. “Assistant choirmaster .”
That, of  course, hadn’ t been wh at she was expecting at all,
and she blinked. Then her eyes  went to his throat. He knew
fine what she was thinking.
“Ar e you going to wear  that ? ” she had asked, hesitant, the
first time they prepared to go into Inverness for shopping.
“I was, aye. Why , have I got a spot?”  He’d craned to look
over the  shoulder of his white shirt. No surprise if he had.
Mandy had rushed in from her p lay to greet him, plastering his
legs with sandy hugs. He’d dusted her of f a bit before lifting
her for a proper kiss, but …
“Not that,”  Bree had said, her lips compressing for a
minute. “It’ s just … What will you say about …” She made athroat-cutting gesture.
His hand had gone to the open collar of his shirt, where the
rope scar made a curving line , distinct to the touch, like a
chain of  tiny pebbles under the  skin. It had faded somewhat,
but was still very visible.
“Nothing.”
Her brows rose, and he’d given her a lopsided smile.
“But what will they be thinking?”
“I suppose they’ll just assume I’m into autoer otic
asphyxiation and went a bit too far one day .”
Familiar as he was with the rural Highlands, he imagined
that was the leas t of what they would think. Externally proper
his putative congregation might be—but no one could imagine
more lurid depravity than a devout Scottish Presbyterian.
“Did …  er … did you tell Dr . W eatherspoon … What did
you tell him?” s he asked now , after a moment’ s consideration.
“I mean—he had to have noticed.”
“Oh, aye. He noticed. I didn’ t say anything, though, and
neither did he.”
“Look, Br ee,”  he’d told her on that first day , “it’ s a straight
choice. W e tell everyone the absolute truth, or we tell them
nothing—or as close to nothing as possible—and let them
think wh at they like. Concocting a story won’ t work, will it?
T oo many ways to trip up.”
She hadn’ t liked it; he could still see the way her eyes had
drawn d own at the corners. But he was right, and she knew it.
Decision had spread across her face, and she’d nodded, her
shoulders squaring.
They’d had to do a certain amount of lying, of course, in
order to legalize the existence of Jem and Mandy . But it was
the late seventies; communes abounded in the States, and
impromptu band s of “travelers,” as they called themselves,
drifted to and fr o across Europe in cavalcades of rusted buses
and clapped-out vans. They had brought very little through thestones with them, bar the children themselves—but among the
tiny hoard Brianna had tucked i nto her pockets and down her
stays were two handwritten birth certificates, attested by one
Claire Beauchamp Randall, MD, attending physician.
“It’ s the pr oper form for a ho me birth,”  C laire had said,
making the loops of her signature with care. “And I  am —or I
was,”  s he’d correcte d, with a wry twist of the mouth, “a
r egister ed physician, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.”
“Assistant choirmaster ,” Bree said now , eyeing him.
He drew a deep breath; the evening air was  f ine , cle ar and
soft, if beginning to be popula ted by midgies. He waved a
cloud of them away from his face, and grasped the nettle.
“I didn’ t go for a job, mind. I went to … to get my mind
clear . About being a minister .”
She stopped dead at that.
“And … ?” she prompted.
“Come on.” He pulled her gen tly into motion once more.
“W e’ll be eaten alive if we stand here.”
They str olled through the kailyard and out past the barn,
walking along the path that le d by the back pasture. He’d
already milked the two cows, M illy and Blossom, and they’d
settled f or the night, big hump ed dark shapes in the grass,
peacefully chewing their cuds.
“I told you about the W estminster Confession, aye?” This
was the Presbyterian equivale nt to the Catholics’ Nicene
Creed—their statement of of ficially accepted doctrine.
“Uh-huh.”
“W ell, see, to be a Presbyterian minister , I’d need to be able
to swear that I accepted everything in the W estminster
Confession. I did, when I—well , before.” He’d come so close,
he thought. He’d been on the e ve of ordination as a minister
when fate had intervened, in th e person of Stephen Bonnet.
Roger had been compelled to drop everything, to find andrescue Brianna from the pirate’ s  lair on Ocracoke. Not that he
regretted doing it, mind…. Sh e paced beside him, red and
long-limbed, graceful as a tiger , and the thought that she might
so easily have v anished from his life forever—and that he’d
never have known his daughter …
He coughed and cleared his throat, abstractedly touching the
scar .
“Maybe I still do. But I’m not sure. And I have to be.”
“What c hanged?” she asked curiously . “What could you
accept then that you can’ t now?”
What changed?  he thought wryly . Good question .
“Predestination,” he said. “In a manner of speaking.” There
was still enough light that he s aw a look of mildly derisive
amusement flicker across her face, though whether simply
from the ironic juxtaposition of  question and answer or from
the concept itself, he didn’ t know . They’d never ar gued
questions of faith—they were more than cautious with each
other on those  gro unds—but they were at lea st familiar with
the general shape of each other ’ s beliefs.
He’d explained the idea of predestination in simple terms:
not som e inescapable fate ordained by God, nor yet the notion
that God had la id out each person’ s life in great detail before
his or her birth— though not a few Presbyterians saw it just
that way . It had to do with salvation and the notion that God
chose a pathway that led to that salvation.
“For some people,” she’d said skeptically . “And He chooses
to damn the rest?”
A lo t of people  thought that , t oo, and it ha d taken better
minds than his to ar gue their way past that impression.
“There are whole books written  about it, but the basic idea
is th at salvation’ s not just the r esult of our choice—God acts
first. Extending the invitation, y e might say , and giving us an
opportunity to respond. But we’ve still got free choice. And
really ,” he added quickly , “the o nly thing that’ s not optional—to be a Presbyte rian—is a belief in Jesus Christ. I’ve still got
that.”
“Good,” she said. “But to be a minister … ?”
“Y eah, probably . And—well, here.” He reached abruptly
into his pocket and handed her the folded photocopy .
“I thought I’d b est not steal th e book,” he said, trying for
levity . “In case I do  dec ide to be minister , I mean. Bad
example for the flock.”
“Ho-ho,” she said absently , reading. She looked up, one
eyebrow quirked.
“It’ s dif ferent, isn’ t it?” he said,  the breathless feeling back
beneath his diaphragm.
“It’ s …” Her ey es shot back to the document, and a frown
creased her brow . She looked up at him a moment later , pale
and swallowing. “Dif ferent. The date’ s dif ferent.”
He f elt a  slight easing of the ten sion that had wound him up
for t he last twen ty-four hours. He wasn’ t losing his mind, then.
He p ut out a hand, and she ga ve him back the copy of the
clipping from the W ilmington Gazette— the death notice for the
Frasers of the Ridge.
“It’ s onl y the date,” he said, running a thumb beneath the
blurred type of the words. “The  text—I think that’ s the same.
Is it what you re member?” She’d found the same information,
looking for her family in the past—it was what had propelled
her through the stones, and him after her . And that , he thought,
has made all the differ ence. Thank you, Robert Fr ost .
She’d pressed against him, to re ad it over again. Once, and
twice, and once more for good measure, before she nodded.
“Only the date,” she said, and he heard the same
breathlessness in her voice. “It … changed.”
“Good,” he said, his voice sound ing queer and gruf f. “When
I sta rted wondering … I had to go and see, before I talked to
you about it. Jus t to check—because the clipping I’d seen in a
book, that couldn’ t be right.”She nodded, still a little pale.
“If I … if I went back to the archive in Boston where I
found that newspaper—would it have changed, too, do you
think?”
“Y eah, I do.”
She was silent for a long moment, looking at the paper in
his hand. Then she looked at him, intent.
“Y ou said, when you started wondering. What made you
start wondering?”
“Y our mother .”
 
IT H AD BEEN a couple of mo nths before they left the
Ridge. Unable to sleep one night, he’d gone out into the woods
and, roaming restlessly to and fro, had encountered Claire,
kneeling in a ho llow full of wh ite flowers, their shapes like a
mist around her .
He’d jus t sat down then and watched her at her gathering, as
she broke stems and stripped leaves into her basket. She
wasn’ t t ouching the flowers, he saw , but pulling up something
that grew beneath them.
“Y ou need to g ather these at night,” she remarked to him
after a little. “Preferably at the dark of the moon.”
“I shouldn’ t have expected—” he began, but broke of f
abruptly .
She laughed, a small fizzing sound of amusement.
“Y ou wo uldn’ t have expected that I should put stock in such
superstitions?” s he asked. “W ait, young Roger . When you’ve
lived as  long as I, you may begin to regard superstitions
yourself. As for this one …” Her hand moved, a pale blur in
the dark ness, and broke a stem with a soft, juicy snap. A
pungent aroma suddenly filled the air , sharp and plangent
through the softer aroma of the flowers.“Insects come and lay their eg gs on the leaves of some
plants, d o you see? The plants secrete certain rather strong-
smelling substances in order to repel the bugs, and the
concentration of these substances is highest when the need is
greatest. As it happens, those insecticidal substances happen
also to have quite powerful med icinal properties, and the chief
thing that troubles this particular sort of plant”—she brushed a
feathery stem under his nose, fresh and damp—”is the larvae
of moths.”
“Er go, i t has more of the substance late at night, because
that’ s when the caterpillars feed?”
“Got it.” The ste m was withdrawn, the plant thrust into her
bag with  a rustle of muslin, and her head bent as she felt about
for m ore. “And some plants are  fertilized by moths. Those, of
course …”
“Bloom at night.”
“Most plants, though, are troubled by daylight insects, and
so th ey begin to  secrete their useful compounds at dawn; the
concentration rises as the day w axes—but then, when the sun
gets too hot, some of the oils will begin to vaporize from the
leaves, a nd the plant will stop producing them. So most of the
very aro matic plants, you pick in late morning. And so the
shamans and the herbalists tell  their apprentices to take one
plant in the dar k of the moon and another at midday—thus
making it a superstition, hmm?” Her voice was rather dry , but
still amused.
Roger sat back o n his heels, watching her grope about. Now
that his eyes we re accustomed, he could make out her shape
with ease, though the details of her face were still hidden.
She wor ked for a time, and the n sat back on her heels and
stretched; he heard the creak of her back.
“I saw him onc e, you know .” H er voice was muf fled; she
had turned away from him, probing under the drooping
branches of a rhododendron.
“Saw him? Who?”“The King.” She found something; he heard the rustle of
leaves as she tugged at it, and the snap of the breaking stem.
“He came to Pembroke Hospital, to visit the soldiers there.
He came and sp oke separately to us—the nurses and doctors.
He was a quiet man, very dignified, but warm in his manner . I
couldn’ t tell you a thing that he said. But it was … remarkably
inspiring. Just that he was there, you know .”
“Mmphm.” W as it the onset of  war , he wondered, making
her recall such things?
“A journalist asked the Queen if she would be taking her
children and evacuating to the country—so many were, you
know .”
“I k now .” Roger saw suddenly in his mind’ s eye a pair of
children: a boy and a girl, thin-faced and silent, huddling near
each other beside a familiar hea rth. “W e had two of them—at
our house in Inverness. How odd, I hadn’ t remembered them
at all until just now .”
She wasn’ t paying attention, though.
“She said—and I may not have the quote exactly right, but
this is the gist o f it—’W ell, the children can’ t leave me, and I
can’ t lea ve the King—and of course the king won’ t leave.’
When was your father killed, Roger?”
Whatever he’d been expecting her to say , it wasn’ t that. For
an insta nt, the question seemed so incongruous as not to be
comprehensible.
“What?” But he had  hea rd her , and shaking his head to
dispel a feeling of surreality , he answered, “October 1941. I’m
not sure I remember the exact date—no, I do, the Reverend
had it written on his genealog y . The thirty-first of October ,
1941. Why?” “Why in  God’ s name,”  h e wanted to s ay , but
he’d been trying to control the impulse toward casual
blasphemy . He choked of f the stronger impulse to escape into
random thought and repeated, very calmly , “Why?”
“Y ou said he’d been shot down in Germany , didn’ t you?”“Over th e Chan nel on his way to Germany . So I was told.”
He coul d just make out her features in the moonlight, but
couldn’ t read her expression.
“Who told you? Do you remember?”
“The Reverend, I suppose. Or I suppose it might have been
my mother .” The sense of unre ality was wearing of f, and he
was beginning to feel angry . “Does it matter?”
“Probably not. When we first met you—Frank and I, in
Inverness—the Reverend said then that your father had been
shot down over the Channel.”
“Y es? W ell …” So what?  w as unspoken,  but she plainl y
picked it up, for  there was a small snort of not-quite laughter
from the rhododendrons.
“Y ou’re right, it doesn’ t matter . But—both you and the
Reverend mentioned that he was a Spitfire pilot. Is that
correct?”
“Y es.” Roger wasn’ t sure why , b ut he was beginning to have
an u neasy sense at the back of his neck, as though something
might be  standin g behind him. H e coughed, making an excuse
to turn his head, but glimpsed nothing behind him but the
black-and-white forest, smudged by moonlight.
“I do know that for sure,” he said, feeling oddly defensive.
“My mother had a photograph of him with his plane. Rag Doll ,
the p lane was ca lled; the name w as painted on the nose, with a
crude picture of a dolly in a red dress, with black curls.” He
did know  that for sure. He’d slept with the picture under his
pillow f or a long time after his mother was killed—the studio
portrait of his mother was to o big, and he worried that
someone would notice it missing.
“Rag Doll,” he repeated, suddenly struck by something.
“What? What is it?”
He waved a hand, awkward.
“It—nothing. I —I just realized that ‘Rag Doll’ was
probably what my father called  my mother . A nickname, youknow? I saw a few of his letters to her; they were usually
addressed to Dolly . And just now , thinking of the black curls
—my mother ’ s portrait … Mandy . Mandy’ s got my mother ’ s
hair .”
“Oh, good,” Claire said dryly . “I’d hate to think I was
entirely respons ible for it. Do tell her that, when she’ s older ,
will you? Girls with very curly hair invariably hate it—at least
in the early years, when they want to look like everyone else.”
Despite his preoccupation, he heard the small note of
desolation in her voice, and reac hed for her hand, disregarding
the fact that she still held a plant in it.
“I’ll tell her ,” he said softly . “I’ll tell her everything. Don’ t
ever think we’d let the kids for get you.”
She squeezed his hand, hard, an d the fragrant white flowers
spilled over the darkness of her skirt.
“Thank you,” she whispered. He heard her snif f a little, and
she wiped the back of her other hand swiftly across her eyes.
“Thanks,” she said again, more strongly , and straightened
herself. “It is  i mp ortant. T o r emember . If I d idn’ t know that, I
wouldn’ t tell you.”
“T ell me … what?”
Her hands, small and hard and smelling of medicine,
wrapped his.
“I do n’ t know w hat happened to your father ,” she said. “But
it wasn’ t what they told you.”
 
“I W AS THERE , RO GER,” she repeated, patien t. “I read
the papers—I nursed airmen; I talked to them. I saw the
planes. Spitfires were small, light planes, meant for defense.
They ne ver crossed the Channel; they hadn’ t the range to go
from En gland into Europe and back, though they were used
there later .”“But …” Whatever ar gument he’d meant to make—blown
of f course, miscalculation—faded. The hairs had risen on his
forearms without his noticing.
“Of cou rse, things happen,” she said, as though able to read
his thoughts. “Accounts get garbled, too, over time and
distance. Whoe ver told your mother might have been
mistaken; she might have said something that the Reverend
misconstrued. All those things are possible. But during the
W ar , I had letters from Frank—he wrote as often as he could,
up u ntil they r ecruited him into MI6. After that, I often
wouldn’ t hear anything for mo nths. But just before that, he
wrote to me, and  mentioned—just as casual chat, you know—
that he’d run into something strange in the reports he was
handling. A Spitfire had gone down, crashed—not shot down,
they thought it must have been an engine failure—in
Northumbria, and while it hadn’ t burned, for a wonder—there
was no sign of t he pilot. None. And he did mention the name
of the pilot, because he thought Jeremiah rather an
appropriately doomed sort of name.”
“Jerry ,” Roger said, his lips feeling numb. “My mother
always called him Jerry .”
“Y es,” s he said softly . “And there are circles of standing
stones scattered all over Northumbria.”
“Near where the plane—”
“I d on’ t know . ” He saw the  slight movement as she
shrugged, helpless.
He close d his eyes and breathed deep, the air thick with the
scent from the broken stems.
“And you’re telling me now because we’re going back,” he
said, very calmly .
“I’ve been ar guing with myself for weeks,” she said,
sounding apologetic. “It was only a month or so ago that I
remembered. I don’ t often thi nk about the—my—past, but
what with everything …” She waved a hand, encompassing
their im minent departure an d the intense discussionssurrounding it. “I was just thin king of the W ar—I wonder if
anyone w ho was  in it ever thinks of it without a capital ‘W’—
and telling Jamie about it.”
It was Jamie w ho had asked h er about Frank. W anted to
know what role he had played in the war .
“He’ s curious about Frank,” she said abruptly .
“I would be, too, under the circumstances,” Roger had
replied dryly . “W as Frank not curious about him?”
That see med to unsettle her , and she’d not replied directly
but had pulled t he conversation firmly back on track—if you
could use such a word for such a conversation, he thought.
“Anyway ,” she said, “it was that that reminded me of
Frank’ s letters. And I was try ing to recall the things he’d
written me about, when suddenly I remembered that one
phrase—about Jeremiah being a name with a certain doom
about it.” He heard her sigh.
“I wasn’ t sure … but I talked to  Jamie, and he said I should
tell you. He says he thinks you’ve a right to know—and that
you’d do the right thing with the knowledge.”
“I’m flattered,” he said. More like flattened.
 
“SO TH A T’S IT .” The evening stars had begun to come
out, faint over the mountains. N ot as brilliant as the stars had
been on  the Ridge, where the mountain night came down like
black ve lvet. They’d come back to the house by now , but
lingered in the dooryard, talking.
“I’d thought about it, now and  again: how does the time-
traveling fit into God’ s plan? C an things be changed? Ought
they be changed? Y our parents—they tried to change history ,
tried dam ned hard, and couldn’ t do it. I’d thought that was all
there was to it— and from a Pres byterian point of view .” He let
a litt le h umor sh ow in his voice . “It was a comfort, almost, to
think that it couldn’ t  c hange. It sh ouldn’ t be able to bechanged. Y e know: God’ s in His heaven, all’ s right with the
world  sort of thing.”
“But.” Bree was holding the fold ed photocopy; she waved it
at a passing moth, a tiny white blur .
“But,” he agreed. “Proof that things can  be changed.”
“I talked  to Mama a little bit about it,” Bree said, after a
moment’ s thought. “She laughed.”
“Did she?” Roger said dryly , an d got the breath of a laugh
from Bree in answer .
“Not like she th ought it was funny ,” she assured him. “I’d
asked her if she thought it was possible for a traveler to change
things, change the future, and she told me it was, obviously—
because she changed the future every time she kept someone
from dying who would have d ied if she hadn’ t been there.
Some of them w ent on to have children they wouldn’ t have
had, and  who knew what those  children would do, that they
wouldn’ t have done if they hadn’ t … and that  w as when she
laughed and said it was a goo d thing Catholics believed in
Mystery and didn’ t insist on try ing to figure out exactly how
God worked, like Protestants do.”
“W ell, I don’ t kn ow that I’d say —oh, was she talking about
me?”
“Probably . I didn’ t ask.”
Now it was his turn to laugh, though it hurt his throat to do
it.
“Proof,” she said thoughtfully . She was sitting on the bench
near the  front door , folding the photocopy in long, nervously
deft fingers. “I don’ t know . Is  it proof?”
“Maybe not up to your rigorous engineering standards,” he
said. “B ut I do remember—and  so do you. If it was only me,
then, yeah, I’d think it was just my mind going. But I’ve got a
little more faith in your  m ental process es. Are you ma king a
paper airplane out of that?”“No, it’ s—whoa. Mandy .” She was up and moving before
he’d quite registered the wail from the nursery upstairs, and
had van ished into the house a moment later , leaving him to
lock up below . They didn’ t usually bother locking the doors—
no one did, in the Highlands—but tonight …
His hear t rate sur ged as a long gray shadow shot out across
the path  in front of him. Then dropped as he smiled. W ee
Adso, out for a prowl. A neighbor boy had come round with a
basket of kittens a few months before, looking for homes for
them, and Bree h ad taken the gr ay one, a green-eyed ringer for
her mother ’ s cat, and given it the same name. If they got a
watchdog, would they name it Rollo? he wondered.
“Chat a Mhinister …”  he said . The minister ’ s cat is a
hunting cat .
“Good hunting, then,” he added to the tail disappearing
under th e hydrangea bush, and bent to retrieve the half-folded
paper from the path where Brianna had dropped it.
No, it wasn’ t a paper airplane. What was it? A paper hat?
No telling, and he tucked it into his shirt pocket and went in.
He f ound Bree a nd Mandy in th e front parlor , in front of a
freshly made fire. Mandy , comforted and given milk, had half-
dozed of f again already in Bree’ s arms; she blinked sleepily at
him, sucking on a thumb.
“A ye, w hat’ s the trouble, then, a leannan ?” he asked her
softly , pushing tumbled curls out of her eyes.
“Bad dream,” Bree said, her voice carefully casual. “A
naughty thing outside, trying to get in her window .”
He a nd Brianna had been sitting  below that very window at
the t ime, but he glanced reflexively at the window beside him,
which reflected only the domestic scene of which he was a
part. The man in the glass looked wary , shoulders hunched in
readiness to lunge at something. He got up and drew the
curtains.
“Here,” he said abruptly , sitting down and reaching for
Mandy . She came into his arms with the slow amiability of atree sloth, sticking her wet thumb in his ear in the process.
Bree went to fetch them cups of cocoa, returning with a
rattle of crocker y , the scent of hot milk and chocolate, and the
look of someone who’ s been thinking what to say about a
dif ficult matter .
“Did yo u … I m ean, given the n ature of the, er , dif ficulty …
did you maybe think of asking God?” she said, dif fident.
“Directly?”
“Y eah, I did th ink of that,” he assured her , torn between
annoyance and amusement at th e question. “And yes, I did ask
—a num ber of times. Especially on the way to Oxford. Where
I f ound that.” He  nodded at the bit of paper . “What is it, by the
way? The shape, I mean.”
“Oh.” She picked it up and ma de the last few folds, quick
and sure, then h eld it out on the palm of her hand. He frowned
at it for a moment, then reali zed what it was. A Chinese
fortune-teller , kids called them ; there were four pockets
showing, and you put your fingers in them and could open the
thing in dif ferent combinations as questions were asked, so as
to show the dif ferent answers —Y es, N o, Some times, Always—
written on the flaps inside.
“V ery appropriate,” he said.
They fell silent for a moment, drinking cocoa in a silence
that balanced precariously on the edge of question.
“The W estminst er Confession also says, God alo ne is Lor d
of the conscience . I’ll  ma ke my peace with it,” he  said quietly ,
at la st, “or I won’ t. I said to Dr . W eatherspoon that it seemed a
bit odd, having an assistant choirmaster who couldn’ t sing—he
just smiled and s aid he was wan ting me to take the job so as to
keep me  in the fold while I tho ught things over , as he put it.
Probably afraid I’d jump ship e lse, and go over to Rome,” he
added, as a feeble joke.
“That’ s good,” she said softly , not looking up from the
depths of the cocoa she wasn’ t drinking.More silence. And the shade of Jerry MacKenzie, RAF ,
came and sat do wn by the fire in his fleece-lined leather flight
jacket, w atching the play of lig ht in his granddaughter ’ s ink-
black hair .
“So you —” He could hear the little pop as her tongue parted
from he r dry mouth. “Y ou’re going to look? See if you can
find out where your father went? Where he might … be?”
Wher e he might be. Her e, ther e, then, now?  His heart gave a
sudden convulsive lurch, thinking of the tramp who’d stayed
in th e br och. God … no. It couldn’ t be. No reason to think it,
none. Only wanting.
He’d tho ught ab out it a lot, on the way to Oxford, between
the pray ing. What he’d say , w hat he’d ask, if he had the
chance. He wanted to ask everything, say everything—but
there really was only the one thi ng to say to his father , and that
thing was snoring in his arms like a drunken bumblebee.
“No.” Mandy squirmed in her s leep, emitted a small burp,
and settled back against his che st. He didn’ t look up, but kept
his eyes  fixed in the dark labyrinth of her curls. “I couldn’ t
risk my own ki ds losing their father .” His voice had nearly
disappeared; he felt his vocal co rds grinding like gears to force
the words out.
“It’ s too important. Y ou don’ t for get having a dad.”
Bree’ s eyes slid sideways, the b lue of them no more than a
spark in the firelight.
“I th ought … y ou were so young. Y ou do remember your
father?”
Roger shook his head, the chambers of his heart clenching
hard, grasping emptiness.
“No,” h e said softly , and bent  his head, breathing in the
scent of his daughter ’ s hair . “I remember yours.” FLUTTERBY
 W ilmington, colony of North Carolina
 May 3, 1777
 
I  COULD SEE A T ONCE that Jamie had been dreaming
again. H is face had an unfocus ed, inward look, as though he
were seeing something other th an the fried black pudding on
his plate.
Seeing h im like this gave me an ur gent desire to ask what he
had seen —quelled at once, for f ear that if I asked too soon, he
might lo se some part of the dream. It also, truth be told,
knotted me with envy . I would  have given anything to see
what he  saw , whether it was rea l or not. That hardly mattered
—it was connection, and the severed nerve ends that had
joined m e to my vanished family sparked and burned like
shorted-out electrical cables when I saw that look on his face.
I c ouldn ’ t stand not to know what he had dreamed, though
in the usual manner of dreams, it was seldom straightforward.
“Y ou’ve been dreaming of them , haven’ t you?” I said, when
the servi ng maid had gone out. W e’d risen late, tired from the
long ride to W i lmington the day before, and were the only
diners in the inn’ s small front room.
He glanced at me and nodd ed slowly , a small frown
between his brows. That made  me uneasy; the occasional
dreams he had of Bree or the children normally left him
peaceful and happy .
“What?” I demanded. “What happened?”
He shrugged, still frowning.
“Nothing, Sassenach. I saw Jem and the wee lass—” A
smile came over his face at that. “God, she’ s a feisty wee
baggage! She minds me o’ you, Sassenach.”
This was a dubious compliment as phrased, but I felt a deep
glow at the tho ught. I’d spent hours looking at Mandy and
Jem, memorizing every small feature and gesture, trying toextrapolate, imagine what they would look like as they grew—
and I was almos t sure that Mand y had my mouth. I knew for a
fact that  she had the shape of my eyes—and my hair , poor
child, for all it was inky black.
“What were they doing?”
He rubbed a f inger between his brows as though his
forehead itched.
“They w ere outside,” he said s lowly . “Jem told her to do
something and she kicked him in the shin and ran away from
him, so he chased her . I think it was spring.” He smiled, eyes
fixed on  whatever he’d seen in  his dream. “I mind the wee
flowers, caught in her hair , a nd lying in drifts across the
stones.”
“What stones?” I asked sharply .
“Oh. T he grav estones,” he answered, readily enough.
“That’ s it—they were playing among the stones on the hill
behind Lallybroch.”
I sig hed happily . This was the third dream that he’d had,
seeing them at L allybroch. It might be only wishful thinking,
but I knew it made him as hap py as it made me, to feel that
they had made a home there.
“They c ould be, ” I said. “Roger  went there—when we were
looking for you. He said the p lace was standing vacant, for
sale. Bree would have money; th ey might have bought it. They
could  be the re!” I’d  told him that before, but he nodded,
pleased.
“A ye, they could be,” he said, his eyes still soft with his
memory of the children on the hill, chasing through the long
grass and the worn gray stones that marked his family’ s rest.
“A flutte rby came with them,” he said suddenly . “I’d for got
that. A blue one.”
“Blue? Are there blue butterflies in Scotland?” I frowned,
trying to  remember . Such butterflies as I’d ever noticed had
tended to be white or yellow , I thought.Jamie gave me a look of mild exasperation.
“It’ s a dream, S assenach. I could have flutterbys wi’ tartan
wings, and I liked.”
I laughed, but refused to be distracted.
“Right. What was it that bothered you, though?”
He glanced curiously at me.
“How did ye ken I was troubled?”
I l ooked  at him down my nose—or as much down my nose
as was possible, given the disparity of height.
“Y ou may not have a glass face, but I have  bee n m arried to
you for thirty-odd years.”
He let the fact that I hadn’ t a ctually been with  him for
twenty of those years pass without comment, and only smiled.
“A ye. W ell, it wasna anything, really . Only that they went
into the broch.”
“The broch?” I said uncertainly . The ancient tower for
which Lallybroc h was named did stand on the hill behind the
house, its shadow passing daily through the burying ground
like the stately march of a giant  sundial. Jamie and I had gone
up there often of an evening in our early days at Lallybroch, to
sit on the bench  that stood against the broch’ s wall and be
away from the hubbub of the house, enjoying the peaceful
sight of  the estate and its grounds spread white and green
below us, soft with twilight.
The small frown was back between his brows.
“The broch,” he repeated, and looked at me, helpless. “I
dinna ken what it was. Only that I didna want them to go in. It
… felt as though there was something inside. W aiting. And I
didna like it at all.”P AR T  T HREE Privateer
 
  CORRESPONDENCE FROM THE FRONT
 October 3, 1776
 Ellesmere
 to Lady Dorothea Grey
 
Dear Coz—
I write in haste to catch the Courier . I am embarked
upon a brief Journey in company with another Officer , on
behalf of Captain Richar dson, and do not know for
certain what my Wher eabouts may be for the immediate
Futur e. Y ou may write to me in car e of your Br other
Adam; I will endeavor to keep in Corr espondence with
him .
I ha ve executed your Commiss ion to the best of my
Ability , and will persever e in your Service. Give my
Father and yours my best Rega r ds and Respects, as well
as my continuin g Affection, and do not omit to keep a
lar ge Part of this last Quantity for yourself .
Y our most obedient,
 W illiam
 
 
October 3, 1776
 Ellesmer e to Lor d John Gr ey
Dear Father ,
After due Thought, I have decided to accept Captain
Richar dson’ s Pr oposal that I accompany a senior Officer
on a Mission to Quebec, acting as Interpr eter for him, my
Fr ench being thought adequate to the Purpose. General
Howe is agr eeable .
I have not yet met Captain Randall-Isaacs, but will join
him in Albany n ext W eek. I do not know when we may
r eturn, and cannot say what Opportunities ther e may be
to w rite, but I will do so when I can, and in the meantime
beg that you will think fondly ofY our son,
 W illiam
 
 
Late October 1776
 Quebec
 
W ILLIAM W ASN’T SURE qui te what to make of
Captain Denys Randall-Isaacs. On the surface, he was just the
sort of genial, unremarkable fellow you found in any regiment:
about thirty , decent with cards, ready with a joke, good-
looking in a dark  sort of way , open-faced, and reliable. He was
a very pleasant traveling com panion, too, with a fund of
entertaining stories for the road and a thoroughgoing
knowledge of bawdy songs and poems of the lower sort.
What he didn’ t do was talk about himself. Which, in
W illiam’ s experience, was what most people did best—or at
least most frequently .
He’d tried a little tentative prodding, of fering the rather
dramatic story of his own birth, and receiving in turn a few
spare facts: Randall-Isaacs’ s own father , an of ficer of
dragoons, had died in the Highlands campaign before Denys’ s
birth, and his mother had remarried a year later .
“My stepfather is a Jew ,” he’d told W illiam. “A rich one,”
he’d added, with a wry smile.
W illiam had nodded, amiable.
“Better than a p oor one,” he’d said, and left it at that. It
wasn’ t much, as facts went, but it did go some way to explain
why Randall-Isaacs was workin g for Richardson rather than
pursuing fame and glory with the Lancers or the W elch
Fusiliers. Money would buy a commission, but it would not
ensure a warm reception in a regiment nor the sorts ofopportunity that family connections and the influence spoken
of delicately as “interest” would.
It occurr ed—fleetingly—to W illiam to wonder just why he
was turning his back on his own substantial connections and
opportunities in order to engage in Captain Richardson’ s
shadowy ventures, but he dismissed that consideration as a
matter for later contemplation.
“Amazing,” Den ys murmured, looking up. They had reined
in their horses on the road that l ed up from the bank of the St.
Lawrence to the citadel of Queb ec; from here, they could see
the steep clif f face that W olfe’ s troops had climbed, seventeen
years before, to capture the citadel—and Quebec—from the
French.
“My fath er made that climb,” W illiam said, trying to sound
casual.
Randall-Isaacs’ s head swiveled t oward him in astonishment.
“He did ? Lord John, you mean —he fought on the Plains of
Abraham with W olfe?”
“Y es.” W illiam eyed the clif f wi th respect. It was thick with
saplings, but the underlying rock was crumbling shale; he
could see the jagged dark fissures and quadrangular cracks
through the leaves. The notion of scaling that height in the
dark, an d not only climbing it, but hauling all the artillery up
the clif f-side with them … !
“He said  the battle was over almost as soon as it started—
only the  one great volley—but t he climb to the battlefield was
the worst thing he’d ever done.”
Randall-Isaacs grunted respectfully , and paused for a
moment before gathering his reins.
“Y ou sa id your father knows Sir Guy?” he said. “Doubtless
he’ll appreciate hearing the story .”
W illiam glanced at his companion. Actually , he hadn’ t  said
that Lord John knew Sir Guy  Carleton, the commander in
chief for North America—though he did. His father knew
everyone. And with that simple thought, he realized suddenlywhat his  true function on this expedition was. He was Randall-
Isaacs’ s calling card.
It was true that he spoke French very well—languages came
easy to him—and that Randall-Isaacs’ s French was
rudimentary . Richardson had likely been telling the truth about
that bit; always best to have an interpreter you can trust. But
while Randall-I saacs had exhibited a flattering interest in
W illiam, W illiam became aware ex post facto  that Randall-
Isaacs was much more specifica lly interested in Lord John: the
highlights of his military career , where he had been posted,
whom he had served with or under , who he knew .
It had happened twice already . They’d called upon the
commanders of Fort Saint-Jean and Fort Chambly , and in both
instances Randall-Isaacs had presented their credentials,
mentioning casually that W illia m was the son of Lord John
Grey . Whereupon the of ficial welcome had warmed at once
into a long, late evening of reminiscence and conversation,
fueled by good brandy . During which—W illiam now realized
—he and the commanders had done all the talking. And
Randall-Isaacs h ad sat listening, his handsome, high-colored
face aglow with a flattering interest.
Huh , W i lliam thought to himself. H aving worked it out, he
wasn’ t s ure how  he felt about it. On the one hand, he was
pleased with himself for having smoked what was going on.
On t he o ther , he  was less pleased  to think that he was desirable
mainly for his connections, rather than his own virtues.
W ell, it was use ful, if humbling, to know . What he didn’ t
know wa s exactly what Randall-Isaacs’ s role was. W as he only
gathering information for Ric hardson? Or had he other
business, unspo ken? Often enough, Randall-Isaacs had left
him to his own devices, saying casually that he had a private
errand for which he thought his own French adequate.
They w ere—according to the  very limited instruction
Captain Richardson had given him—assessing the sentiments
of the French habitants  and English settlers in Quebec, with an
eye to future su pport in case of incursion by the Americanrebels or attempted threats and seductions by the Continental
Congress.
These sentiment s so far seemed clear , if not what he might
have ex pected. The French settlers in the area were in
sympathy with Sir Guy , who—as governor general of North
America—had passed the Quebec Act, which legalized
Catholicism and protected the French Catholics’ trade. The
English were disgruntled by the same act, for obvious reasons,
and had declined en masse  t o answer Sir G uy’ s calls for militia
assistance durin g the American attack on the city during the
previous winter .
“They must have been insane,” he remarked to Randall-
Isaacs, a s they crossed the open  plain before the citadel. “The
Americans who tried it on here last year , I mean.”
They’d r eached the top of the clif f now , and the citadel rose
from the plain before them, peaceful and solid—very solid—in
the a utumn sun. The day was warm and beautiful, and the air
was alive with t he rich, earthy smells of the river and forest.
He’d never seen such a forest. The trees that edged the plain
and grew all a long the banks of the St. Lawrence grew
impenetrably thick, now blazing with gold and crimson. Seen
against the darkness of the wate r and the impossible deep blue
of th e va st Octob er sky , the who le of it gave him the dreamlike
feeling of riding through a medieval painting, glowing with
gold leaf and burning with a sense of otherworldly fervor .
But beyond the beauty of it, he felt the savagery of the
place. Felt it with a clarity  that made his bones feel
transparent. The days were still warm, but the chill of winter
was a sharp toot h that bit harder with each day’ s twilight, and
it took very little imagination for him to see this plain as it
would b e a few weeks from now , cloaked in bitter ice, whitely
inhospitable to all life. W ith a ride of two hundred miles
behind him, and an immediate understanding of the problems
of supply for two riders on the rugged journey north in good
weather , combined with what he knew of the rigors of
supplying an army in bad weather …“If t hey weren’ t insane, they w ouldn’ t be doing what they
ar e  doing.”  Randall-Isaacs interrupted his thoughts, he, too,
drawing up for a moment to look over the prospect with a
soldier ’ s eye. “It was Colonel  Arnold who led them here,
though. That man is certainly insane. But a damned good
soldier .” Admiration showed in his voice, and W illiam glanced
curiously at him.
“Know him, do you?” he asked casually , and Randall-Isaacs
laughed.
“Not to speak t o,” he replied. “ Come on.” He spurred up,
and they turned toward the citadel gate. He wore an amused,
half-contemptuous expression, though, as if dwelling on a
memory , and after a few moments, he spoke again.
“He might have done it. Arnold , I mean; taken the city . Sir
Guy hadn’ t any troops to speak  of, and had Arnold got here
when he planned to, and with the powder and shot he needed
… w ell, it woul d have been a dif ferent story . But he chose the
wrong man to ask directions of.”
“What do you mean by that?”
Randall-Isaacs l ooked suddenly  wary , but then seemed to
shrug in ternally , as though to sa y , “What d oes it matter?”  He
was in good hum or , already looking forward to a hot dinner , a
soft bed, and clean linen, after weeks of camping in the dark
forests.
“He couldn’ t make it overland,”  he said. “Seeking a way to
carry an army a nd its necessities north by water , Arnold had
gone looking for someone who  had made the hazardous trip
and knew the rivers and portages,” Randall-Isaacs said. “He’d
found one, too—Samuel Goodwin.”
“But it never o ccurred to him that Goodwin might be a
Loyalist.” Rand all-Isaacs shook his head at this naivete.
“Goodwin came  to me and asked what he should do. So I told
him, and he gave Arnold his maps—carefully rewritten to
serve their purpose.”And serve their purpose they had. By misstating distances,
removing landm arks, indicating  passages where there were
none, and providing maps that were pure figments of
imagination, M r . Goodwin’ s guidance succeeded in luring
Arnold’ s force deep into the wilderness, obliging them to carry
their sh ips and  supplies overland for days on end, and
eventually delaying them so badly that the winter caught them,
well short of Quebec City .
Randall-Isaacs laughed, though there was a tinge of regret
about it, W illiam thought.
“I was amazed when they told me he’d made it after all.
Aside from everything else, he’d been swindled by the
carpenters who made his ships—I do believe that was sheer
incompetence, not politics, though these days it’ s sometimes
hard to tell. Ma de with green timbers and badly fitted. More
than half of them came apart and sank within days of
launching.
“It h ad to have been sheer hell,” Randall-Isaacs said, as
though t o himself. He pulled himself up straight then, shaking
his head.
“But the y follow ed him. All h is men. Only one company
turned back. Starving, half naked, freezing … they followed
him,” he repeated, marveling . He glanced sideways at
W illiam, smiling. “Think your men would follow you,
Lieutenant? In such conditions?”
“I hope I shoul d have better sense than to lead them into
such conditions,” W illiam repli ed dryly . “What happened to
Arnold in the end? W as he captured?”
“No,” Randall-Isaacs said thou ghtfully , lifting a hand to
wave at the guards by the citadel gate. “No, he wasn’ t. As to
what’ s h appened to him now , God only knows. Or God and Sir
Guy . I’m hoping the latter can tell us.” JOYEUX NOEL
 London
 December 24, 1776
 
M OST PROSPEROUS MADAMS WERE stout
creatures, Lord John reflected. Whether it was only the
satisfaction of appetites denied in their early years, or was a
shield ag ainst the possibility of a return to the lower stations of
their trade, almost all of them were well armored in flesh.
Not Nes sie. He could see the shadow of her body through
the thin muslin of her shift—he  had inadvertently roused her
from her  bed—a s she stood bef ore the fire to pull on her bed-
sacque. She bore not an ounce more upon her scrawny frame
than she had wh en he’d first met her , then aged—she’d said—
fourteen, though he’d suspected  at the time that she might be
eleven. That would make her thirty-odd. She still looked
fourteen. He smiled at the notio n, and she smiled back, tying
her g own. The s mile aged her a bit, for there were gaps among
her teeth, and th e remainder showed black at the root. If she
was not  stout, it was because  she lacked the capacity to
become so; she adored sugar , and would eat an entire box of
candied violets or T urkish Delight in minutes, compensating
for the starvatio n of her youth in the Scottish Highlands. He’d
brought her a pound of sugar plums.
“Think I ’m that cheap, do ye?” she said, raising a brow as
she took the prettily wrapped box from him.
“Never ,” he assured her . “That i s merely by way of apology
for having disturbed your rest.” That was improvisation; he
had in fact exp ected to find h er at work, it being past ten
o’clock at night.
“A ye, w ell, it is  Christmas Eve,” she said, answering his
unasked questio n. “Any man wi ’ a home to go to’ s in it.” She
yawned, pulled of f her nightcap, and fluf fed her fingers
through the wild mass of curly dark hair .“Y et you  seem to have some cu stom,” he observed. Distant
singing came from two floors  below , and the parlor had
seemed well populated when he passed.
“Och, aye. The desperate ones. I leave them to Maybelle to
deal with; dinna like to see them, poor creatures. Pitiful. They
dinna re ally want a woman, the  ones who come on Christmas
Eve—only a fire to sit by , and folk to sit with.” She waved a
hand and sat down, greedily pulling the bow from her present.
“Let me wish you a happy Christmas, then,” he said,
watching her with amused af fe ction. She popped one of the
sweetmeats into her mouth, closed her eyes, and sighed in
ecstasy .
“Mmp,” she said, not pausing to swallow before inserting
and masticating another . From the cordial intonation of this
remark, he assumed her to be returning the sentiment.
He’d known it was Christmas  Eve, of course, but had
somehow put the knowledge of it out of his head during the
long, cold hours of the day . It had poured all day , driving
needles of freezing rain, augme nted now and then by irritable
bursts of hail, and he’d been chilled through since just before
dawn, when Minnie’ s footman had roused him with the
summons to Ar gus House.
Nessie’ s room was small but elegant, and smelled
comfortably of sleep. Her bed w as vast, hung with woolen bed
curtains done in the very fashionable pink and black “Queen
Charlotte” checks. T ired, cold, and hungry as he was, he felt
the pull  of that warm, inviting  cavern, with its mounds of
goose-down pillows, quilts, and clean, soft sheets. What would
she thin k, he wondered, if he a sked to share her bed for the
night?
“A f ir e to sit by , and folk to sit with.”  W e ll, he had that, at
least for the moment.
Grey became aware of a low bu zzing noise, something like
a tr apped bluebottle flinging itself against a windowpane.
Glancing toward the sound, he perceived that what he hadthought to be merely a heap of rumpled bedclothes in fact
contained a body; the elaborately passementeried tassel of a
nightcap trailed across the pillow .
“That’ s no but R ab,” said an amused Scottish voice, and he
turned t o find her grinning at him. “Fancy it three ways, do
ye?”
He realized, even as he blushed, that he liked her not only
for herse lf, or for her skill as an intelligence agent, but because
she had an unex celled ability to disconcert him. He thought
she did not know the shape of  his own desires exactly , but
she’d been a wh ore since childhood and likely had a shrewd
apprehension of  almost anyone’ s desires, whether conscious or
not.
“Oh, I think no t,” he said politely . “I shouldn’ t wish to
disturb y our husband.” He tried not to think of Rab MacNab’ s
brutal hands and solid thighs; Ra b had been a chairman, before
his marriage to Nessie and the  success of the brothel they
owned. Surely he didn’ t also … ?
“Y e couldna wake yon wee oaf  wi’ cannon fire,” she said,
with an af fectio nate glance into the bed. She got up, though,
and pulled the curtains across, muf fling the snoring.
“Speak o’ cannon,” she added, bending to peer at Grey as
she retu rned to her seat, “ye loo k as though ye’ve been in the
wars you rself. Here, have a dram , and I’ll ring for a bit of hot
supper .” She nodded at the deca nter and glasses that stood on
the elbow table and reached for the bell rope.
“No, I thank you. I haven’ t m uch time. But I will take a
drop to keep the cold out, thank you.”
The whisky—she drank nothing else, scorning gin as a
beggar ’ s drink and regarding w ine as good but insuf ficient to
its p urpose—warmed him, and  his wet coat had begun to
steam in the fire’ s heat.
“Y e’ve not much time,” she said. “Why’ s that, then?”
“I’m bound for France,” he said. “In the morning.”Her eyebrows shot up, and she put another comfit in her
mouth.
” ‘Oo ‘don me tkp Kismus wi yrfmily?”
“Don’ t talk with your mouth ful l, my dear ,” he said, smiling
nonetheless. “My brother suf fer ed a bad attack last night. His
heart, the quack says, but I dou bt he really knows. The usual
Christmas dinner is likely to be  somewhat less of an occasion
than usual, though.”
“I’m that sorry to hear ,” Nessie said, more clearly . She
wiped sugar from the corner of her mouth, brow puckered with
a troubled frown. “His lordship’ s a fine man.”
“Y es, he—” He stopped, staring at her . “Y ou’ve met  m y
brother?”
Nessie dimpled demurely at him.
“Discretion is a madam’ s most val-u-able stock in trade,”
she chanted, clearly parroting the wisdom of a former
employer .
“Says the woman who’ s spying  for me.” He was trying to
envision Hal … or perhaps not  to envision Hal … for surely he
wouldn’ t … to spare Minnie his demands, perhaps? But he’d
thought …
“A ye, w ell, spyi ng’ s no the sam e as idle gossip, now , is it? I
want tea, even if you don’ t. T alking’ s thirsty work.” She rang
the bell for the porter , then turn ed back, one eyebrow raised.
“Y our brother ’ s  dying, and ye’re goin’ to France? Must be
summat ur gent, then.”
“He’ s not dying,” Grey said sharply . The thought of it split
the c arpet at his  feet, a grinning  abyss waiting to pull him in.
He looked determinedly away from it.
“He … had a shock. W ord was brought that his youngest
son was wounded in America and has been captured.”
Her eyes widened at that, and she clutched the dressing
gown closer to her nonexistent breasts.“The youngest. That would be … Henry , no?”
“It would. And how the devil  do you  know  that?” he
demanded, agitation making his voice harsh. A gap-toothed
smile gl immered at him, but th en went away as she saw the
depth of his distress.
“One of his lo rdship’ s footmen is a regular ,” she said
simply . “Thursdays; it’ s his night of f.”
“Oh.” H e sat still, hands on his knees, trying to bring his
thoughts—and h is feelings—und er some kind of control. “It—
I see.”
“It’ s late in the year to be getting messages from America,
no?” She glanced at the window , which was covered in layers
of re d v elvet an d lace that were  unable to keep out the sound
of lashing rain. “Did a late ship come in?”
“Y es. Blown of f course and l imped in to Brest with a
wounded mainmast. The message was brought overland.”
“And is it Brest ye’re going to, then?”
“It is not.”
A so ft scratching came at the door before she could ask
anything further , and she went t o let in the porter , who had—
without being asked, Grey noted—brought up a tray laden
with tea things, including a thickly iced cake.
He turne d it over in his mind. Could he tell her? But she
hadn’ t b een joking about discretion, he knew . In her own way ,
she kept secrets as much—and as well—as he did.
“It’ s about W illiam,” he said, as she shut the door and
turned back to him.
 
HE K NEW DA WN W AS near , f rom the ache in his bones
and the faint chime of his pocket watch. There was no sign of
it in the sky . Cl ouds the color o f chimney sweepings brushed
the roov es of London, and the streets were blacker than theyhad been at midnight, all lant erns having been long since
extinguished, all hearth fires burnt low .
He’d be en up all night. There were things he must do; he
ought to  go home and sleep for a few hours before catching
the Dover coach. He couldn’ t go without seeing Hal once
more, though. Just to assure himself.
There w ere lights in the windows of Ar gus House. Even
with the drapes drawn, a fain t gleam showed on the wet
cobbles outside. It was snowing thickly , but wasn’ t yet
sticking to the ground. There was a good chance that the coach
would be detained—was sure to be slow , bogged down on the
miry roads.
Speaking of coaches—his heart gave a sickly leap at the
sight of a battered-looking carriage standing in the porte
cochere, which he thought belonged to the doctor .
His thump at the door was answered at once by a half-
dressed footman, nightshirt tuc ked hastily into his breeches.
The man’ s anxious face relaxed a little when he recognized
Grey .
“The duke—”
“T ook b ad in the night, my lord,  but easier now ,” the man—
Arthur , that was his name—interrupted him, stepping back to
let him in and ta king the cloak f rom his shoulders, shaking of f
the snow .
He n odded and made for the stair , not waiting to be shown
up. H e met the doctor coming down—a thin gray man, marked
by his black ill-smelling coat and the bag in his hand.
“How is he?” h e demanded, seizing the man by the sleeve
as he reached the landing. The doctor drew back, af fronted,
but then  saw his face in the glow from the sconce and,
recognizing his resemblance to Hal, settled his ruf fled feathers.
“Somewhat bet ter , my lord. I have let him blood, three
ounces, and his breathing is grown easier .”Grey let go the sleeve and bounded up the stairs, his own
chest tig ht. The door to Hal’ s su ite of rooms stood open and he
went in at onc e, startling a maid who was carrying out a
chamber pot, lidded and then delicately draped with a cloth
handsomely embroidered with lar ge, brilliant flowers. He
brushed past her with a nod of apology and went into Hal’ s
bedroom.
Hal was sitting up against the bolster , pillows wedged
behind h im; he looked nearly dead. Minnie was beside him,
her pleasant round face gaunt with anxiety and sleeplessness.
“I see you ev en shit with style, Y our Grace,” Grey
remarked, sitting down on the other side of the bed.
Hal opened one gray lid and ey ed him. The face might be
that of a skeleton, but the pale,  sharp eye was the living Hal,
and Grey felt his chest flood with relief.
“Oh, the cloth?” Hal said, weakly but clearly . “That’ s
Dottie. She will not go out, even though I assured her that if I
thought I was g oing to die, I should certainly wait for her
return to do it.”  He paused to breathe, with a faint wheezing
note, then coughed and went on: “She is not the sort, thank
God, to indulge in pieties, she has no musical talent, and her
vitality is such that she is a menace to the kitchen staf f. So
Minnie set her to needlewo rk, as some outlet for her
formidable ener gies. She takes after Mother , you know .”
“I am  sorry , John,” Minnie said apologetically to him. “I
sent her to bed, but I saw that her candle is still lit. I believe
she is at work this moment on  a pair of carpet slippers for
you.”
Grey th ought carpet slippers  were likely innocuous,
whatever motif she had chosen, and said so.
“So long as she isn’ t embroideri ng a pair of drawers for me.
The knotwork, you know …”
That made Hal laugh, which in turn made him cough
alarmingly , though it brought a little color back into his face.
“So you aren’ t dying?” Grey asked.“No,” Hal said shortly .
“Good,” said Grey , smiling at his brother . “Don’ t.”
Hal blinked, and then, recalling  the occasion on which he
had said exactly that to Grey , smiled back.
“Do my  best,” he said dryly , and then, turning, laid an
af fectionate hand on Minnie’ s. “My dear …”
“I’ll have some tea brought up,” she said, rising at once.
“And a good hot breakfast,” s he added, after a scrutinizing
look at Grey . She closed the door delicately behind her .
“What is it?” H al hitched himself higher on the pillow ,
disregarding th e bloodstained  cloth wrapped round one
forearm. “Y ou have news?”
“V ery little. But a great number of alarming questions.”
The new s of Henry’ s capture h ad been enclosed as a note
for Hal inside a letter to himsel f, from one of his contacts in
the i ntelligencing world, and carried an answer to his inquiries
regarding the known French connections of one Percival
Beauchamp. He  hadn’ t wanted to discuss that with Hal until
he’d see n Nessie, though—and Hal had been in no condition
for such discussions, anyway .
“No k nown connections b etween Beauchamp and
V er gennes”—naming the French foreign minister—”but he
has been seen often in company with Beaumarchais.”
That provoked another coughing fit.
“Little f ucking wonder ,” Hal observed hoarsely , upon his
recovery . “A mutual interest in hunting, no doubt?” That last
was a sarcastic reference, both to Percy’ s disinclination for
blood sports and to Beaumarchais’ s title of “Lieutenant
General of Hunting,” bestowed upon him some years previous
by the late king.
“And,”  Grey went on, ignoring this, “with one Silas
Deane.”
Hal frowned. “Who?”“An Am erican merchant. In Paris on behalf of the American
Congress. He skulks round Beaumarchais, rather . And he’ s
been seen speaking with V er gennes.”
“Oh, him.” Hal flapped a hand. “Heard of him. V aguely .”
“Have you heard of a business called Rodrigue Hortalez et
Cie ?”
“No. Sounds Spanish, doesn’ t it?”
“Or Portuguese. My informant had nothing but the name
and a rumor that Beaumarchais has something to do with it.”
Hal grunted and lay back.
“Beaumarchais has his fingers in any number of pies.
Makes watches, for God’ s sake, as though writing plays
weren’ t bad enough. Has Beauc hamp anything to do with this
company?”
“Not kno wn. It’ s all vague associations at this point, nothing
more. I asked fo r everything that could be turned up that had
anything—anything not generally known, I mean—to do with
Beauchamp or the Americans; this is what came back.”
Hal’ s slender fingers played restless scales on the coverlet.
“Does your informant know what this Spanish company
does?”
“T rade, what else?” Grey replied ironically , and Hal snorted.
“If they  were bankers, as well , I’d think you might have
something.”
“I might , at that. But the only w ay to find out, I think, is to
go a nd p oke at things with a sha rp stick. I’m taking the coach
to Dove r in”—he squinted at the  carriage clock on the mantel,
obscured by the gloom—”three hours.”
“Ah.”
The voice was noncommittal, but Grey knew his brother
very well indeed.“I’ll be back from France by the  end of March at the latest,”
he said, adding gently , “I shall be on the first ship that sails for
the C olonies in the new year , Hal. And I’ll bring Henry back.”
Alive or dead . Neither of them spoke the words; they didn’ t
need to.
“I’ll be here when you do,” Hal said at last, quietly .
Grey put his ha nd over his brother ’ s, which turned at once
to take his. It might look frail, but he was heartened at the
determined strength in Hal’ s grasp. They sat in silence, hands
linked, until the door opened and Arthur—now fully dressed—
sidled in  with a tray the size of a card table, laden with bacon,
sausages, kidneys, kippers, sh irred eggs in butter , grilled
mushrooms and tomatoes, toast, jam, marmalade, a huge pot
of fr agrantly steaming tea, bowls of sugar and milk—and a
covered dish which he set ceremoniously before Hal, this
proving to be filled with a sort of nasty thin gruel.
Arthur bowed and went out, leaving Grey wondering
whether he was the footman w ho went to Nessie’ s house on
Thursdays. He turned back to find Hal helping himself
liberally to Grey’ s kidneys.
“Aren’ t you meant to be eating your slop?” Grey inquired.
“Don’ t tell me you’r e  determined to hasten me into my
grave, to o,” Hal said, closing his eyes in brief rapture as he
chewed. “How the devil anyone  expects me to recover , fed on
things like rusks and gruel …”  Huf fing, he speared another
kidney .
“Is it really your heart, do you think?” Grey asked.
Hal shook his head.
“I really  don’ t think so,” he said, his tone detached. “I
listened to it, yo u know , after the first attack. Whanging away
just as usual.” H e paused to prod  himself experimentally in the
chest, fork suspended in the air . “It doesn’ t hurt there. Surely it
would, wouldn’ t it?”
Grey shrugged.“What sort of attack was it, then?”
Hal swa llowed t he last of the kidney and reached for a slice
of buttered toast, taking up the marmalade knife in his other
hand.
“Couldn’ t breathe,” he said casually . “T urned blue, that kind
of thing.”
“Oh. W ell, then.”
“I feel quite w ell, just now ,” Hal said, sounding mildly
surprised.
“Do you?” Grey said, smiling. He had a moment’ s
reservation, but after all … he was going abroad, and
unexpected things not only could happen but often did. Best
not l eave the ma tter hanging, just in case something un toward
befell either one of them before they met again.
“W ell, then … if you’re sure t hat a minor shock will not
shuf fle of f your mortal coil, allow me to tell you something.”
His news regarding the tendr esse  e xisting  betwe en Dottie
and W il liam made Hal blink and stop eating momentarily , but
after a moment’ s contemplation he nodded and resumed
chewing.
“All right,” he said.
“All right ?” Grey echoed. “Y ou have no objections?”
“Hardly sit well with you if I did, would it?”
“If y ou expect m e to believe that a concern for my feelings
would in  any way af fect your own actions, your illness has
severely damaged you.”
Hal grinned briefly , and drank tea.
“No,” he said, s etting down the empty cup. “Not that. It’ s
just—” He leaned back, hands clasped over his—very slightly
—protruding belly , and gave Grey a straight look. “I could  die.
Don’ t mean to; don’ t think I will. But I could. I’d die easier if I
knew she was settled with someone who’d protect her and
look after her properly .”“I’m flattered that you think W illiam would,” Grey said
dryly , though he was in fact immensely pleased.
“Of course he would,” Hal said, matter -of-fact. “He’ s your
son, isn’ t he?”
A c hurch bell b egan to ring, s omewhere in the distance,
reminding Grey .
“Oh!” he said. “Happy Christmas!”
Hal looked equally surprised, but then smiled.
“The same to you.”
 
GREY W AS STILL FILLED with Christmas feeling
when he set of f for Dover—literally , as the pockets of his
greatcoat were jammed with sweetmeats and small gifts and he
carried under his arm a wrapped parcel containing the
infamous carpet  slippers, these lavishly embellished with lily
pads an d green frogs done in crewelwork. He had hugged
Dottie w hen she gave them to him, managing to whisper in her
ear t hat her job was done. She h ad kissed him with such vigor
that he could still feel it on his cheek and rubbed absently at
the spot.
He must  write to W illiam at once—though in fact there was
no particular hurry , as a letter could not be carried any faster
than he would go himself. He’d  meant what he’d told Hal; as
soon as a ship could set sail in the spring, he’d be on it. He
only hoped he’d be in time.
And not only for Henry .
The roads were quite as bad as he’d expected, and the
Calais ferry was worse, but he was oblivious to the cold and
discomfort of the journey . W ith  his anxiety for Hal somewhat
allayed, he was free to think about what Nessie had told him—
a bi t of informa tion he’d thought of mentioning to Hal but
hadn’ t, not wanting to burden his brother ’ s mind, in case it
might hamper his recovery .“Y our Frenchman didn’ t come her e ,” Nessie had told him,
licking sugar of f her fingers. “But he went to Jackson’ s
regular , when he was in town.  He’ s gone of f now , though;
back to France, they say .”
“Jackson’ s,” he’d said slowly , wondering. He didn’ t
patronize bawdy houses himself—bar Nessie’ s establishment
—but he certainly knew about Jackson’ s and had been there
once or twice w ith friends. A flash house, of fering music on
the ground floor , gaming on the first floor , and more private
diversions higher up. V ery popular with mid-echelon army
of ficers. But not, he was certa in, a place catering to Percy
Beauchamp’ s particular tastes.
“I se e,” he’d sai d, calmly drinking tea, feeling his heart beat
in his ears. “And  have you ever come across an of ficer named
Randall-Isaacs?” That was the part of his letter he hadn’ t told
Hal; Denys Randall-Isaacs was an army of ficer known to
frequent Beauc hamp’ s compa ny , both in France and in
London, his informant had said—and the name had gone
straight through Grey’ s heart like an icicle.
It might  b e no m ore than coincidence t hat a man known to
associate with Percy Beauchamp had taken W illiam on an
intelligencing e xpedition to Quebec—but damned if he
thought it was.
Nessie had lifted her head abru ptly at the name “Randall-
Isaacs,” like a dog hearing the rustle of something in the brush.
“A ye, I have,” she said slowly . There was a blob of fine
sugar on  her lower lip; he wishe d to wipe it of f for her , and in
other circumstances would have. “Or heard of him. He’ s a Jew ,
they say .”
“A Jew?” That startled him. “ Surely not.” A Jew would
never be allowed to take a commission in the army or navy , no
more than a Catholic.
Nessie arched a dark brow at him.
“Perhaps he doesna want anyone to know ,” she said, and,
licking h er lips like a cat, tidied away the blob of sugar . “But ifnot, he ought to  stay awa’ from  kittle-hoosies, that’ s all I can
say!” She laughed heartily , then sobered, hunching her bed-
sacque over her shoulders and s taring at him, dark-eyed in the
firelight.
“He’ s got summat to do wi’ your wee lad, the Frenchie,
too,” she  said. “For it was a girl from Jackson’ s told me about
the J ewish cove and what a sho ck it was to her when he took
his b reeches of f. She said she w ouldn’ t’ve, only his friend the
Frenchie was there, too, wantin g to watch, and when he—the
Frenchie, I mean—saw she was  put of f, he of fered her double,
so she did it. Sh e said when ye  came right down to it”—and
here she  grinned lewdly at him , the tip of her tongue resting
against the front teeth she still had—”it was nicer than some.”
“Nicer than some,” he muttered distractedly to himself, only
half-noticing th e wary glance cast toward him by the only
other ferry passenger hardy enough to stay abovedecks.
“Bloody hell !”
The snow was falling thickly o ver the Channel, and now
swept nearly horizontal as the howling wind changed direction
and the ship ga ve a sickening lurch. The other man shook
himself and went below , leaving Grey to eat brandied peaches
with his fingers from a jar in his pocket and stare bleakly at the
oncoming coast of France, visible only in glimpses through
low-lying clouds.
 
December 24, 1776
 Quebec City
Dear Papa—
I w rite you fr om  a Convent. No t, I hasten to explain,
one of the Cov ent Gar den variety , but a r eal Roman
Convent, run by Ursuline Nuns .
Captain Randall-Isaacs and I arrived at the Citadel in
late Oct ober , int ending to call u pon Sir Guy and discover
his Opinion of the local Sy mpathies r egar ding the
American Insurr ection, only to be told that Sir Guy hadmar ched to Fort Saint-Jean, to deal personally with an
Outbr eak of said Insurr ection, this being a Sea Battle (or
so I suppose I must call it), wh ich took place upon Lake
Champlain, this a narr ow Body connecting with Lake
Geor ge, which per haps you will know fr om your own
T ime her e .
I wa s much in favor of going to join Sir Guy , but
Captain Randal l-Isaacs was r eluctant in consideration of
the Dist ance involved and the T ime of Y ear . In Fact his
Judgment was pr oved sound, as the next Day br ought
fr eezing Rain, this giving way shortly to a howling
Blizzar d, so fier ce as to darken the Sky so that you could
not tell Day fr om Night, and which buried the W orld in
Snow and Ice within Hours. Seeing this Spectacle of
Natur e, I will admit that my Disappointment at missing
an Opportunity to join Sir Guy was substantially allayed .
As i t wa s, I should have been to o late in any Case, as
the Engagement had alr eady taken place, upon the 1st
October . W e did not learn the Particulars until mid-
November , when some Hessian Officers fr om Bar on von
Riedesel’ s Regiment arrived at the Citadel with News of
it. Most likely you will have hear d mor e official and dir ect
Descriptions of the Engagement by the T ime you r eceive
this Letter , but ther e may be some Details of inter est
omitted fr om the official V ersions—and to be frank, the
Composition of such an Account is the only Employment
available to me at pr esent, as  I have declined a kind
Invitation fr om the Mother Superior to attend the Mass
they hold at midnight tonight in observance of Christmas.
(The Bells of the city’ s Chur ches  ring every quarter Hour ,
marking time thr ough the Day and Night. The convent’ s
Chapel lies dir ectly beyond the W all of the Guesthouse in
which I am lodged upon the highest Floor , and the Bell is
per haps twenty Feet fr om my H ead when I lie in Bed. I
can thus inform you faithfully that it is now 9:15 p.m.)
T o particulars, then: Sir Guy was alarmed by the
attempted Invasion of Quebec last Y ear , even though it
ended in abject Failur e, and had thus determined toincr ease his Hold upon the upp er Hudson, this being the
only possible A venue by whic h further T r ouble could
come, th e Difficulties of land T ravel being so exigent as
to p r event any b ut the most determined (I have a small
Jar of spirits o f W ine with wh ich to pr esent you, this
containing a Deerfly measuring nearly two Inches in
Length, as well as a Quantity o f very lar ge T icks, these
r emoved fr om my Person with the assistance of Honey ,
which smothers them if applied liberally , causing them to
loose their Grip) .
While the Invasion of last W inter did not succeed,
Colonel Arnold’ s Men determined to deny Sir Guy Access
to th e Lakes, and thus sank or burned all the Ships at
Fort Saint-Jean as they withdr ew , as well as burning the
Sawmill and the Fort itself .
Sir Guy had ther efor e r equisitioned collapsible Ships to
be s ent to him fr om England (I wish I had seen these!)
and, ten  of them arriving, we nt down to St. John to
oversee their assembly upon the upper Richelieu River .
Meanwhile, Co lonel Arnold (who seems an amazing,
industrious Fello w , if half what I hear of him is true) had
been madly building his own Fleet of ramshackle Galleys
and hog-beamed Sloops .
Not content with his Pr odigies of collapsibility , Sir Guy
also had the  Indefatigable, a Fr igate of som e 180 tonnes
(some Ar gument between my informants as to the number
of G uns she carr ies; after a seco nd  Bottle of  the convent’ s
Clar et [the Nuns make it themse lves, and fr om the Shade
of the priest’ s N ose, no little o f it gets consumed her e,
too], Consensus was r eached, with “a bloody Lot, mate,”
always allowing for Err ors of T ranslation, being the final
Number), taken apart, hauled to the River , and ther e
r eassembled .
Colonel Arnold  appar ently decided that to wait any
longer w as to lose what Advantage of Initiative he might
possess, and sallied out fr om his Hiding place at V alcour
Island on 30 Se ptember . By Report, he had fifteen Craft,
to Sir Guy’ s twenty-five, these former all hastily built,unseaworthy , and manned by Landsmen who did not
know a Binnacle fr om a Bunion—the American Navy , in
all its glory!
Still, I must not  laugh too much. The mor e I hear of
Colonel Arnold (and I hear a gr eat Deal about him, her e
in Queb ec), the mor e I think he must be a Gentleman of
Gall an d Kidne y , as Grandpapa Sir Geor ge is wont to
say; I should like to meet him one day .
Ther e is Singing outside; the  habitants ar e coming to
the C athedral nearby . I don’ t kn ow the Music, and it’ s too
far to make ou t the W or ds, bu t I can see the Glow of
T or ches fr om my Eyrie. The Bells say it is ten o’clock .
(The Mo ther Su perior says that she knows you, by the
way —Soeur Immaculata is her Name. I should scar cely
have been startled by this; tol d her that you know the
Ar chbishop of Canterbury  and the Pope, by which she
pr ofessed to be much impr essed, and begs you will
convey her most humble Obeisance to His Holiness when
next you  see him. She kindly ask ed me to Dinner , and told
me S tories of th e taking of the Citadel in ‘59, and how
you qu arter ed a number of Highlanders upon the
Convent. How shocked the Siste rs all wer e by their bar e
Legs, and sought a Requisition of Canvas that they might
make the men T r ousers. My Uniform has suffer ed
noticeably thr ough the last few W eeks of T ravel, but I am
still decently cover ed below the  W aist, I am r elieved to
say . So was Mother Superior , no doubt!)
I r eturn to my Account of the Battle: Sir Guy’ s Fleet
sailed south, intending to r each and r ecaptur e Cr own
Point, then T iconder oga. As the y passed V alcour Island,
though, two of Arnold’ s Ships sprang out upon them,
firing in challenge. These then attempted to withdraw , but
one ( Royal Savage, they said) could not make W ay
against the Headwinds, and ran agr ound. Several British
Gunboats swarmed her and captur ed a few Men, but wer e
for ced to withdraw under heavy Fir e fr om the Americans
—though not omitting to set Fir e to the  Roy al S avage as
they did so .A gr eat deal of Maneuvering th en ensued in the Strait,
and the Battle began in earnest about Midday , the
Carleton and  Inflexible bearing most of the Brunt of the
Action, along with the Gunboat s. Arnold’ s  Revenge and
Philadelphia wer e ba dly hit  by Br oadsides, and the
Philadelphia sank near Evening .
The  Carleton continued firing  until a fortunate Shot
fr om the Americans sever ed the Line to her Anchor ,
causing her to drift. She was  heavily attacked  and a
number of her Men killed or injur ed, the Butcher ’ s Bill
including her Captain, a Lieutenant James Dacr es (I
have an uneasy feeling that I ha ve met him, per haps at a
Dance l ast Season) and the senior Officers. One of her
Midshipmen too k Command and carried her to Safety .
They said it was Edwar d Pellew—and I  know I have met
him, once or twice, at Boodles with Uncle Harry .
T o r esume: Another lucky Shot struck the Magazine of
a Gunboat and blew it up, but meanwhile, the  Inflexible
was finally br ought into play and batter ed the American
Boats with her heavy Guns. The smaller of Sir Guy’ s
Craft landed Indians meanwh ile upon the Shor es of
V alcour Island and the Shor e of  the Lake, thus cutting off
this A venue of Escape, and the Remnants of Arnold’ s
Fleet wer e thus obliged to r etr eat down the Lake .
They succeeded in slipping past Sir Guy , the Night
being foggy , and took Refuge at Schuyler Island, some
miles south. Sir Guy’ s Fleet pursued them, though, and
was abl e to draw within Sigh t of them the next Day ,
Arnold’ s Boats being much hamper ed by Leakage,
Damage, and the W eather , which had turned to heavy
Rain and high W ind. The  W ashington was caught,
attacked, and for ced to strike her Colors, her Cr ew of
mor e than a hu ndr ed Men being captur ed. The r est of
Arnold’ s Fleet, though, mana ged to get thr ough to
Buttonmold Bay , wher e, I understand, the W aters ar e too
shallow to allow Sir Guy’ s Ships to follow .
Ther e Arnold beached, stripped, and set afir e most of
his Craf t—their Flags still flying, as a Mark of Defiance,the G ermans said; they wer e am used by this, but admir ed
it. C olonel Arnold (or must w e now call him Admiral
Arnold?) person ally set Fir e to the  Congress, this being
his Flagship, and set off Overland, narr owly escaping the
Indians who had been set to pr event him. His tr oops did
r each Cr own Point, but did not linger ther e, pausing only
to destr oy the Fort befor e withdrawing to T iconder oga .
Sir Guy did not mar ch his Pris oners back to Quebec,
but r etur ned the m to T iconder oga under a Flag of T ruce
—a very pr etty Gestur e, much admir ed by my Informants .
10:30. Did you see the  aur ora borealis when you wer e
her e, or was i t too early in the Y ear? It is a most
r emarkable Sight. Snow has fallen all Day , but ceased
near Sunset and the Sky has clear ed. Fr om my W indow , I
see a northern Exposur e, and ther e is pr esently an
amazing shimmer that fills the whole Sky , waves of pale
blue and some gr een—though I have seen it to be r ed
sometimes—that swirl like Dr ops of Ink spilt in W ater and
stirr ed. I cannot hear it at pr ese nt, because of the Singing
—someone is Playing a Fiddle in the Distance; it is a
very sweet and pier cing T une— but when I have seen the
Phenomenon outside the City , in the W oods, ther e is often
a most peculiar Sound, or Sounds, that accompany it.
Sometimes a sort of faint Whistl ing, as of W ind ar ound a
Building, though ther e is no Movement of the Air;
sometimes a strange, high, hissing Noise, interrupted now
and then by a Fusillade of Clicks and Cracklings, as
though a Hor de of Crickets wer e advancing  upon the
Listener thr oug h dry Leaves—though by the time the
Aur ora b egins to be seen, the Cold has long since killed
all Insects (and good riddance! W e applied an Ointment
used by the loca l Indians, which was of some help against
stinging Flies and Mosquitoe s, but does nothing to
discourage the inquisitiveness of Earwigs, Roaches, and
Spiders) .
W e h ad a Guide  for our Journey between St. John and
Quebec, a Man of mixed B lood (he had a most
r emarkable Head of Hair , thick and curly as Sheep’ s W ooland the color of  Cinnamon Bark) who told us that some
of t he native P eople think that the Sky is a Dome,
separating Earth fr om Heaven, but that ther e ar e Holes in
the Dome, and that the Light s of the Aur ora ar e the
T or ches of Heaven, sent out to  guide the Spirits of the
Dead thr ough the Holes .
But I see I have  yet to finish my Account, though it is
only to add that following the Battle, Sir Guy withdr ew to
winter Q uarters in St. John, an d likely will not r eturn to
Quebec until the Spring .
So now I come to the true Point of my letter . I r ose
Y ester day to discover Capta in Randall-Isaacs had
decamped during the Night, leaving me with a brief Note
stating that he had ur gent Business, had enjoyed my
Company and valuable Assistance, and that I was to
r emain h er e until either his Ret urn or the arrival of new
Or ders .
The Snow is dee p, mor e may come at any Moment, and
Business must be ur gent indeed which could compel a
man to ventur e any Distance. I  am of course somewhat
disturbed at Captain Randall-Isaacs’ s abrupt Departur e,
curious as to wh at might have happened to cause it, and
somewhat anxious as to his W elf ar e. This does not seem a
Situation in which I would be justified in ignoring my
Or ders, however , and so … I wait .
1 1:30. I stopped writing for som e little time, to stand
and watc h the Sky . The Lights of the Aur ora come and go,
but I think they have gone altogether now; the Sky is
black, the Stars bright but ti ny by contrast with the
vanished brilliance of the Lights. Ther e is a vast
Emptiness in the Sky that one seldom senses in a City .
Despite the Clangor of the Bells, the Bonfir es in the
Squar e, and the Singing of People—ther e is a Pr ocession
of s ome kind g oing on—I can feel the gr eat Silence
beyond it .
The Nuns ar e go ing in to their Chapel. I leaned out of
my W indow just now to watch them hurrying along, two
by two like a mar ching Column, their dark Gowns andCloaks making them look like small Pieces of the Night,
drifting among the Stars of their T or ches. (I have been
writing a long T ime, you must for give the Fancies of an
exhausted Brain.)
This is the first Christmas I have spent with no Sight of
Home or Family . The First of many , no doubt .
I t hink of you often, Papa, and hope you ar e well and
looking forwar d to r oast Goose tomorr ow with
Grandmama an d Grandpapa Sir Geor ge. Give my Love
to th em, please, and to Uncle H al and his family . (And to
my Dottie, especially .)
A very merry Christmas fr om your Son, W illiam
PostScriptum: 2:00 a.m. I went down after all, and
stood at the Back of the Chapel. It was somewhat Popish,
and ther e was a gr eat Deal of Incense, but I said a Prayer
for Mother Geneva and for Mama Isobel. When I
emer ged fr om the Chapel, I saw that the Lights have
come back. Now they ar e blue .
  THE BOSOM OF THE DEEP
 
May 15, 1777
My dears,
I ha te Boats. I despise them with the utmost Fiber of
my B eing. And y et I find myself once mor e launched upon
the dr eadful Bosom of the Sea, aboar d a Craft known as
the  T ra nquil T eal, fr om which Absur dity you may deduce
the grim  Whimsy of her Captain. This Gentleman is a
Smuggler of mixed Race, evil Countenance, and low
Humor , who tells me, straight-faced, that his name is
T rustworthy Roberts .
 
J AMIE P AUSED T O DIP his quill, glanced at the
receding shore of North Carolina, and, observing it to rise and
fall in an unsettling manner , fixed his eyes at once upon the
page he had tacked to his lap desk to prevent its being borne
away by the stif f breeze that filled the sails above his head.
W e ar e in good Health , he wrote slowly . Putting aside the
notion o f seasickness, upon which he did not propose to dwell.
Ought he to tell them about Fer gus? he wondered.
“Feeling all right?”
He looked up to see Claire, bending to peer at him with that
look of intent b ut cautious curiosity she reserved for people
who might at a ny moment vomit, spurt blood, or die. He’d
already done the first two, as a result of her having
accidentally put one of her needles into a small blood vessel in
his scalp , but hoped she didn’ t distinguish any further signs of
his impending demise.“W ell enough.” He didn’ t want even to think about his
stomach, for fear of inciting it , and changed the subject in
order to avoid further discussion. “Shall I tell Brianna and
Roger Mac about Fer gus?”
“How much ink have you got?”  she asked, with a sidelong
smile. “Y es, of course you should. They’ll be very interested.
And it will distr act you,” she added, squinting slightly at him.
“Y ou’re still rather green.”
“A ye, thanks.”
She laughed with the cheerful callousness of the good sailor ,
kissed the top of his head—avoiding the four needles
protruding from  his forehead—and went to stand by the rail,
watching the wavering land recede from view .
He averted his gaze from this distressing prospect, and
returned to his letter .
Fer gus and his f amily ar e also w ell, but I must tell you
of a puzzling occurr ence. A man who calls himself
Per cival Beauchamp …
 
It to ok him mos t of a page to describe Beauchamp and his
baf fling interest. He glanced up at Claire, wondering whether
he should also include the possibility of Beauchamp’ s
relationship to her family , but decided against it. His daughter
certainly knew her mother ’ s maiden name and would notice it
at once. He had no further useful information to provide in that
respect—and his hand was beginning to ache.
Claire was still at the rail, one hand on it for balance, her
face dreaming.
She had  tied back the mass of her hair with ribbon, but the
wind was whipping strands of i t out, and with hair and skirts
and shawl streaming back, the cloth of her gown molded to
what wa s still a very fine bosom , he thought she looked like a
ship’ s f igurehead, graceful and fierce, a protective spirit
against the dangers of the deep.He found that thought obscurely comforting, and returned to
his composition in better heart, despite the disturbing content
he had now to confide.
Fer gus elected not to speak with Monsieur Beauchamp,
which I thought wise, and so w e pr esumed this to be the
end of the Matter .
While we wer e i n W ilmington, though, I went down to
the Doc ks one Evening to meet Mr . DeLancey Hall, our
Liaison with Captain Roberts. Owing to the Pr esence of
an English Man-of-war in the Harbor , the Arrangement
was that we should r epair discr eetly aboar d Mr . Hall’ s
fishing Ketch, which would transport us outwith the
Harbor , whence  we should r e ndezvous with the  T eal,
Captain Roberts  disliking close Pr oximity to the British
navy . (T his is a fairly universal  Response on the part of
private and mer chant Captai ns, owing both to the
pr evalence of Contraband aboar d most Ships and to the
Navy’ s rapacious Attitude towar d the Ships’ Cr ews, who
ar e r outinely abducted—pr essed, they call it—and to all
Intents and Purposes, enslaved for Life, save they ar e
willing to risk Hanging for Desertion.)
I h ad br ought w ith me some minor Items of Luggage,
intending under the Pr etext of taking these aboar d to
inspect b oth the Ketch and Mr . Hall mor e closely befor e
entrusting our Lives to either . The Ketch was not at
Anchor , though, and Mr . Hall did not appear for some
T ime, so that I began to worry lest I had mistaken his
Instructions or that he had r un afoul either of His
Majesty’ s Navy or some fellow Rapscallion or Privateer .
I wa ited until it had gr own Dark, and was on the point
of r e turning to our Inn, when I  saw a small Boat come
into the Harbor with a blue Lantern at its T ail. This was
Mr . Hall’ s Signal, and the Boa t was his Ketch, which I
assisted him to t ie up to the Quay . He told me that he had
some Ne ws, and we r epair ed to  a local T avern, wher e he
said that he had  been in New Bern the Day befor e, andther e found the T own in an Upr oar , owing to an infamous
Assault upon the Printer , Mr . Fraser .
By r eport, he—Fer gus—was making his Rounds of
Delivery , and had just got down  fr om the Mule Cart when
someone sprang upon him fr om behind, thrusting a Sack
over his  Head, and someone else attempted at the same
T ime to seize his Hands, pr esu mably with the Intent of
binding them. Fer gus naturally r esisted these Attempts
with some V igor , and accor ding to Mr . Hall’ s Story ,
succeeded in wounding one Assailant with his Hook,
ther e be ing a certain Amount of Blood to substantiate this
Assumption. The wounded Man fell back with a Scr eam
and utter ed loud Oaths (I shoul d have been inter ested to
know the content of said Oaths, in or der to know whether
the Speaker might be Fr ench or English, but this
Information was  not included), w her eupon Clar ence (who
you will r emember , I think) became excited and
appar ently bit the second Assailant, this Man and Fer gus
having fallen against the Mule in their Struggle. The
second Man was discourag ed by this vigor ous
Intervention, bu t the first r eturned to the Fray at this
Point, and Fer gus—still blin ded by the Sack but
bellowing for Help—grappled with him, striking at him
again with his H ook. Some Reports (says Mr . Hall) claim
that the V illain wr enched the Hook fr om Fer gus’ s W rist,
while others claim that Fer gus succeeded in striking him
again but that the Hook became  entangled in the V illain’ s
Clothing and was pulled off in the Struggle .
In any Event, people in Thompson’ s Or dinary hear d the
Stramash and rushed out, wher eupon the V illains fled,
leaving Fer gus somewhat bruis ed and most indignant at
the loss of his Hook, but otherwise unharmed, for which
God and St. Dismas (he be ing Fer gus’ s particular
Patr on) be thanked .
I questioned Mr . Hall as closely as I could, but ther e
was littl e mor e to be learned. He said that public Opinion
was divided, with many saying t hat this was an attempted
Deportation and  the Sons of Liberty wer e to blame for theattack, while some members of the Sons of Liberty
indignantly deni ed this Accusation, claiming that it was
the w ork of Loyalists incensed o ver Fer gus’ s printing of a
particularly infl ammatory Speec h by Patrick Henry , and
the Abduction was a Pr elude to T ar and Feathers.
Appar ently Fer gus has been so successful in avoiding the
Appearance of taking Sides in th e Conflict that both Sides
ar e equa lly likely to have taken Offense and decided to
eliminate his Influence .
This is, of course, possible. But  with the Pr esence and
Behavior of Monsieur Beaucham p in Mind, I think a thir d
Explanation is mor e likely . Fer gus declined to speak with
him, but  it would not have r equir ed a gr eat deal of further
Inquiry for him to learn that despite  his Name and
Scottish W ife, Fer gus is a Fr enchman. Sur ely most of the
Inhabitants of New Bern know this, and someone could
easily have told him .
I con fess myself to be at a Loss  as to why Beauchamp
should wish to abduct Fer gus, rather than simply come
and con fr ont him in Person to inquir e whether he might
be the Person f or whom the Gentleman claimed to be
sear ching. I must assume that h e does not mean Fer gus
immediate Harm, for if he did, it would be a fairly simple
Matter t o have arranged to hav e him killed; ther e ar e a
gr eat many Men of no Attachment and mean Character
drifting thr ough the Colony these Days .
The Occ urr ence is worrying, but ther e is little I can do
about it in my p r esent abject Position. I have sent Fer gus
a L etter—osten sibly r egar ding  the Specifications of a
printing Job—which lets him know that I have placed a
Sum wit h a Goldsmith in W ilmington, which he may draw
upon in case of Need. I had discussed with him the
Dangers of his pr esent Position, not knowing at the T ime
how dan ger ous they might actually be, and he agr eed that
ther e might be s ome Advantage to his Family’ s Safety in
his moving to a City wher e public Opinion is mor e
str ongly aligned with his own Inclinations. This latestIncident may compel his Decisi on, the mor e particularly
as Pr oximity to ourselves is no longer a Consideration .
 
He h ad to stop again, as pain was radiating through his hand
and up his wrist. He stretched the fingers, stifling a groan; a
hot wire  seemed  to stab from his fourth finger up his forearm
in brief electric jolts.
He was more t han worried for Fer gus and his family . If
Beauchamp had tried once, he would try again. But why?
Perhaps the fact of Fer gus’ s being French was not suf ficient
evidence that he was the Claudel Fraser that Beauchamp
sought, and he proposed to sati sfy himself upon this point in
privacy , by whatever means came to hand? Possible, but that
ar gued a  coldne ss of purpose th at disturbed Jamie more than
he had wished to say in his letter .
And in fairness,  he must admit that the notion of the attack
having been executed by pe rsons of inflamed political
sensibility was a distinct possib ility , and perhaps of a higher
probability than  the sinister des igns of Monsieur Beauchamp,
which were both romantical and theoretical to a high degree.
“But I havena lived this long without knowing the smell of a
rat when I see one,” he muttered, still rubbing his hand.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” said his personal figurehead,
appearing suddenly beside him with an expression of marked
concern. “Y our hand!”
“A ye?” He looked down at it, cross with discomfort.
“What’ s amiss? All my fingers are still attached to it.”
“That’ s the most that could be said for it. It looks like the
Gordian knot.” She knelt down beside him and took the hand
into her s, massaging it in a forceful way that was doubtless
helpful but so im mediately painful that it made his eyes water .
He closed them, breathing slowly through clenched teeth.
She was  scolding him for writi ng too much at once. What
was the hurry , after all?“It w ill be days before we reach Connecticut, and then
months  o n the w ay to Scotland. Y ou could write one sentence
per day and quote the whole Book of Psalms along the way .”
“I wanted to,” he said.
She said something derogatory under her breath, in which
the word s “Scot” and “pigheaded” featured, but he chose to
take no notice. He had  w anted to; it clarified his thoughts to
put them  down in black and white, and it was to some degree a
relief to express them on paper ,  rather than to have the worry
clogged up in his head like mud in mangrove roots.
And beyond that—not that he required an excuse, he
thought, narrowing his eyes at t he top of his wife’ s bent head
—seeing the shore of North Car olina drop away had made him
lonely fo r his daughter and Rog er Mac, and he’d wanted the
sense of connection that writing to them gave him.
“Do you think you will see them?”  Fer gus had asked him
that, soo n before  they took leav e of each other . “Per haps you
will go to France.” So  far as Fer gus and Marsali and the folk
on the Ridge were concerned, Brianna and Roger Mac had
gone to France to escape the oncoming war .
“No,” he’d said, hoping the bl eakness of his heart didn’ t
show in his voice. “I doubt we shall ever see them again.”
Fer gus’ s strong right hand had tightened on his forearm,
then relaxed.
“Life is long,” he said quietly .
“A ye,” he’d answered, but thought, No one’ s life is that
long .
His hand  was growing easier now; while she still massaged
it, the motion no longer hurt so much.
“I m iss them, to o,” she said quietly , and kissed his knuckles.
“Give me the letter; I’ll finish it.”
 Y our father ’ s hand won’ t stand any mor e today . Ther e
is one notable thing about this ship, beyond the captain’ s
name. I was down in the hold earlier in the day , and saw
a go od number of boxes, all stenciled with the name
“Arnold” and “New Haven, Connecticut.” I said to the
hand (whose name is a very pedestrian John Smith,
though no doubt to make up fo r this distr essing lack of
distinction he has thr ee gold earrings in one ear and two
in th e other . H e told me that each one r epr esents his
survival fr om the sinking of a sh ip. I am hoping that your
father d oesn’ t know this) that M r . Arnold must be a very
successful mer chant. Mr . Smith laughed and said that, in
fact, Mr . Benedi ct Arnold is a colonel in the Continental
army , an d a very gallant officer he is, too. The boxes ar e
bound fo r delivery to his sister , Miss Hannah Arnold, who
minds both his thr ee small son s and his importing and
dry-goods stor e in Connecticut, while he is about the
business of the war .
I mu st say that a goose walked a cr oss my grave when I
hear d that. I’ve met men whose  history I knew befor e—
and at least one of those I  knew to carry a  doom with
him. Y ou don’ t g et used to the feeling, though. I looked at
those boxes and wonder ed—ought I to write to Miss
Hannah? Get off the ship in New Haven and go to see
her? And tell her what, exactly?
All our experience to date suggests that ther e is
absolutely nothing I could do to alter what’ s going to
happen. And looking at the situation objectively , I don’ t
see any way … and yet. And  yet !
And yet, I’ve come close to so many people whose
actions have a n oticeable effect , whether or not they end
up maki ng history as such. Ho w can it not be so? your
father says. Everyone’ s actions have some effect upon the
futur e. And plainly he’ s right. And yet, to brush so close
to a name like Benedict Arnold gives one a right turn, as
Captain Roberts  is fond of saying. (No doubt a situation
that gave one a left turn would be very shocking indeed.)W ell. Returning tangentially to the original subject of
this lette r , the mysterious Mons ieur Beauchamp. If your
father ’ s—Frank’ s, I mean—if you still have the boxes of
papers and books fr om his h ome office, and a fr ee
moment, you might go thr ough them and see if you find
an old manila fo lder in ther e, w ith a coat of arms drawn
on it in color ed  pencil. I think that it’ s azur e and gold,
and I r ecall that it has martlet s on it. W ith luck, it still
contains the Beauchamp family  genealogy that my uncle
Lamb wr ote up for me, lo these many years ago .
Y ou might just have a look and see whether the
incumbent of the name in 1777  was per haps a Per cival.
For the sake of curiosity .
The wind’ s come up a bit, an d the water ’ s getting
r ough. Y our father has gone rath er pale and clammy , like
fish bait ; I’ll close and take him down below for a nice
quiet vomit and a nap, I think .
All my love,
 Mama
  ST AG A T BA Y
 
R OGER BLEW THOUGHTFULL Y ACROSS the
mouth of an empty stout bottle, making a low , throaty moan.
Close. A little d eeper , though … and of course it lacked that
hungry sound, that growling note. But the pitch … He got up
and rummaged in the refrigerato r , finding what he was looking
for behind a heel of cheese and six mar garine tubs full of God
knew what; he’d lay odds it wasn’ t mar garine.
There w as no more than an inch  or so of champagne left in
the bottle—a remnant of their celebratory dinner the week
before, in honor of Bree’ s new job. Someone had thriftily
covered the neck of the bottle with tinfoil, but the wine had of
course g one flat. He went to pour it out in the sink, but a
lifetime of Scottish thrift was no t so easily dismissed. W ith no
more th an an instant’ s hesitation, he drank the rest of the
champagne, lowering the empty bottle to see Annie
MacDonald holding Amanda by the hand and staring at him.
“W ell, at least y e’re no puttin’ it on your cornflakes yet,”
she said, edging past him. “Her e, pet, up ye go.” She hoisted
Mandy into her booster seat an d went out, shaking her head
over her employer ’ s low moral character .
“Gimme, Daddy!” Mandy reached for the bottle, attracted
by t he shiny la bel. W ith the statutory parental pause as he
mentally ran through potential  scenarios of destruction, he
instead gave her his glass of milk and hooted across the
champagne bottle’ s fluted lip, producing a deep, melodious
tone. Y es, that w as it—something close to the F below middle
C.
“Do again, Daddy!” Mandy was charmed. Feeling mildly
self-conscious, he hooted again, making her fall about in a
cascade of giggles. He picked up the stout bottle and blewacross that one, then alternated, working up a two-note
variation to the rhythm of “Mary Had a Little Lamb.”
Attracted by the hooting and Mandy’ s ecstatic shrieks,
Brianna appeared in the doorway , a bright blue plastic hard hat
in her hand.
“Planning to start your own jug band?” she asked.
“Already got one,” he replied, and having decided that the
worst thing Mandy could do w ith the champagne bottle was
drop it onto the rug, handed it t o her and stepped out into the
hall with  Brianna, where he pu lled her close and kissed her
deeply , the baize door swinging shut with a cushioned foosh .
“Champagne for breakfast?” she broke the kiss long enough
to ask, then returned for more, tasting him.
“Needed the bottle,” he mumbled, tasting back. She’d had
porridge with butter and honey  for breakfast, and her mouth
was swe et, turning the champagne bitter on the edges of his
tongue. The hall was chilly , but  she was warm as toast under
her fleece jumper . His fingers l ingered just under the edge of
it, on the bare soft skin at the small of her back.
“Y e’ll have a go od day , aye?” he whispered. He fought the
ur ge to slide his fingers down  the back of her jeans; not
respectful to be fingering the arse of a brand-new inspector of
the North of Scotland Hydro Electric Board. “Y ou’re bringing
the hat home, after?”
“Sure. Why?”
“Thought ye might wear it in be d.” He took it from her hand
and set it gently  on her head. It made her eyes go navy blue.
“W ear it, and I’ ll tell ye what I wanted with the champagne
bottle.”
“Oh, now there’ s an of fer I can ’ t re—” The navy-blue eyes
slid sudd enly sid eways, and Roger glanced in that direction, to
see Ann ie at the end of the hall, broom and dustpan in hand
and an expression of deep interest on her narrow face.“Y eah. Ah… have a good da y ,” Roger said, letting go
hastily .
“Y ou, too.” Face twitching, Bria nna took him firmly by the
shoulders and kissed him, before striding down the hall and
past a round-eyed Annie, whom  she airily wished good day in
the Gaelic.
A sudden crash came from the kitchen. He turned
automatically toward the baize door , though less than half his
attention was on the incipient disaster . The greater part was
focused on the sudden realization that his wife appeared to
have departed for work wearing no knickers.
 
MANDY HAD, God knew how , managed to throw the
champagne bottle through the window and was standing on the
table, re aching for the jagged e dge of the pane, when Roger
rushed in.
“Mandy!” He grabbed her , swung her of f the table, and in
the same motion smacked her bottom once. She emitted an
ear -piercing howl, and he carried her out under his arm,
passing Annie Mac, who stood i n the doorway with mouth and
eyes all round as “O”s.
“See to the glass, aye?” he said.
He felt guilty as hell; what had he been thinking, handing
her the bottle? Let alone leaving her by herself with it!
He a lso felt a certain irritation with Annie Mac—after all,
she was employed to watch the children—but fairness made
him adm it that he ought to have  made sure she’d come back to
watch Mandy before he left. The irritation extended to Bree, as
well, prancing of f to her new job, expecting him to mind the
household.
He recognized that the irritatio n was only his attempt to
escape t he guilt,  though, and di d his best to put it aside while
soothing Mandy , having a wee chat about not standing on
tables, not throwing things in the house, not touching sharpthings, c alling for a grown-up if she needed help—fat chance,
he thoug ht, with a wry inward  smile; Mandy was the most
independent thre e-year -old he’d  ever seen. Which was saying
something, considering that he’d also seen Jem at that age.
One thin g abou t Amanda: she didn’ t hold a grudge. Five
minutes after being smacked and scolded, she was giggling
and begging him to play dollies with her .
“Daddy’ s got to work this morning,” he said, but bent so she
could scramble onto his shoulders. “Come on, we’ll find
Annie Mac; you and the dollies can maybe help her get the
pantry sorted.”
Leaving Mandy and Annie Mac happily working in the
pantry , supervised by an assortment of scabby-looking dolls
and grubby stuf fed animals, he w ent back to his of fice and got
out the notebook into which h e was transcribing the songs
he’d so painstakingly committed to memory . He had an
appointment late r in the week to talk with Siegfried MacLeod,
the c hoirmaster at St. Stephen’ s , and had it in mind to present
him with a copy  of some of the rarer songs, by way of creating
goodwill.
He thou ght he might need it. D r . W eatherspoon had been
reassuring, saying that MacLeod would be delighted to have
help, esp ecially with the children’ s choir , but Roger had spent
enough time in academic ci rcles, Masonic lodges, and
eighteenth-century taverns to kn ow how local politics worked.
MacLeod might well resent having an outsider—so to speak—
foisted on him without warning.
And the re was the delicate issue of a choirmaster who
couldn’ t sing. He touched his throat, with its pebbled scar .
He’d seen two specialists, one in Boston, another in
London. Both of them had said  the same thing. There was a
possibility that sur gery might improve his voice, by removing
some o f the scarring in his larynx. There was an equal
possibility that the sur gery might further damage—or
completely destroy—his voice.“Sur gery on the vocal cords is a delicate business,” one of
the doct ors had said to him, shaking his head. “Normally , we
don’ t ris k it unless there’ s a dire  necessity , such as a cancerous
growth, a congenital malformation that’ s preventing any useful
speech—or a strong professiona l reason. A well-known singer
with nod ules, for instance; in that case, the desire to restore the
voice might be suf ficient motive to risk sur gery—though in
such cases, there usually isn’ t a major risk of rendering the
person permanently mute. In your case …”
He pressed two fingers against his throat and hummed,
feeling the reassuring vibration. No. He remembered all too
well what it felt like to be unable to speak. He’d been
convinced at the time that he’d never speak—let alone sing—
again; the memory of that des pair made him sweat. Never
speak to his children, to Bree? No, he wasn’ t risking that.
Dr . W eatherspoon’ s eyes had lingered on his throat with
interest, but he hadn’ t said anything. MacLeod might be less
tactful.
Whom the Lor d loveth, he chasteneth . W eatherspoon—to his
credit—hadn’ t said that in the course of their discussion. It
had, however , been the quotatio n chosen for that week’ s Bible
group; it had be en printed on th eir flyer , which was sitting on
the rector ’ s desk. And in Roger ’ s hypersensitive frame of mind
at the time, everything looked like a message.
“W ell, i f that’ s what Y e’ve go t in mind, I appreciate the
compliment,” he said out loud. “Be all right with me if I
wasn’ t Y our favorite just this week, though.”
It was said half jokingly , but there was no denying the anger
behind it. Resentment at having to prove himself —to  himself
—one more time. He’d had to d o it physically last time. Now
to d o it again, spiritually , in this slippery , less straightforward
world? He’d been willing, hadn’ t he?
“Y ou as ked. Sin ce when do Y e not take yes for an answer?
Am I missing something here?”Bree had thought so; the height  of their quarrel came back
to him now , making him flush with shame.
“Y ou had—I thought you  had,” she’d corr ected, “a vocation.
Maybe that’ s not what Protestants call it, but that’ s what it is ,
isn’ t it? Y ou told me that God spoke to you.” Her eyes were
intent on his, un swerving, and so penetrating that he wanted to
look away—but didn’ t.
“Do you think God changes His mind?” she asked more
quietly , and laid her hand on his arm, squeezing. “Or do you
think you were mistaken?”
“No,” he’d said, in instant reflex . “No, when something like
that happens … well, when it did  hap pen, I was n’ t in any
doubt.”
“Are you now?”
“Y ou sound like your mother . Making a diagnosis.” He’d
meant it as a joke, but it wasn ’ t. Bree resembled her father
physically to such a degree that he seldom saw Claire in her ,
but the calm ruthlessness in her questions was Claire
Beauchamp to the life. So was  the slight arch of one brow ,
waiting for an answer . He took a deep breath. “I don’ t know .”
“Y es, you do.”
Anger b ubbled up, sudden and bright, and he’d jerked his
arm away from her grasp.
“Where in hell do you get of f telling me what I know?”
She widened her stare. “I’m married to  you.”
“Y ou think that entitles you to try to read my mind?”
“I think that entitles me to worry about you!”
“W ell, don’ t!”
They’d made it up, of course. K issed—well, a bit more than
that—and for giv en each other . For giving, of course, didn’ t
mean for getting.
“Y es, you do.”Did he know?
“Y es,” he said defiantly to th e broch, visible from his
window . “Y es, I damned well d o!” What to do about it: that
was the dif ficulty .
W as he  perhaps meant to b e a minister but not a
Presbyterian? Be come a nondenominational, an evangelical …
a Catholic?  The  thought was so disturbing,  he was obliged to
get up and wal k to and fro for a bit. It wasn’ t that he had
anything against Catholics—well, bar the reflexes inbred by a
life spent as a  Protestant in the Highlands—but he just
couldn’ t see it. “Going over to Rome” was how Mrs. Ogilvy
and Mrs. MacNeil and all th e rest of them would see it
(“Going straight to the Bad Place” being the unspoken
implication); his defection would be discussed in tones of low
horror f or … well, for years. He grinned reluctantly at the
thought.
W ell, and besides, he couldn’ t be a Catholic priest, now ,
could he? Not with Bree and the kids. That made him feel a
little calmer , and he sat down again. No. He’d have to trust
that Go d—through the agen cy of Dr . W eatherspoon—
proposed to show him the way  through this particular thorny
passage of his life. And if He did … well, was that not
evidence of predestination in itself?
Roger groaned, thrust the whole  thing out of his head, and
immersed himself doggedly in his notebook.
Some of the songs and poems he’d written down were well-
known: selections from his previous life, traditional songs he’d
sung as a perfo rmer . Many of the rare ones, he’d acquired
during the eighteenth century , from Scottish immigrants,
travelers, peddlers, and seame n. And some he’d unearthed
from the trove of boxes the Reverend had left behind. The
garage o f the old manse had bee n filled with them, and he and
Bree had made no more than a dent in it. Pure luck that he’d
run across the wooden box of letters so soon after their return.
He glan ced up at it, tempted. He couldn’ t read the letters
without Bree; that wouldn’ t be right. But the two books—they’d looked briefly at the books when they found the box,
but had been c oncerned most ly with the letters and with
finding out what had happened to Claire and Jamie. Feeling
like Jem absconding with a pa cket of chocolate biscuits, he
brought the box down carefully—it was very heavy—and set it
on the desk, rummaging carefully down under the letters.
The books were small, the lar ge st what was called a crown
octavo v olume, about five by se ven inches. It was a common
size, fro m a time when paper was expensive and dif ficult to
get. The  smaller was likely a crown sixteenmo, only about
four by five inch es. He smiled briefly , thinking of Ian Murray;
Brianna had told him her cousin’ s scandalized response to her
description of toilet paper . He m ight never wipe his arse again
without a feeling of extravagance.
The small one was carefully bound in blue-dyed calfskin,
with gil t-edged pages; an expensive, beautiful book. Pocket
Principles of Health , it was  entitled , by C. E. B. F . Fraser ,
M.D . A limited edition, produce d by A. Bell, Printer ,
Edinbur gh .
That gave him a small thrill. So they’d made it to Scotland,
under the care o f Captain T rustworthy Roberts. Or at least he
supposed they must—though the scholar in him cautioned that
this wasn’ t proof; it was alway s possible that the manuscript
had somehow made it to Scotland, without necessarily being
carried in person by the author .
Had they come here? he wond ered. He looked around the
worn, comfortable room, easily envisioning Jamie at the big
old desk by the window , going through the farm ledgers with
his broth er -in-law . If the kitchen was the heart of the house—
and it was—this room had likely always been its brain.
Moved b y impu lse, he opened t he book and nearly choked.
The frontispiec e, in customary eighteenth-century style,
showed an engraving of the author . A medical man, in a neat
tiewig a nd black coat, with a high black stock. From above
which his mother -in-law’ s face looked serenely out at him.He laughed out loud, causing Annie Mac to peer cautiously
in at him, in ca se he might be having a fit of some kind, as
well as talking to himself. He w aved her of f and shut the door
before returning to the book.
It was her , all right. The wide-spaced eyes under dark
brows, the graceful firm bones of cheek, temple, and jaw .
Whoever had done the engraving had not got her mouth quite
right; it had a sterner shape he re, and a good thing, too—no
man had lips like hers.
How old… ? He checked the date of printing:
MDCCLXXVIII. 1778. Not much older than when he’d last
seen her , then—and looking stil l a good deal younger than he
knew her to be.
W as there a pict ure of Jamie in the other … ? He seized it
and flipped it open. Sure enough, another steel-point
engraving, though this was a more homely drawing. His
father -in-law sat  in a wing chair , his hair tied simply back, a
plaid draped over the chair behind him, and a book open upon
his k nee. He wa s reading to a small child sitting upon his other
knee—a little girl with dark cur ly hair . She was turned away ,
absorbed in the story . Of course—the engraver couldn’ t have
known what Mandy’ s face would look like.
Grandfather T ales , the book was titled, with the subtitle,
“Stories from the Highlands of Scotland and the Backcountry
of the Carolinas,” by James A lexander Malcolm Mac Kenzie
Fraser . Again, printed by A. Bell, Edinbur gh , in the same year .
The dedication said simply , For my grandchildr en .
Claire’ s portrait had made him laugh; this one moved him
almost to tears, and he closed the book gently .
Such fai th they had had. T o create, to hoard, to send these
things, these fragile documents, down through the years, with
only the hope that they would survive and reach those for
whom they were intended. Faith  that Mandy would be here to
read them one day . He swallo wed, the lump in his throat
painful.How had they managed it? W ell, they did say faith moved
mountains, even if his own seemed presently not adequate to
flatten a molehill.
“Jesus,” he muttered, not sure if this was simple frustration
or a prayer for assistance.
A flicke r of motion through the window distracted him from
the paper , and he glanced up to see Jem coming out of the
kitchen door at the far end of the house. He was red in the
face, sm all shoulders hunched, and had a lar ge string bag in
one hand, through which Roge r could see a bottle of lemon
squash, a loaf of bread, and a few other foodlike bulges.
Startled, Roger looked at the clo ck on the mantel, thinking he
had lost complete track of time—but he hadn’ t. It was just on
one o’clock.
“What the—” Shoving the pape r aside, he got up and made
for the back of the house, emer ging just in time to see Jem’ s
small figure, clad in windch eater and jeans—he wasn’ t
allowed to wear jeans to school—making its way across the
hayfield.
Roger c ould hav e caught him u p easily , but instead slowed
his pace, following at a distance.
Plainly Jem wasn’ t ill—so likely something drastic had
happened at school. Had the school sent him home, or had he
simply l eft on his own? No one had called, but it was just past
the school’ s dinner hour; if Jem had seized the opportunity to
run for it, it wa s possible they hadn’ t yet missed him. It was
nearly two miles to walk, but that was nothing to Jem.
Jem had got to the stile in the drystone dyke that walled the
field, hopped over , and was making determinedly across a
pasture full of sheep. Where was he heading?
“And what the bloody hell did  you do this time?” Roger
muttered to himself.
Jem had been i n the village school at Broch Mordha for
only a couple of months—his first experience with twentieth-
century education. After their return, Roger had tutored Jem athome in  Boston, while Bree was with Mandy during her
recovery from the sur gery that h ad saved her life. W ith Mandy
safe home again, they’d had to decide what to do next.
It w as mostly Jem that had made them go to Scotland rather
than stay in Boston, though Bree had wanted that anyway .
“It’ s their heritage,” she’d ar gued. “Jem and Mandy are
Scots on both sides, after all. I want to keep that for them.”
And the connection with their grandfather; that went without
saying.
He’d agreed, and agreed also that Jem would likely be less
conspicuous in Scotland—desp ite exposure to television and
months in the United States, he still spoke with a strong
Highland lilt that would make him a marked man in a Boston
elementary school. On the other hand, as Roger observed
privately , Jem was the sort of person who drew attention, no
matter what.
Still, the re was no question that life on Lallybroch and in a
small Highland school were a g reat deal more like what Jem
had been accustomed to in North Carolina—though given the
natural flexibility of kids, he thought he’d adapt pretty well to
wherever he found himself.
As to his own prospects in S cotland … he’d kept quiet
about that.
Jem had  reached the end of the pasture and shooed of f a
group of  sheep that were blocking the gate that led to the road.
A b lack ram lo wered its head and menaced him, but Jem
wasn’ t bothered about sheep; he shouted and swung his bag,
and the ram, startled, backed up sharply , making Roger smile.
He had no qualms about Jem’ s intelligence—well, he did,
but n ot a bout its  lack. Much mor e about what kind of trouble it
could lead him into. School w asn’ t simple for anyone, let
alone a new school. And a scho ol in which one stuck out, for
any reason … R oger remembered his own school in Inverness,
where he was peculiar first for having no real parents, and then
as the minister ’ s  adopted son. A fter a few miserable weeks ofbeing poked, taunted, and having his lunch stolen, he’d started
hitting b ack. And while that ha d led to a certain amount of
dif ficulty with the teachers, it ha d eventually taken care of the
problem.
Had Jem been f ighting? He hadn’ t seen any blood, but he
might no t have been close enough. He’d be surprised if it was
that, though.
There’d been an incident the week before, when Jem had
noticed a lar ge rat scurrying in to a hole under the school’ s
foundation. He had brought a bit of twine with him next day ,
set a  sna re just before going in to the first lesson, and gone out
at th e recess to retrieve his prey , which he had then proceeded
to sk in in a businesslike manner , to the admiration of his male
classmates and the horror of the girls. His teacher hadn’ t been
best plea sed, either; Miss Glendenning was a city woman from
Aberdeen.
Still, it was a Highland village school, and most of the
students came from the nearby farms and crofts. Their fathers
fished and hunted—and they certainly understood about rats.
The principal, Mr . Menzies, had congratulated Jem on his
cunning, but told him not to do  it again at school. He had let
Jem kee p the skin, though; Roger had nailed it ceremoniously
to the door of the toolshed.
Jem didn’ t trouble opening the pasture gate; just ducked
between the bars, dragging the bag after him.
W as he making  for the main road, planning to hitchhike?
Roger p ut on a bit of speed, d odging black sheep droppings
and kneeing his way through a cluster of grazing ewes, who
gave way in indignation, uttering sharp baahs .
No, Jem  had turned the other wa y . Where the devil could he
be g oing? The dirt lane that led to the main road in one
direction led absolutely nowhere in the other—it petered out
where the land rose into steep, rocky hills.
And that, evidently , was where Jem was headed—for the
hills. He turned out of the lane and began climbing, his smallform almost obscured by the lu xuriant growth of bracken and
the drooping branches of rowa n trees on the lower slopes.
Evidently he was taking to the  heather , in the time-honored
manner of Highland outlaws.
It w as the thoug ht of Highland outlaws that made the penny
drop. Jem was heading for the Dunbonnet’ s cave.
Jamie F raser had lived there for seven years after the
catastrophe of Culloden, almost  within sight of his home but
hidden from Cumberland’ s soldiers—and protected by his
tenants, who never used his na me aloud but called him “the
Dunbonnet,” for  the color of the knitted Highland bonnet he
wore to conceal his fiery hair .
That same hair f lashed like a beacon, halfway up the slope,
before disappearing again behind a rock.
Realizing that, red hair or no, he could easily lose Jem in the
rugged landscape, Roger lengthened his stride. Ought he to
call out? He knew approximately where the cave was—
Brianna had described its locati on to him—but he hadn’ t yet
been up there himself. It occurr ed to him to wonder how Jem
knew where it was. Perhaps he didn’ t and was searching for it.
Still, he didn’ t call, but started up the hill himself. Now he
came to look, h e could see th e narrow path of a deer trail
through the growth and the partial print of a small sneaker in
the mud  of it. He relaxed a little  at the sight, and slowed down.
He wouldn’ t lose Jem now .
It was quiet on the hillside, but the air was moving, restless
in the rowan trees.
The heather was a haze of rich purple in the hollows of the
soaring rock above him. He cau ght the tang of something on
the w ind and turned after it, curious. Another flash of red: a
stag, splendidly  antlered and reeking of rut, ten paces from
him on the slope below . He froz e, but the deer ’ s head came up,
wide black nostrils flaring to scent the air .
He reali zed suddenly that his hand was pressed against his
belt, where he’d once carried a s kinning knife, and his muscleswere tensed, ready to rush down and cut the deer ’ s throat, once
the hunter ’ s shot took it down. He could all but feel the tough
hairy skin, the pop of the wi ndpipe, and the gush of hot,
reeking blood over his hands , see the long yellow teeth
exposed, slimed with the green of the deer ’ s last meal.
The stag belled, a guttural, ech oing roar , his challenge to
any other stag within hearing. F or the space of a breath, Roger
expected one of Ian’ s arrows to whir out of the rowans behind
the deer or the echo of Jamie’ s rifle to crack the air . Then he
shook himself back into his sk in and, bending, picked up a
stone to throw—but the deer ha d heard him and was of f, with
a crash that took it rattling into the dry bracken.
He stood still, smelling his own sweat, still dislocated. But it
wasn’ t the North Carolina mountains, and the knife in his
pocket was meant for cutting twine and opening beer bottles.
His hear t was pounding, but he turned back to the trail, still
fitting himself back into time and place. Surely it got easier
with pra ctice? They’d been back well more than a year now ,
and still  he woke sometimes at night with no notion where or
when he was—or , worse, stepp ed through some momentary
wormhole into the past while still awake.
The kids, being kids, hadn’ t se emed to suf fer much from
that sense of bei ng … otherwhere. Mandy , of course, had been
too youn g and too sick to remember anything, either of her life
in N orth Carolina or the tr ip through the stones. Jem
remembered. But Jem—he’d taken one look at the
automobiles on the road they’d r eached half an hour after their
emer gence from the stones on Ocracoke and stood transfixed,
a hu ge grin spre ading across his face as the cars whizzed past
him.
“V room,” he’d said contentedly to himself, the trauma of
separation and time travel—Ro ger had himself barely been
able to walk, feeling that he had  left a major and irretrievable
piece of himself trapped in the stones—apparently for gotten.
A kindly motorist had stopped for them, sympathized with
their story of a  boating accident, and driven them to thevillage, where a collect phone ca ll to Joe Abernathy had sorted
out the immediate contingencies of money , clothes, a room,
and food. Jem h ad sat on Roger ’ s knee, gazing open-mouthed
out the window  as they drove up the narrow road, the wind
from the open window fluttering his soft, bright hair .
Couldn’ t wait to do it again. An d once they’d got settled at
Lallybroch, had pestered Roger into letting him drive the
Morris Mini round the farm t racks, sitting in Roger ’ s lap,
small hands clenching the steering wheel in glee.
Roger smiled wryly to himself; he supposed he was lucky
Jem had  decided to abscond on foot this time—another year or
two, and he’d likely be tall enough to reach the pedals. He’d
best start hiding the car keys.
He w as high abo ve the farm now , and slowed to look up the
slope. B rianna h ad said the cav e was on the south face of the
hill, abo ut forty feet above a lar ge whitish boulder known
locally as “Leap o’ the Cask.” So known because the
Dunbonnet’ s servant, bringing ale to the hidden laird, had
encountered a group of British soldiers and, refusing to give
them the cask he carried, had had his hand cut of f—
“Oh, Jesus,” Roger whispered. “Fer gus. Oh, God, Fer gus.”
Could s ee at once the laughing, fine-boned face, dark eyes
snapping with amusement as he lifted a flapping fish with the
hook he wore in  place of his missing left hand—and the vision
of a small, limp hand, lying bloody on the path before him.
Because it was here. Right here . T urning, he saw the rock,
big and  rough, bearing silent, stolid witness to horror and
despair—and to  the sudden grip of the past that took him by
the throat, fierce as the bite of a noose.
He coug hed hard, trying to ope n his throat, and heard the
hoarse eerie bell of another stag, close above him on the slope
but still invisible.
He ducked of f t he trail, flattening himself against the rock.
Surely to God h e hadn’ t sounded bad enough that the stag hadtaken hi m for a rival? No—more likely it was coming down in
challenge to the one he’d seen a few moments before.
Sure enough; an instant later a  big stag came down from
above, picking its way almost daintily through heather and
rocks. It was a fine animal, but w as already showing the strain
of rutting season, its ribs shadowed under the thick coat and
the f lesh of its face sunk in, ey es red with sleeplessness and
lust.
It sa w him; the big head swiveled in his direction, and he
saw the rolling, bloodshot eyes fix on him. It wasn’ t afraid of
him, though; likely had no room in its brain for anything save
fighting and copulation. It stretched its neck in his direction
and belled at him, eyes showing white with the ef fort.
“Look, m ate, you want her , you  can have her .” He backed
slowly a way , bu t the deer follo wed him, menacing him with
lowered antlers. Alarmed, he spread his arms, waved and
shouted at the deer; normally that would have sent it bounding
away . R ed deer in rut weren’ t normal; the thing lowered its
head and char ged him.
Roger d odged as ide and threw h imself flat at the base of the
rock. He was w edged as tightly next the rock’ s face as he
could get, in h opes of keeping the maddened stag from
trampling him. It stumbled to a stop a few feet from him,
thrashing at the heather with it s antlers and breathing like a
bellows—but then it heard the blatting of the challenger
below , and jerked its head up.
Another roar from below , and the new stag turned on its
haunches and bounded clear o ver the trail, the sound of its
hell-bent passage down the slope marked by the crunch of
breaking heather and the rattle of stones spurned by its hooves.
Roger scrambled to his feet, adrenaline running through his
veins like quicksilver . He hadn’ t realized the red deer were at
it up  here, or he’d not have bee n wasting time strolling along
maundering abo ut the past. He needed to find Jem now , before
the boy ran afoul of one of the things.He could hear the roars and c lashing of the two below ,
fighting it out for control of a harem of hinds, though they
were out of sight from where he stood.
“Jem!” h e bello wed, not caring whether he sounded like a
rutting deer or a  bull elephant. “Jem! Where are you? Answer
me this minute!”
“I’m up here, D a.” Jemmy’ s voice came from above him, a
little tremulous, and he whirled to see Jem sitting on the Leap
o’ the Cask, string bag clutched to his chest.
“Right, you. Down. Now .” Relief fought with annoyance
but edge d it out. He reached up , and Jem slid down the rock,
landing heavily in his father ’ s arms.
Roger g runted and set him dow n, then leaned down to pick
up the string ba g, which had fa llen to the ground. In addition
to bread and lem on squash, he saw , it held several apples, a
lar ge chunk of cheese, and a packet of chocolate biscuits.
“Planning to stay for a while, were ye?” he asked. Jemmy
flushed and looked away .
Roger turned and looked up the slope.
“Up the re, is it? Y our grandda’ s cave?” He couldn’ t see a
thing; the slope was a jumble of rock and heather , liberally
splotched with scrubby gorse bushes and the odd sprout of
rowan and alder .
“A ye. Ju st there.” Jemmy pointed up the slope. “See, where
that witch tree’ s leaning?”
He saw the rowan—a full-grown tree, gnarled with age;
surely it  couldn’ t have been ther e since Jamie’ s time, could it?
—but st ill saw no sign of the c ave’ s opening. The sounds of
combat from below had ceased; he glanced round in case the
loser should be coming back this way , but evidently not.
“Show me,” he said.
Jem, who had be en looking deeply uneasy , relaxed a little at
this and, turning, scrambled up the slope, Roger at his heels.Y ou could be rig ht next to the cave’ s opening and never see
it. It was screened by an outcrop of rock and a heavy growth
of go rse; you co uldn’ t see the narrow opening at all unless you
were standing in front of it.
A cool breath came out of the cave, moist on his face. He
knelt down to peer in; couldn’ t see more than a few feet inside,
but it wasn’ t inviting.
“Be cold  to sleep in there,” he said. He glanced at Jem, and
motioned to a nearby rock.
“W ant to sit down and tell me what happened at school?”
Jem swallowed and shifted from foot to foot.
“No.”
“Sit down.” He didn’ t raise his v oice, but made it evident he
expected to be obeyed. Jem didn’ t quite sit down but edged
backward, leaning against the rocky outcrop that hid the cave
mouth. He wouldn’ t look up.
“I got the strap,” Jem muttered, chin buried in his chest.
“Oh?” Roger kept his voice cas ual. “W ell, that’ s a bugger . I
got it once or twice, when I was at school. Didn’ t like it.”
Jem’ s head jerked up, eyes wide.
“A ye? What for , then?”
“Fighting, mostly ,” Roger said. He supposed he oughtn’ t to
be telling the b oy that—bad example—but it was the truth.
And if fighting was Jem’ s problem…
“That what happened today?” He’d looked Jem over briefly
when he sat down, and gave him a closer look now . Jem
seemed undamaged, but when he turned his head away , Roger
could see that s omething had happened to his ear . It was a
deep crimson, the lobe of it nearly purple. He suppressed an
exclamation at sight of it and merely repeated, “What
happened?”
“Jacky McEnroe said if ye heard  I’d got the strap, ye’d give
me anot her whipping when I got home.” Jem swallowed, butnow looked at his father directly . “W ill you?”
“I don’ t know . I hope I won’ t have to.”
He’d tawsed Jemmy once—he’d had to—and neither of
them wanted to repeat the exp erience. He reached out and
touched Jem’ s flaming ear gently .
“T ell me what happened, son.”
Jem too k a deep breath, blowing out his cheeks, then
deflated into resignation.
“A ye. W ell, it started when Jimm y Glasscock said Mam and
me and Mandy were all goin’ to burn in hell.”
“Y eah?” Roger wasn’ t all that surprised; Scottish
Presbyterians we ren’ t known for their religious flexibility , and
the bree d hadn’ t altered all tha t much in two hundred years.
Manners might keep most of them from telling their papist
acquaintance they were going straight to hell—but most of
them likely thought it.
“W ell, ye know what to do abo ut that, though, don’ t you?”
Jem had heard similar sentiments expressed on the Ridge—
though generally more quietly , Jamie Fraser being who he
was. Still, they’d talked about it,  and Jem was well prepared to
answer that particular conversational gambit.
“Oh, aye.” Jem shrugged, looking down at his shoes again.
“Just say , ‘A ye, fine, I’ll see ye there, then.’ I did.”
“And?”
Deep sigh.
“I said it in the Gaidhlig .”
Roger scratche d behind his ear , puzzled. Gaelic was
disappearing in the Highlands, but was still common enough
that you heard i t once in a while in the pub or the post of fice.
No doubt a few of Jem’ s classmates had heard it from their
grans, but even if they didn’ t understand what he’d said… ?
“And?” he repeated.“And M iss Glendenning grabbe d me by the ear and like to
tore it of f.” A flush was risin g in Jemmy’ s cheeks at the
memory . “She shook me, Da!”
“By the ear?” R oger felt an answering flush in his own
cheeks.
“Y es!” T ears of humiliation and anger were welling in Jem’ s
eyes, but he dashed them away with a sleeve and pounded his
fist on his leg . “She said, ‘ W e—do—not—speak—like—
THA T! W e—sp eak—ENGLISH!’ ” His voice was some
octaves higher than the redoub table Miss Glendenning’ s, but
his mimicry made the ferocity of her attack more than evident.
“And then she took a strap  to you?” Roger asked
incredulously .
Jem shook his head, and wiped his nose on his sleeve.
“No,” he said. “That was Mr . Menzies.”
“What? Why? Here.” He handed Jem a crumpled paper
handkerchief fro m his pocket, a nd waited while the boy blew
his nose.
“W ell… I was already fussed wi’ Jimmy , and when she
grabbed me like that, it hurt ba d. And… well, my dander got
up,” he said, giving Roger a  blue-eyed look of burning
righteousness that was so much his grandfather that Roger
nearly smiled, despite the situation.
“And ye said something else to her , did ye?”
“A ye.” Jem dropped his eyes, ru bbing the toe of his sneaker
in the dirt. “Miss Glendenning doesna like the Gaidhlig , but
she doesn’ t know any , either . Mr . Menzies does.”
“Oh, God.”
Drawn by the shouting, Mr . Me nzies had emer ged onto the
play yard just in time to hear Jem giving Miss Glendenning the
benefit of some of his grandfath er ’ s best Gaelic curses, at the
top of his lungs.“So he made me bend over a chair and gave me three good
ones, th en sent me to the cloakroom to stay ‘til school was
out.”
“Only you didn’ t stay there.”
Jem shook his head, bright hair flying.
Roger bent and picked up the  string bag, fighting back
outrage, dismay ,  laughter , and a throat-clutching sympathy . On
second thought, he let a bit of the sympathy show .
“Running away from home, were ye?”
“No.” Je m looked up at him, surprised. “I didna want to go
to sc hool tomorrow , though. No t and have Jimmy laugh at me.
So I thought to stay up here ‘til the weekend, and maybe by
Monday , things  would get sor ted. Miss Glendenning might
die,” he added hopefully .
“And maybe your mam and I would be so worried by the
time ye came down, ye’d get of f without a second whipping?”
Jem’ s deep-blue eyes widened in surprise.
“Och, no. Mam would give me laldy if I just went of f wi’ no
word. I put a note on my bed. Said I was living rough a day or
two.” He said this with perfect matter -of-factness. Then he
wiggled his shoulders and stood up, sighing.
“Can we get it over and go home?” he asked, his voice
trembling only a little. “I’m hungry .”
“I’m not going to whip you,” Roger assured him. He
reached out an a rm and gathered Jemmy to him. “Come here,
pal.”
Jemmy’ s brave facade gave way at that, and he melted into
Roger ’ s arms, crying a little in  relief but letting himself be
comforted, cuddling like a puppy against his father ’ s shoulder ,
trusting Da to make it all right. And his da bloody would ,
Roger promised silently . No matter if he had to strangle Miss
Glendenning with his bare hands.“Why is  it bad t o speak Gaidhlig , Da?” he murmured, worn
out by so much emotion. “I didna mean to do anything bad.”
“It’ s not,” Roger whispered, smoothing the silky hair behind
Jem’ s ea r . “Dinn a fash yourself. Mam and I will get it sorted. I
promise. And ye haven’ t got to go to school tomorrow .”
Jem sigh ed at that, going inert as a bag of grain. Then he
lifted his head and gave a small giggle.
“D’ye think Mam will give Mr . Menzies laldy?” TUNNEL TIGERS
 
B RIANNA ’S FIR ST INTIMA TIO N of disaster was the
slice of light on  the track, shrinking to nothing in the split
second it took f or the enormous doors to swing shut, echoing
behind h er with  a boom that seemed to shiver the air in the
tunnel.
She said something that she would have washed Jem’ s
mouth o ut for saying, and said it with heartfelt fury—but said
it al so under her breath, having  realized in the instant that it
took the doors to close what was happening.
She cou ldn’ t see a thing save the swirls of color that were
her retinas’ response to sudden dark, but she was only ten feet
or so inside the tunnel and cou ld still hear the sound of the
bolts sli ding home; they were worked by big wheels on the
outside of the steel doors and  made a grinding sound like
bones be ing che wed. She turned carefully , took five steps, and
put out her hands. Y es, there were the doors; big, solid, made
of st eel, and now solidly locked . She could hear the sound of
laughter outside.
Giggling , sh e thought w ith furious contempt. Like little
boys!
Little boys, indeed. She took a few deep breaths, fighting
of f both anger a nd panic. Now that the dazzle of the darkness
had fade d, she could see the thin  line of light that bisected the
fifteen-foot doors. A man-height shadow interrupted the light
but was  jerked away , to the ac companiment of whispers and
more giggling. Someone trying t o peek in, the idiot. Good luck
to h im, seeing a nything in her e . Aside from the hair of light
between the doors, the hydr oelectric tunnel under Loch
Errochty was dark as the pits of hell.At least she cou ld use that hair of light for orientation. Still
breathing with deliberation, she made her way—stepping
carefully; she didn’ t want to amuse the baboons outside any
more than necessary by stumbling and falling noisily—to the
metal b ox on the left wall where the power switches that
controlled the tunnel lighting were located.
She found the box and was momentarily panicked to find it
locked, before recalling that she had the key; it was on the big
jangle of grubby keys that Mr . Campbell had given her , each
one dangling a w orn paper tag w ith its function written on. Of
course, she couldn’ t r ead  th e bloody tags —and frigging Andy
Davies had casually borrowed the flashlight that should have
been in her belt, on the pretext of looking under the truck for
an oil leak.
They’d planned it pretty well, she thought grimly , trying one
key , then the ne xt, fumbling and scratching to insert the tip in
the t iny invisible slot. All three of them were clearly in on it:
Andy , Craig McCarty , and Rob Cameron.
She was of an orderly mind, and when she’d tried each key
in carefu l turn with no result, didn’ t try them again. She knew
they’d thought of that one, too; Craig had taken the keys from
her to unlock the toolbox in the panel truck, and returned them
with a bow of exaggerated gallantry .
They’d stared at her—naturally—when she was introduced
to th em as the new safety inspector , though she supposed
they’d a lready b een informed she was that shocking thing, a
woman. Rob Cameron, a handsome young man who clearly
fancied himself,  had looked her frankly up and down before
extending his hand with a smile . She’d returned the slow up-
and-down before taking it, and the other two had laughed. So
had Rob, to his credit.
She hadn’ t sensed any hostility  from them on the drive to
Loch Errochty , and she thought she’d have seen it if it had
been there. This was just a stupid joke. Probably .
In all honesty , th e doors closing behind her had not  been her
first intimation that something was up, she thought grimly .She’d been a m other much too long to miss the looks of
secretive delight or preternatural innocence that marked the
face of a male u p to mischief, an d such looks had been all over
the f aces of her  maintenance and repair team, if she’d spared
the attention to look at them. Her mind had been only half on
her job, though; the other hal f had been in the eighteenth
century , worried for Fer gus and Marsali, but encouraged by
the visio n of her parents and Ian safely bound at last for
Scotland.
But whatever was going on —had  gone on, she corrected
herself firmly—in the past, she had other things to worry about
in the here and now .
What di d they expect her to do? she wondered. Scream?
Cry? Beat on the doors and beg to be let out?
She walked quietly back to the door and pressed her ear to
the c rack, in tim e to hear the roar of the truck’ s engine starting
up and the spurt of gravel from  its wheels as it turned up the
service road.
“Y ou bloody bastar ds !” sh e said out loud. What did they
mean by  this? Since she hadn’ t satisfied them by shrieking and
crying, they’d decided simply to leave her entombed for a
while? Come back later in hopes of finding her in shards—or ,
better ye t, red-f aced with fury? Or—more-sinister thought—
did they mean t o go back to the Hydro Electric Board of fice,
innocent looks on their faces, a nd tell Mr . Campbell that his
new inspector simply hadn’ t shown up for work this morning?
She breathed out through her nose, slow , deliberate.
Right. She’d eviscerate them when the opportunity of fered.
But what to do just now?
She turned away from the power box, looking into the utter
black. S he hadn’ t been in this particular tunnel before, though
she’d se en one like it during her tour with Mr . Campbell. It
was one of the original tunnels  of the hydroelectric project,
dug by hand with pick and shov el by the “hydro boys” back in
the 1950 s. It ran nearly a mile through the mountain and underpart of the flood ed valley that n ow held the greatly expanded
Loch Er rochty , and a toylike electric train ran on its track
down the center of the tunnel.
Originally , the train had carried the workmen, the “tunnel
tigers,” to the work face and back; now reduced to only an
engine, it served the occasional hydroelectric workers
checking the huge cables that r an along the tunnel’ s walls or
servicing the tremendous turbines at the foot of the dam, far
of f at the other end of the tunnel.
Which was, it occurred to her , what Rob, Andy , and Craig
were me ant to be doing. Liftin g one of the massive turbines
and replacing its damaged blade.
She pres sed her back against th e tunnel wall, hands flat on
the roug h rock, and thought. Tha t’ s where they’d gone, then. It
made no  dif ference, but she cl osed her eyes to improve her
concentration and summoned up the pages of the massive
binder—presently on the seat of the vanished truck—that
contained the structural and engineering details of all the
hydroelectric stations under her purview .
She’d lo oked at the diagrams for this one last night and
again, hastily , while brushing her teeth this morning. The
tunnel led to  the dam, and had obviously b een used in the
construction of the lower levels of that dam. How low? If the
tunnel joined at the level of the turbine chamber itself, it
would h ave been walled of f. Bu t if it joined at the level of the
servicing chamber above—a huge room equipped with the
multi-ton ceiling  cranes needed to lift the turbines from their
nests—then there would still be a door; there would have been
no need to seal it of f, with no water on the other side.
T ry as she might , she couldn’ t bring the diagrams to mind in
suf ficient detail to be sure there was an opening into the dam
at th e fa r end of the tunnel—but it would be simple enough to
find out.
 SHE’D SEEN THE TRAIN, in that brief moment before
the door s closed; it didn’ t take  much fumbling round to get
into the open cab of the tiny engine. Now , had those clowns
taken th e key to the engine, to o? Ha. There was no key; it
worked by a switch on the console. She flipped it, and a red
button g lowed with sudden triumph as she felt the hum of
electricity run through the track beneath.
The trai n couldn ’ t have been sim pler to run. It had a single
lever , which you pushed forward or back, depending on which
direction you meant to go. She shoved it gently forward, and
felt air move past her face as the train moved silently of f into
the bowels of the earth.
She had to go slowly . The tiny r ed button shed a comforting
glow over her h ands, but did nothing to pierce the darkness
ahead, a nd she had no idea where or how much the track
curved. Neither did she want to  hit the end of the track at a
high rate  of speed and derail th e engine. It felt as though she
was inching through the dark, but it was much better than
walking, feeling her way over a mile of tunnel lined with high-
voltage cables.
It h it her in the dark. For a  split second, she thought
someone had laid a live cable o n the track. In the next instant,
a sound that wa sn’ t a sound thrummed through her , plucking
every nerve in h er body , making her vision go white. And then
her hand brushed rock and she  realized that she had fallen
across the console, was hanging halfway out of the tiny ,
trundling engine, was about to fall out into darkness.
Head spinning, she managed to grab the edge of the console
and pull  herself back into the ca b. Flipped the switch with one
shaking hand and half-fell to th e floor , where she curled up,
gripping her knees, her breath a whimpering in the dark.
“Holy God,” she whispered. “Oh, Blessed Mother . Oh,
Jesus.”
She cou ld feel it out there. St ill feel it. It didn’ t make a
sound n ow , bu t she felt its nearness and couldn’ t stop
trembling.She sat still for a  long time, head  on her knees, until rational
thought began to come back.
She couldn’ t be mistaken. She’d passed through time twice,
and knew  t he feeling. But  this hadn’ t been nearly so shocking.
Her skin still p rickled and her nerves jumped and her inner
ears rang  as though she’d thrust her head into a hive of hornets
—but she felt s olid. She felt as though a red-hot wire had
sliced her in tw o, but she hadn’ t had the horrible sense of
being disassembled, turned physically inside out.
A terrib le thought sent her sur g ing to her feet, clinging to
the con sole. Had she jumped? W as she somewhere—
some when— else? But the metal console was cool and solid
under he r hands, the smell of damp rock and cable insulation
unchanged.
“No,” she whispered, and flicked the power light for
reassurance. It came on, and t he train, still in gear , gave a
sudden l urch. Hastily , she throttled back the speed to less than
a crawl.
She couldn’ t have jumped into  the past. Small objects in
direct co ntact with a traveler ’ s person seemed to move with
them, but an en tire train and its track was surely pushing it.
“Besides,” she said out loud, “if  you’d gone more than twenty-
five years or so into the past, the tunnel wouldn’ t be  here.
Y ou’d be inside… solid rock.” Her gor ge rose suddenly , and
she threw up.
The sense of… it… was receding, though. It—whatever it
was—was behind her . W ell, that settled it, she thought, wiping
her m outh with t he back of her hand. There bloody well had  to
be a door at the far end, becau se there was no way she was
going back the way she’d come.
There w as a door . A plain, ord inary , industrial metal door .
And a padlock,  unlocked, hanging from an open hasp. She
could smell WD-40; someone had oiled the hinges, very
recently , and the door swung op en easily when she turned the
knob. She felt suddenly like Alice, after falling down the
White Rabbit’ s hole. A really mad Alice.A steep flight of steps lay on the other side of the door ,
dimly li t—and at the top was another metal door , edged with
light. Sh e could hear the rumbl e and the metallic whine of a
ceiling crane in operation.
Her breath was coming fast, a nd not from the ef fort of
climbing the stairs. What would she find on the other side? It
was the servicing chamber inside the dam; she knew that
much. But would she find Thu rsday on the other side? The
same  T hursday she’d had when the  tunnel doors had closed
behind her?
She grit ted her teeth and opened the door . Rob Cameron
was wai ting, lo unging back against the wall, lit cigarette in
hand. H e broke into an enormous grin at sight of her , dropped
the butt, and stepped on it.
“Knew y e’d make it, hen,” he said. Across the room, Andy
and Craig turned from their work and applauded.
“Buy ye a pint after work, then, lass,” Andy called.
“T wo!” shouted Craig.
She could still taste bile at the back of her throat. She gave
Rob Cameron the sort of look she’d given Mr . Campbell.
“Don’ t,” she said evenly , “call me hen.”
His good-looking face twitched and he tugged at his
forelock with mock subservience.
“Anything you say , boss,” he said. HILL T OPS
 
I T W AS NEARL Y SEVEN by the time he heard
Brianna’ s car in the drive. The kids had had their supper , but
came swarming out to her , clinging to her legs as though she’d
just come back from darkest Africa or the North Pole.
It w as some tim e before the kids were settled for the night
and Bre e had time to give her undivided attention to him. He
didn’ t mind. “Are you starving?” she said. “I can fix—”
He interrupted her , taking her by the hand and drawing her
into his of fice, w here he carefully closed and locked the door .
She was standing there, hair half matted from her hard hat,
grimy from spending the day in the bowels of the earth. She
smelled of earth. Also engine grease, cigarette smoke, sweat,
and… beer?
“I’ve a lot to tell you,” he said.  “And I know ye’ve a lot to
tell m e. But first … could ye just  slip of f your jeans, maybe, sit
on the desk, and spread your legs?”
Her eyes went perfectly round.
“Y es,” she said mildly . “I could do that.”
 
ROGER HAD OFTEN WONDERED whether it was true
what they said about redheaded people being more volatile
than the  usual—or whether it was just that their emotions
showed so suddenly and alarmingly on their skins. Both, he
thought.
Maybe he should have waited ‘ til she’d got her clothes on
before telling her about Miss G lendenning. If he had, though,
he’d have missed the remarkable sight of his wife, naked and
flushed with fury from the navel upward.“That bloody old besom! If sh e thinks she can get away
with—”
“She can’ t,” he interrupted firmly . “Of course she can’ t.”
“Y ou bet she can’ t! I’ll go down there first thing tomorrow
and—”
“W ell, maybe not.”
She stopped and looked at him, one eye narrowed.
“Maybe not what ?”
“Maybe not you.” He fastened  his own jeans, and picked
hers up. “I was thinking it might be best if I go.”
She frowned, turning that one over .
“Not tha t I think ye’d lose your temper and set about the old
bitch,” h e added , smiling, “but y ou have got your job to go to,
aye?”
“Hmmm,” she said, seeming skeptical of his ability to
adequately impress Miss Glend enning with the magnitude of
her crime.
“And if ye did lose  t he heid and nu t the woman, I’d hate to
have to explain to the kids why  we were visiting Mummy in
jail.”
That ma de her laugh, and he relaxed a little. He really didn’ t
think  s he’d resort to physical violence, but then, she hadn’ t
seen Jem my’ s ear right after h e’d come home. He’d had a
strong u r ge himself to go straight down to the school and show
the w oman what it felt like, but  he was in better command of
himself now .
“So what do  you  mean to say to her?” S he fished her
brassiere out from under the des k, giving him a succulent view
of her rear aspect, as she hadn’ t put the jeans on yet.
“Nothing. I’ll speak to the principal. He  can have a word
with her .”“W ell, that might be better ,” s he said slowly . “W e don’ t
want Miss Glendenning to take it out on Jemmy .”
“Right.” The beautiful flush wa s fading. Her hard hat had
rolled of f under the chair; he picked it up and set it on her head
again. “ So—how was work today? And why don’ t ye wear
knickers to work?” he asked, suddenly remembering.
T o his startlement, the flush roared back like a brushfire.
“I g ot out of the habit in the eighteenth century ,” she
snapped, plainly taking the huf f. “I only wear knickers for
ceremonial purposes anymore. What did you think, I was
planning to seduce Mr . Campbell?”
“W ell, n ot if he’ s anything like you described him, no,” he
said mildly . “I just noticed wh en ye left this morning, and
wondered.”
“Oh.” She was s till ruf fled, he could see that and wondered
why . He was about to ask again about her day when she took
the hat of f and eyed him speculatively .
“Y ou sa id if I w ore the hat, yo u’d tell me what you were
doing with that champagne bottle. Other than giving it to
Mandy t o throw through the win dow ,” she added, with a tinge
of wifely censoriousness. “What were you thinking , Roger?”
“W ell, in all ho nesty , I was thinking about your arse,” he
said. “But it nev er occurred to me that she’d throw the thing.
Or that she could  throw it like that.”
“Did you ask her why she did it?”
He stopped, nonplused.
“It hadn ’ t occurred to me that  she’d have a reason,” he
confessed. “I snatched her of f the table as she was about to
pitch fa ce-first into the broken window , and I was so
frightened that I just picked her up and smacked her bum.”
“I don’ t think she’d do something like that for no reason,”
Bree sai d meditatively . She’d put aside the hard hat and was
scooping herself into her brassiere, a spectacle Roger found
diverting under just about any circumstances.It wasn’ t until they’d gone back to the kitchen for their own
late supp er that he remembered to ask again how her workday
had gone.
“Not ba d,” she said, with a goo d assumption of casualness.
Not so good as to convince h im, but good enough that he
thought better of prodding, and instead asked, “Ceremonial
purposes?”
A broad grin spread across her face.
“Y ou know . For you.”
“Me?”
“Y es, you and your fetish for women’ s lacy underthings.”
“What—you mean you only wear knickers for—”
“For you to take of f, of course.”
There was no telling where the conversation might have
gone from this point, but it w as interrupted by a loud wail
from above, and Bree disappea red hastily in the direction of
the stairs, leaving Roger to contemplate this latest revelation.
He’d got the bacon fried and the tinned beans simmering by
the time she reappeared, a small frown between her brows.
“Bad dr eam,” she said, in answ er to his lifted brow . “The
same one.”
“The bad thing trying to get in her window again?”
She nodded and took the saucepan of beans he handed her ,
though she didn’ t move immediately to serve out the food.
“I asked her why she threw the bottle.”
“A ye?”
Brianna took the bean spoon, holding it like a weapon.
“She said she saw him outside the window .”
“Him? The—”
“The Nuckelavee.”
 
IN THE MORNING, the broch was just as it had been the
last time he’d looked. Dark. Quiet, save for the rustling of the
doves overhead. He’d taken away the rubbish; no new fish
papers had come. Swept and garnished , h e thought. W aiting
for the occupation of whatever roaming spirit might happen
by?
He shook that thought of f and closed the door firmly . He’d
get new hinges a nd a padlock for it, next time he passed by the
Farm and Household Stores.
Had Mandy really seen someone? And if she had, was it the
same tra mp wh o had frightened Jem? The idea of someone
hanging round, spying on his family , made something hard and
black cu rl through his chest, like a sharp-pointed iron spring.
He stood for a moment, narro wly surveying the house, the
grounds, for any trace of an intruder . Anywhere a man might
hide. He’d already searched the barn and the other
outbuildings.
The Dunbonnet’ s cave? The tho ught—with his memory of
Jem standing right by the mou th of the cave—chilled him.
W ell, he’d soon find out, he thought grimly , and with a last
glance at Annie MacDonald an d Mandy , peacefully hanging
out the family washing in the yard below , he set of f.
He kept a sharp  ear out today . He heard the echo of the red
stags be lling, st ill hard at it, and once saw a small herd of
hinds in the dist ance, but luckily met no lust-crazed males. No
lurking tramps, either .
It took him some time of casting about to find the cave’ s
entrance, even though he’d been there only the day before. He
made a good bi t of noise, appro aching, but stood outside and
called, “Hallo, the cave!” just in case. No answer .
He approached the entrance from  the side, pressing back the
covering gorse with a forearm, ready in case the tramp might
be lurkin g inside—but he could tell as soon as the damp breath
of the place touched his face that it was unoccupied.Nonetheless, he poked his head in, then swung himself
down into the cave itself. It was dry , for a cave in the
Highlands, whic h was not saying all that much. Cold as a
tomb, though. It was no wonder  Highlanders had a reputation
for toughness; anyone who wasn’ t would have succumbed to
starvation or pneumonia in short order .
Despite the chill of the place, he stood for a minute,
imagining his father -in-law here. It was empty and cold, but
oddly peaceful, he thought. No s ense of foreboding. In fact, he
felt… welcomed , and the notion made the hairs prickle on his
arms.
“Grant, Lord, that they may be  safe,” he said quietly , his
hand resting on the stone at the entrance. Then he climbed out,
into the sun’ s warm benediction.
That strange sense of welcome, of having been somehow
acknowledged, remained with him.
“W ell, what now , athair -ceile ?” h e said aloud , half joking.
“Anyplace else I should look?”
Even as  he said it, he realized that he was  l oo king. On the
top of the next small hill was the heap of stones Brianna had
told him  about. Human-made, sh e’d said, and thought it might
be a n Iron Age fort. There didn’ t look to be enough of
whatever it was standing to of fe r shelter to anyone, but out of
sheer restlessness, he made his way down through the tumble
of rock and heat her , splashed through a tiny burn that gur gled
through the rock at the foot of th e hill, and toiled his way up to
the heap of ancient rubble.
It was  a ncient —but not as old as the Iron Age. What he
found looked like the ruins of a small chapel; a stone on the
ground had a cr oss chiseled crudely into it, and he saw what
looked like the weathered fragments of a stone statue,
scattered by the entrance. There was more of it than he’d
thought from a distance; one wall still reached as high as his
waist, a nd there were parts of two more. The roof had long
since fallen in a nd disappeared, but a length of the rooftree
was still there, the wood gone hard as metal.W iping sweat from the back o f his neck, he stooped and
picked up the statue’ s head. V ery old. Celtic, Pictish? Not
enough left to tell even the statue’ s intended gender .
He p assed a thumb gently over  the statue’ s sightless eyes,
then set the head carefully ato p the half wall; there was a
depression there, as though there might once have been a niche
in the wall.
“Okay ,” he said, feeling awkward. “See you later , then.”
And, turning, made his way down the rough hill toward home,
still with that odd sense of being accompanied on his way .
The Bible says, “Seek, and ye s hall find,”  he thou ght. An d
said alou d to the vibrant air , “But there’ s no guarantee about
what  you’ll find, is there?” CONVERSA TION WITH A HEADMASTER
 
A FTER A  PEAC EFUL LUNC H with Mandy , who
seemed to have for gotten all ab out her nightmares, he dressed
with som e care for his interview  with the headmaster of Jem’ s
school.
Mr . Menzies was a surprise; R oger hadn’ t thought to ask
Bree what the man was lik e, and had been expecting
something squa t, middle-aged,  and authoritarian, along the
lines of his own headmaster at school. Instead, Menzies was
close to  Roger ’ s own age, a slender , pale-skinned man with
spectacles and what looked like a humorous eye behind them.
Roger didn’ t miss the firm se t of the mouth, though, and
thought he’d been right to keep Bree from coming.
“Lionel Menzies,” the headmaster said, smiling. He had a
solid handshake  and a friendly air , and Roger found himself
revising his strategy .
“Roger MacKenzie.” He let go and took the prof fered seat,
across the desk from Menzies. “Jem’ s—Jeremiah’ s—dad.”
“Oh, aye, of course. I rather thought I might see you or your
wife, when Jem didn’ t turn up at school this morning.”
Menzies leaned back a little, fol ding his hands. “Before we go
very far… could I just ask ex actly what Jem told ye about
what happened?”
Roger ’ s opinion of the man rose a grudging notch.
“He said that his teacher heard him say something to
another lad in the Gaelic, where upon she grabbed him by the
ear and shook him. That made  him mad and he called her
names—also in Gaelic—for which you belted him.” He’d
spotted the strap itself, hung up inconspicuously—but still
quite visible—on the wall beside a filing cabinet.Menzies’ s eyebrows rose behind his spectacles.
“Is that not what happened?” Roger asked, wondering for
the first time wh ether Jem had l ied or omitted something even
more horrible from his account.
“No, that’ s what happened,” Menzies said. “I’ve just never
heard a parent give such a concise account. Generally
speaking, it’ s a half hour of prologue, dissociated trivia,
contumely , and contradiction— that’ s if both parents come—
and pers onal attacks before I ca n make out precisely what the
trouble is. Thank you.” He smiled, and quite involuntarily ,
Roger smiled back.
“I w as s orry to have to do it,” Menzies went on, not pausing
for reply . “I like Jem. He’ s clever , hardworking—and really
funny .”
“He is that,” Roger said. “But—”
“But I hadn’ t a choice, really ,” Menzies interrupted firmly .
“If none of the other students had known what he was saying,
we migh t have done with a simple apology . But—did he tell
ye what it was he said?”
“Not in detail, no.” Roger hadn’ t inquired; he’d heard Jamie
Fraser curse someone in Gaelic only three or four times—but
it was a memorable experienc e, and Jem had an excellent
memory .
“W ell, I won’ t, either , then, unless you insist. But the thing
is, w hile only a few of the kids on the play yard likely
understood him,  they would tell—well, they have told, in fact
—all their friends exactly what he said. And they know I
understood it, too. I’ve got to  support the authority of my
teachers; if there’ s no respect for the staf f, the whole place
goes to hell…. D id your wife tell me ye’d taught yourself? At
Oxford, I think she said? That’ s very impressive.”
“That w as some  years ago, and I was only a junior don, but
yes. And I hear what you’re saying, though I unfortunately had
to ke ep order an d respect without the threat of physical force.”Not that  he wouldn’ t have loved to be able to punch one or
two of his Oxford second-year students in the nose…
Menzies eyed him with a slight twinkle.
“I’d say your presence was like ly adequate,” he said. “And
given that you’re twice my si ze, I’m pleased to hear that
you’re not inclined to use force.”
“Some of your other parents are ?” Roger asked, raising his
own brows.
“W ell, none of the fathers has actually struck me, no, though
it’ s been threatened once or twice. Did have one mother come
in with the famil y shotgun, though.” Menzies inclined his head
at th e w all behin d him, and loo king up, Roger saw a spray of
black po ckmarks in the plaster , mostly—but not entirely—
covered by a framed map of Africa.
“Fired o ver your head, at least,” Roger said dryly , and
Menzies laughed.
“W ell, no,” he said, deprecating. “I asked her please to set it
down ca refully , and she did, but not carefully enough. Caught
the trigger somehow and blam!  The poor woman was really
unnerved—though not quite as much as I was.”
“Y ou’re bloody  good, mate,” Roger said, smiling in
acknowledgment of Menzies’ s skill in handling dif ficult
parents—including Roger—but  leaning forward a little to
indicate that he meant to take control of the conversation. “But
I’m not—not yet, anyway—complaining about your belting
Jem. It’ s what led to that.”
Menzies drew breath and nodde d, setting his elbows on the
desk and steepling his hands.
“A ye, right.”
“I understand the need to support your teachers,” Roger
said, and set his own hands on the desk. “But that woman
nearly tore my s on’ s ear of f, and evidently for no crime greater
than saying a few words—not cursing, just words—in the
Gaidhlig .”Menzies eyes sharpened, catching the accent.
“Ah, you’ve got it, then. W ondered, ken, was it you or your
wife had it.”
“Y ou make it sound like a disease. My wife’ s an American
—surely ye noticed?”
Menzies gave him an amused look—no one failed to notice
Brianna—but said only , “A ye, I noticed. She told me her da
was Scots, though, and a Highlander . Y ou speak it at home?”
“No, not much. Jem got it from his grandda. He’ s … no
longer with us,” he added.
Menzies nodded.
“Ah,” he  said softly . “A ye, I had it from my grandparents, as
well—my mam’ s folk. Dead, too, now . They were from Skye.”
The usual implied question hovered, and Roger answered it.
“I was born in Kyle of Lochalsh, but I grew up mostly in
Inverness. Picke d up most of my own Gaelic on the fishing
boats in the Minch.” And in the mountains of North Carolina.
Menzies nodded  again, for the first time looking down at his
hands rather than at Roger .
“Been on a fishing boat in the last twenty years?”
“No, thank God.”
Menzies smiled briefly , but didn’ t look up.
“No. Y ou won’ t find much of the Gaelic there these days.
Spanish, Polish, Estonian… qu ite a bit of those, but not the
Gaelic. Y our wife said ye’d spent a number of years in
America, so you’ll maybe not have noticed, but it’ s not much
spoken in public anymore.”
“T o be honest, I hadn’ t paid it much mind—not ‘til now .”
Menzies nodded again, as though to himself, then took of f
his spectacles and rubbed at the marks they’d left on the bridge
of his nose. Hi s eyes were pa le blue and seemed suddenly
vulnerable, without the protection of his glasses.“It’ s bee n on the decline for a number of years. Much more
so for the last te n, fifteen years. The Highlands are suddenly
part of the UK— or at least the rest of the UK says so—in a
way they’ve never been before, and keeping a separate
language is seen as not only old-fashioned but outright
destructive.
“It’ s no what you’d call a written policy , to stamp it out, but
the use of Gaelic is strongly… discouraged… in schools.
Mind”—he raise d a hand to forestall Roger ’ s response—”they
couldn’ t get away with that if the parents protested, but they
don’ t. M ost of them are eager for their kids to be part of the
modern world, speak good English, get good jobs, fit in
elsewhere, be able to leave the Highlands… Not so much for
them here, is there, save the North Sea?”
“The parents…”
“If they ’ve learnt the Gaelic from their own parents, they
deliberately don ’ t teach it to their kids. And if they haven’ t got
it, they certainly  make no ef fort to learn. It’ s seen as backward,
ignorant. V ery much a mark of the lower classes.”
“Barbarous, in fact,” Roger said, with an edge. “The
barbarous Erse?”
Menzies recognized Samuel Johnson’ s dismissive
description of the tongue spoken by his eighteenth-century
Highland hosts, and the brief, rueful smile lit his face again.
“Exactly . There’ s a great deal of prejudice—much of it
outspoken—against…”
“T euchters?” “T euchter” was a Lowland Scots term for
someone in the Gaeltacht, the G aelic-speaking Highlands, and
in cultur al terms the general equivalent of “hillbilly” or “trailer
trash.”
“Oh, ye do know , then.”
“Something.” It  was true; even as recently as the sixties,
Gaelic speakers had been viewed with a certain derision and
public dismissiveness, but this… Roger cleared his throat.“Regardless, Mr . Menzies,” he said, coming down a bit on
the “Mr .,” “I object very much  to my son’ s teacher not only
disciplining him for speaking Gaelic but actually assaulting
him for doing so.”
“I share your concern, Mr . MacKenzie,” Menzies said,
looking up and m eeting his eyes in a way that made it seem as
though he truly did. “I’ve had a wee word with Miss
Glendenning, and I think it won’ t happen again.”
Roger held his gaze for moment, wanting to say all sorts of
things but realizing that Menzie s was not responsible for most
of them.
“If i t does,” he said evenly , “I won’ t come back with a
shotgun—but I will come back with the sherif f. And a
newspaper pho tographer , to document Miss Glendenning
being taken of f in handcuf fs.”
Menzies blinked once and put his spectacles back on.
“Y ou’re sure ye wouldn’ t rather send your wife round with
the family shotgun?” he asked wistfully , and Roger laughed,
despite himself.
“Fine, th en.” Menzies pushed back his chair and stood up.
“I’ll see ye out; I’ve got to lock up. W e’ll see Jem on the
Monday , then, will we?”
“He’ll be here. W ith or without handcuf fs.”
Menzies laughed.
“W ell, he needn’ t worry about his reception. Since the
Gaelic-speaking kids did  tell their friends what it was he said,
and he took his belting without a squeak, I think his entire
form now regards him as Robin Hood or Billy Jack.”
“Oh, God.” SHIPS THA T P ASS IN THE NIGHT
 May 19, 1777
 
T HE SHARK W AS EASIL Y twelve feet long, a dark,
sinuous shape keeping pace with the ship, barely visible
through the storm-stirred gray waters. It had appeared abruptly
just before noon, startling me b adly when I looked over the
rail and saw its fin cut the surface.
“What’ s amiss with its head?” Jamie, appearing in response
to my startled cry , frowned into the dark water . “It has a
growth of some sort.”
“I th ink it’ s what they call a ha mmerhead.” I clung tight to
the railing, slippery with spray . The head did look  misshapen:
a queer ,  clumsy , blunt thing at the end of such a sinisterly
graceful body . As we watched, though, the shark came closer
to the surface and rolled, bringing one fleshy stalk and its
distant cold eye momentarily clear of the water .
Jamie made a sound of horrified disgust.
“They normally look like that,” I informed him.
“Why?”
“I suppo se God was feeling bor ed one day .” That made him
laugh, an d I viewed him with approval. His color was high and
healthy , and he’d eaten breakfast with such appetite that I’d
felt I could dispense with the acupuncture needles.
“What’ s the strangest thing you ’ve ever seen? An animal, I
mean. A non-human animal,” I added, thinking of Dr .
Fentiman’ s ghastly collection of pickled deformities and
“natural curiosities.”
“Strange by itself? Not deforme d, I mean, but as God meant
it to be?” He s quinted into the sea, thinking, then grinned.
“The ma ndrill in Louis of France’ s zoo. Or … well, no. Maybe
a rhinoceros, though I havena seen one of those in the flesh.
Does that count?”“Let’ s s ay something you’ve seen in the flesh,” I said,
thinking of a fe w pictorial animals I’d seen in this time that
appeared to have been deeply af fected by the artist’ s
imagination. “Y ou thought the mandrill was stranger than the
orangutan?” I recalled his fascination with the orangutan, a
solemn-faced young animal who had seemed equally
fascinated by him , this leading to a number of jokes regarding
the origins of red hair on the part of the Duc d’Orleans, who’d
been present.
“Nay , I’ ve seen a good many people who looked stranger
than the orangutan,” he said. The wind had shifted, yanking
auburn lashings  of hair out of his ribbon. He turned to face
into the breeze and smoothed them back, sobering a little. “I
felt sorr y for the creature; it se emed to ken it was alone and
might never see another of its kind again.”
“Maybe it did think  you were one of its kind,” I suggested.
“It seemed to like you.”
“It w as a sweet wee thing,” he agreed. “When I gave it an
orange, it took the fruit from my hand like a Christian, verra
mannerly . Do ye suppose…” H is voice died away , his eyes
going vague.
“Do I suppose … ?”
“Oh. I was only thinking”—he glanced quickly over his
shoulder , but we were out of earshot of the sailors—”what
Roger Mac said about France being important to the
Revolution. I thought I shoul d ask about, when we’re in
Edinbur gh. See whether there m ight be any of the folk I knew
who had fingers in France…” He lifted one shoulder .
“Y ou aren’ t actually thinking of going  to  France, are y ou?” I
asked, suddenly wary .
“No, no,” he said hurriedly . “I only happened to think—if
by some  chance  we did, might the orangutan still be there? It’ s
been a great while, but I dinna ken how long they live.”
“Not quite as long as people, I d on’ t think, but they can  live
to a great age, if they’re well cared for ,” I said dubiously . Thedoubt was not a ll on the orangutan’ s account. Go back to the
French court? The mere thought made my stomach flip-flop.
“He’ s dead, ken,” Jamie said qu ietly . He turned his head to
look at me, eyes steady . “Louis.”
“Is he?” I said blankly . “I… when?”
He d ucked his head and made a small noise that might have
been a laugh.
“He died  three years ago, Sassen ach,” he said dryly . “It was
in the papers. Though I grant ye, the W ilmington Gazette  didna
make a great deal of the matter .”
“I didn’ t  notice.” I glanced dow n at the shark, still patiently
keeping compan y with the ship. My heart, after the initial leap
of surpr ise, had relaxed. My general reaction, in fact, was
thankfulness—and that in itself surprised me, rather .
I’d com e to terms with my memory of sharing Louis’ s bed
—for the ten minutes it had taken—long since, and Jamie and
I had  lon g since come to terms w ith each other , turning to each
other in the wake of the loss of our first daughter , Faith, and
all the terrible t hings that had h appened in France before the
Rising.
It wasn’ t that hearing of Louis’ s death made any real
dif ference at all—but still, I had a feeling of relief, as though
some tir esome bit of music that had been playing in the far
distance had finally come to a graceful end, and now the
silence of peace sang to me in the wind.
“God re st his soul,” I said, rath er belatedly . Jamie smiled,
and laid his hand over mine.
” Fois shi orruidh thoir dha,”  he echo ed. God  rest his soul.
“Makes ye wonder , ken? How it might be for a king, to come
before God and answer for your life. Might it be a great deal
worse, I mean, having to answer for all the folk under your
care?”
“Do you think he would?” I asked, intrigued—and rather
uneasy a t the thought. I hadn’ t  known Louis in any intimateway—bar the obvious, and tha t seemed less intimate than a
handshake; he’d never even met my eyes—but he hadn’ t
seemed like a man consumed b y care for his subjects. “Can a
person r eally be held to accou nt for the welfare of a whole
kingdom? Not just his own peccadilloes, you think?”
He considered that seriously , t he stif f fingers of his right
hand tapping slowly on the slippery rail.
“I think  so,” he said. “Y e’d answer for what ye’d done to
your family , no? Say ye’d done ill by your children,
abandoned them or left them to starve. Surely that would
weigh against your soul, for y ou’re responsible for them. If
you’re born a king, then ye’re  given responsibility for your
subjects. If ye do ill by them, then—”
“W ell, but where does that stop? ” I protested. “Suppose you
do well by one  person and ba dly by another? Suppose you
have people under your care—so to speak—and their needs
are in opposition to one another? What do you say to that?”
He broke into a smile.
“I’d say  I’m verra glad I’m not G od and havena got to try to
reckon such things.”
I was silent for a moment, imag ining Louis standing before
God, trying to explain those ten minutes with me. I was sure
he’d thought he had a right—ki ngs, after all, were kings—but
on the other hand, both the seventh and the ninth
commandments were fairly explicit and didn’ t seem to have
any clauses exempting royalty .
“If you were there,” I said impulsively , “in heaven,
watching that judgment—would you for give him? I would.”
“Who?” he said, surprised. “Louis?” I nodded, and he
frowned, rubbin g a finger slowly down the bridge of his nose.
Then he sighed and nodded.
“A ye, I would. W ouldna mind watching him squirm a bit
first, mind,” he added, darkly . “A wee pitchfork in the arse
would be fine.”I laughe d at that, but before I could say anything further , we
were int errupted by a shout of “Sail, ho!” from above. While
we’d be en alone the instant before, this advice caused sailors
to pop out of hat ches and companionways like weevils out of a
ship’ s biscuit, swarming up into  the rigging to see what was
up.
I strained my eyes, but nothing was immediately visible.
Y oung Ian, though, had gone a loft with the others, and now
landed on the d eck beside us with a thump. He was flushed
with wind and excitement.
“A smal lish ship, but she’ s got guns,” he told Jamie. “And
she’ s flying the Union flag.”
“She’ s a naval cutter ,” said Captain Roberts, who had
appeared on my other side and was peering grimly through his
telescope. “Shit.”
Jamie’ s hand went to his dirk, unconsciously checking, and
he looked over the captain’ s shoulder , eyes narrowed against
the wind. I could see the sail now , coming up rapidly to
starboard.
“Can we outrun her , Cap’n?” T he first mate had joined the
crowd at the rail, watching the oncoming ship. She did have
guns; six, that I could see—and there were men behind them.
The captain pondered, absently clicking his glass open and
shut, then glanced up into the rigging, presumably estimating
the chances of our putting on e nough sail to outdistance the
pursuer . The mainmast was cracked; he’d been intending to
replace it in New Haven.
“No,” he  said gloomily . “The m ain’ll be away , if there’ s any
strain pu t on her .” He shut the telescope with a decisive click
and stowed it away in his pocket. “Have to brass it out, best
we can.”
I wonde red just how much of Captain Roberts’ s car go was
contraband. His taciturn face didn’ t give anything away , but
there wa s a distinct air of uneasiness among the hands, which
grew noticeably as the cutter drew alongside, hailing.Roberts gave the terse order to heave to, and the sails
loosened, the ship slowing. I cou ld see seamen at the guns and
rail of the cutter; glancing sideways at Jamie, I saw that he was
counting them and glanced back.
“I make it sixteen,” Ian said, low-voiced.
“Undermanned, God damn it,” said the captain. He looked
at Ia n, estimating his size, and s hook his head. “They’ll likely
mean to press what they can out of us. Sorry , lad.”
The rath er formless alarm I’d felt at the cutter ’ s approach
sharpened abruptly at this—and sharpened still further as I saw
Roberts glance appraisingly at Jamie.
“Y ou don’ t think they—” I began.
“Shame you shaved this morning, Mr . Fraser ,” Roberts
observed to Jamie, ignoring me . “T akes twenty years of f your
age. And you l ook a damned sight healthier than men half
your age.”
“I’m ob liged to  ye for the compliment, sir ,” Jamie replied
dryly , one eye on the railing, where the cocked hat of the
cutter ’ s captain had suddenly poked up like an ill-omened
mushroom. He unbuckled his belt, slid the dirk’ s scabbard
free, and handed it to me.
“Keep t hat for me, Sassenach,” he said under his breath,
buckling his belt again.
The cutt er ’ s captain, a squat middle-aged man with a sullen
brow and a pair of much-men ded breeches, took a quick,
piercing look around the deck when he came aboard, nodded
to himself as tho ugh his worst suspicions had been confirmed,
then shouted back over his shoulder for six men to follow .
“Search the hold,” he said to his minions. “Y ou know what
to look for .”
“What sort of w ay is this to carry on?” Captain Roberts
demanded angrily . “Y ou’ve no right to search my ship! What
do you lot think you are, a raft of bloody pirates?”“Do I look like a pirate?” The cutter ’ s captain looked more
pleased than insulted by the idea.
“W ell, you can’ t be a naval capt ain, I’m sure,” Roberts said
coldly . “A nice, gentlemanlike set of individuals, I’ve always
found His Majesty’ s navy . Not the sort to board a respectable
merchant with out leave, let alone without proper
introduction.”
The cutter ’ s captain appeared to find this funny . He took of f
his hat and bowed—to me.
“Allow me, mum,” he said. “Captain W orth Stebbings, your
most hu mble.” He straightened  up, clapping on his hat, and
nodded to his lieutenant. “Go through the holds like a dose of
salts. A nd you—” He tapped Roberts on the chest with a
forefinger . “Get all your men on deck, front and center , cully .
All  of them, mind. If I have to dra g them up here, I won’ t be
best pleased, I warn you.”
T remendous ban gings and rumblings from below ensued,
with sea men po pping up periodically to relay news of their
findings to Captain Stebbings, who lounged by the rail,
watching as the men of the T eal  wer e rounded u p and herded
together on deck—Ian and Jamie among them.
“Here, now!” Captain Roberts was game, I’d give him that.
“Mr . Fraser and his nephew aren’ t crew; they’re paying
passengers! Y ou ’ve no call to molest free men, about their
lawful business. And no right to press my crew , either!”
“They’re British subjects,” Stebbings informed him briefly .
“I’ve every right. Or do you al l claim to be Americans? ” He
leered b riefly at that; if the ship could be considered a rebel
vessel, h e could simply take the whole thing as a prize, crew
and all.
A mutter at this ran through the men on deck, and I saw
more than one of the hands’ e yes dart to the belaying pins
along th e rail. Stebbings saw it, too, and called over the rail for
four more men to be brought aboard—with arms.Sixteen minus six minus four is six , I thought, and edged a
little clo ser to the rail to peer into the cutter rocking in the
swell a little way below and tethered by a line to the T eal. If
the sixteen doesn’ t include Captain Stebbings. If it does…
One man was at the helm, this b eing not a wheel but a sort
of sticklike arrangement poking up through the deck. T wo
more were manning a gun, a long brass thing on the bow ,
pointed at the T eal ‘s side. Where were the others ? T wo on
deck. The others perhaps below .
Captain Roberts was still haranguing Stebbings behind me,
but the cutter ’ s crew were bum ping barrels and bundles over
the deck, calling for a rope to  lower away to the cutter . I
looked back to find Stebbing s walking along the row of
crewmen, indicating his choices to four burly men who
followed him. These jerked his choices out of line and set
about ty ing them together , a lin e running from ankle to ankle.
Three men had a lready been chosen, John Smith among them,
looking white-faced and tense. My heart jumped at sight of
him, then nearly stopped altogether as Stebbings came to Ian,
who looked down at him impassively .
“Likely , likely ,” Stebbings said with approval. “A cross-
grained son of a bitch, by the looks of you, but we’ll soon
knock sense into you. T ake him!”
I saw the mus cles swell in I an’ s forearms as his fists
clenched, but the pressgang was armed, two with pistols
drawn, a nd he stepped forward, though with an evil look that
would have given a wiser man pause. I had already observed
that Captain Stebbings was not a wise man.
Stebbings took two more, then paused at Jamie, looking him
up a nd down. Jamie’ s face was  carefully blank. And slightly
green; th e wind was still up, an d with no forward way on the
ship, she was r ising and falling heavily , with a lurch that
would have disconcerted a much better sailor than he was.
“Nice b ig ‘un, sir ,” said one of the press-gang, with
approval.“T rifle elderly ,” Stebbings said dubiously . “And I don’ t
much like the look on his face.”
“I dinna care much for the look of yours,” Jamie said
pleasantly . He straightened, squa ring his shoulders, and looked
down his long, straight nose at Stebbings. “If I didna ken ye
for a n ar rant cow ard by your ac tions, sir , I should know ye for
a fig-licker and a fopdoodle by your foolish wee face.”
Stebbings’ s mal igned face went blank with astonishment,
then dar kened with rage. One or  two of the press-gang grinned
behind his back, though hastily e rasing these expressions as he
whirled round.
“T ake him,” he growled to the press-gang, shouldering his
way toward the booty collected  by the rail. “And see that you
drop him a few times on the way .”
I wa s frozen in shock. Clearly Jamie couldn’ t let them press
Ian and take h im away , but surely he couldn’ t mean to
abandon me in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, either .
Not even with h is dirk thrust into the pocket tied beneath
my skirt, and my own knife in its sheath around my thigh.
Captain Roberts had watche d this little performance
openmouthed, though whether w ith respect or astonishment, I
couldn’ t tell. He was a short man, rather tubby , and clearly not
constructed for physical confrontation, but he set his jaw and
stamped up to Stebbings, seizing him by the sleeve.
The crew ushered their captives over the rail.
There wasn’ t time to think of anything better .
I seized the rail and more or less rolled over it, skirts flying.
I h ung by my hands for a terrify ing instant, feeling my fingers
slide across the wet wood, grop ing with my toes for the rope
ladder th e cutter ’ s crew had thro wn over the rail. A roll of the
ship threw me h ard against the side, I lost my grip, plunged
several feet, and caught the ladder , just above the cutter ’ s
deck.The rop e had burned through m y right hand, and it felt as
though I ’d lost all the skin of f my palm, but there was no time
to troubl e about that now . Any minute, one of the cutter ’ s crew
would see me, and—
T iming m y jump  to the next heave of the cutter ’ s deck, I let
go and landed like a bag of ro cks. A sharp pain shot up the
inside of  my right knee, but I staggered to my feet, lurching to
and fro with the roll of the deck, and lunged toward the
companionway .
“Here! Y ou! What you doing?” One of the gunners had seen
me and was gaping at me, clearly unable to decide whether to
come do wn and deal with me or  stay with his gun. His partner
looked over his shoulder at me and bellowed at the first man to
stay put , it wasn’ t but monkey b usiness of some sort, he said.
“Stay put, God damn your eyes!”
I ign ored them, my heart pound ing so hard I could scarcely
breathe. What now? What next? Jamie and Ian had
disappeared.
“Jamie!” I shouted, as loudly a s I could. “I’m here!” And
then ran  toward the line that hel d the cutter to the T eal , jerking
up m y skirt as I ran. I did this only because my skirts had
twisted in my u ndignified descent, and I couldn’ t find the slit
to reach  through  in order to get at the knife in its sheath on my
thigh, but the action itself seeme d to disconcert the helmsman,
who had turned at my shout.
He gaw ped like a goldfish, but had suf ficient presence of
mind as to keep his hand on the  tiller . I got my own hands on
the l ine and dug my knife into th e knot, using it to pry the tight
coils loose.
Roberts and his crew , bless the m, were making a terrible
racket on the T eal  above, quite drowning out the shouts of the
helm and gunners. One of these, with a desperate glance
toward t he deck of the T eal  a bove, finally made up his min d
and came toward me, jumping down from the bow .What wo uldn’ t I  give for a pistol just now? I  thought grimly .
But a knife was what I had, an d I jerked it out of the half-
loosened knot and drove it into the man’ s chest as hard as I
could. H is eyes went round, and I felt the knife strike bone and
twist in my hand , skipping through the flesh. He shrieked and
fell back ward, landing on deck i n a thump and nearly—but not
quite—taking my knife with him.
“Sorry ,” I gasped, and, panting, resumed work on the knot,
the fractious rope now smeared with blood. There were noises
coming from the companionway now . Jamie and Ian might not
be a rmed, but m y guess was tha t that wouldn’ t matter a lot, in
close quarters.
The rope slid rel uctantly free. I jerked the last coil loose and
it fe ll, slapping against the T eal ‘s si de. At once , the current
began to  carry the boats apart, the smaller cutter sliding past
the big sloop. W e weren’ t mo ving quickly at all, but the
optical illusion of speed made me stagger , gripping at the rail
for balance.
The wounded gunner had got onto his feet and was
advancing on me, staggering but furious. He was bleeding, but
not heavily , and was by no mea ns disabled. I stepped quickly
sideways and glancing at the companionway , was relieved
beyond measure to see Jamie coming out of it.
He reached me in three strides.
“Quick, my dirk!”
I s tared blankly at him for a moment, but then remembered,
and with  no more than minimum  fumbling, managed to get at
my p ocket. I jerked at the hilt of  the dirk, but it was tangled in
the fabric. Jamie seized it, ripped it free—tearing both the
pocket a nd the waistband of my skirt in the process—whirled,
and cha r ged back into the bow els of the ship. Leaving me
facing a wounded gunner , an unwounded gunner now making
his w ay cautiously down from his station, and the helmsman,
who was yelling hysterically fo r someone to do something to
some sort of sail.I swallowed and took a good hold on the knife.
“Stand b ack,” I said, in as loud and commanding a voice as
I c ould manage.  Given my shor tness of breath, the wind, and
the p revailing noise, I doubt they  heard me. On the other hand,
I d oubte d that it would have m ade a dif ference if they had. I
yanked my sagging skirt up w ith one hand, crouched, and
lifted the knife i n a determined manner , meant to indicate that
I knew what to do with it. I did.
W aves of heat were going over my skin and I felt
perspiration prickle my scalp, drying at once in the cold wind.
The panic had g one, though; my mind felt very clear and very
remote.
Y ou ar en’ t going to touch me  was the only thi ng in my mind.
The ma n I had wounded was cautious, hanging back. The
other gunner saw nothing but a  woman and didn’ t bother to
arm himself, simply reaching f or me with angry contempt. I
saw the knife m ove upward, fast, and arc as though moving by
itself, the shimmer of it dulled  with blood as I slashed him
across the forehead.
Blood poured down over his face, blinding him, and he gave
a strang led yell  of hurt and astonishment and backed away ,
both hands pressed to his face.
I hes itated for a moment, not quite sure what to do next, the
blood still pounding through my temples. The ship was
drifting, rising and falling on the waves; I felt the gold-laden
hem of my skirt scrape across t he boards, and jerked the torn
waistband up again, feeling irritated.
Then I saw a be laying pin stuck into its hole in the railing, a
line wra pped round it. I walke d over and, poking the knife
down the bodkin of my stays for  lack of any better place to put
it, took hold of the pin with both hands and jerked it free.
Holding it like a  short baseball bat, I shifted back on one heel
and brou ght it down with as much force as I could on the head
of the man whose face I’d slashed. The wooden pin bounced
of f his skull with a hollow ringing noise, and he staggered
away , caroming of f the mast.The helmsman at this point ha d had enough. Leaving his
helm to mind itself, he scramb led up out of his station and
made for me li ke an angry monkey , all reaching limbs and
bared te eth. I tried to hit him wi th the pin, but I’d lost my grip
when I struck the gunner , and  it slipped out of my hand,
rolling away down the heaving  deck as the helmsman flung
himself on me.
He was small and thin, but his weight bore me back and we
lurched together  toward the rail ; my back struck it and all my
breath rushed out in a whoosh, the impact a solid bar of shock
across my kidneys. This transformed within seconds to live
agony , a nd I writhed under him, sliding downward. He came
with me, grappling for my throat with a single-minded
purpose. I flailed at him, my arms, my hands striking
windmill-like at his head, the bones of his skull bruising me.
The win d was roaring in my ears; I heard nothing but
breathless cursing, harsh gasps that might be mine or his, and
then he knocked my hands away  and grabbed me by the neck,
one-handed, his thumb digging hard up under my jaw .
It hurt and I tried to knee him, but my legs were swaddled in
my s kirt and pin ned beneath his weight. My vision went dark,
with litt le bursts  of gold light going of f in the blackness, tiny
fireworks heralding my death. Someone was making little
mewling noises,  and I realized dimly that it must be me. The
grip on my neck  tightened, and the flashing lights faded into
black.
 
I WOK E WITH A confused sense of being
simultaneously terrified and rocked in a cradle. My throat hurt,
and when I tried to swallow , the resultant pain made me choke.
“Y e’re all right, Sassenach.” Jam ie’ s soft voice came out of
the sur rounding gloom—where was I? —and his hand
squeezed my forearm, reassuring.“I’ll… take your… word for it,” I croaked, the ef fort
making my eyes water . I coughed. It hurt, but seemed to help a
little. “What… ?”
“Have a  bit of water , a nighean .” A big hand cradled my
head, lifting it a bit, and the mouth of a canteen pressed
against my lip. Swallowing the  water hurt, too, but I didn’ t
care; my lips and throat were parched, and tasted of salt.
My eyes were beginning to accustom themselves to the
darkness. I could see Jamie’ s form, hunched under a low
ceiling, and the shape of rafters—no, timbers—overhead. A
strong s mell of tar and bilges. S hip. Of course, we were in a
ship. But which  ship?
“Where… ?” I whispered, waving a hand.
“I havena got the slightest idea,” he said, sounding rather
irritable. “The T eal’ s  peo ple are man aging the sails—I hope—
and Ian’ s holding a pistol on one  o’ the naval folk to make him
steer , but for all I ken, the man’ s taking us straight out to sea.”
“I meant… what… ship.” Though his remarks had made
that clear enough; we must be on the naval cutter .
“They said the name of it’ s the Pitt .”
“How very appropriate.” I looked glassily around the murky
surroundings, an d my sense of reality suf fered another jolt as I
saw a huge mot tled bundle of some kind, apparently hanging
in the dim air a few feet beyond Jamie. I sat up abruptly—or
tried to, only at this point realizing that I was in a hammock.
Jamie se ized me by the waist with a cry of alarm, in time to
save me pitching out on my hea d, and as I steadied, clutching
him, I realized that the thing I had taken as an enormous
cocoon was in fact a man, lying in another hammock
suspended from the rafters, but trussed up in it like a spider ’ s
dinner and gagged. His face pre ssed against the mesh, glaring
at me.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt…,” I croaked, and lay back, breathing
heavily .“D’ye want to re st a bit, Sassena ch, or shall I set ye on your
feet?” Jamie asked, clearly edgy . “I dinna want to leave Ian on
his own too long.”
“No,” I said, struggling upright once more. “Help me out,
please.” The room—cabin, wha tever it was—spun round me,
as well as heavi ng up and down , and I was obliged to cling to
Jamie with my eyes closed for  a moment, until my internal
gyroscope took hold.
“Captain Roberts?” I asked. “The T eal ?”
“God knows,” Jamie said tersely . “W e ran for it as quick as I
could se t the men to sailing this thing. For all I ken, they’re on
our tail, but I couldna see anything when I looked astern.”
I was beginning to feel steadier , though the blood still
throbbed painfully in my throat and temples with each
heartbeat, and I could feel the tender patches of bruising on
my elbows and shoulders, and a vivid band across my back,
where I’d fallen against the rail.
“W e’ve shut most of the crew up in the hold,” Jamie said,
with a nod at th e man in the hammock, “save this fellow . I
didna ken whether ye might want to look at him first. In the
medical way , I mean,” he added, seeing my momentary
incomprehension. “Though I dinna think he’ s hurt badly .”
I approa ched the  fellow in the hammock and saw that it was
the helmsman who had tried to throttle me. There was a lar ge
lump visible on his forehead, and he had the beginnings of a
monstrous black eye, but from what I could see, leaning close
in the dim light, his pupils were the same size and—allowing
for the rag stuf fed into his mouth—his breath was coming
regularly . Probably not badly hurt, then. I stood for a moment
staring at him. It was dif ficult to tell—the only light
belowdecks cam e from a prism embedded in the deck above—
but I thought that perhaps what I had taken for a glare was
really just a look of desperation.
“Do you need to have a pee?” I inquired politely .The man  and Jamie made nearly identical noises, though in
the first case i t was a groan of need, and in Jamie’ s, of
exasperation.
“For Go d’ s sake !” he said, grab bing my arm as I started to
reach fo r the man. “I’ll deal with him. Go upstairs.” It was
apparent from his much-tried tone that he had just about
reached the last-straw stage, and there was no point in ar guing
with him . I left, making my ginger way up the companionway
ladder to the acc ompaniment of a lot of Gaelic muttering that I
didn’ t try to translate.
The belting wind above was enough to make me sway
alarmingly as it caught my skirts, but I seized a line and held
on, letting the fresh air clear my head before I felt steady
enough to go aft . There I found Ian, as advertised, sitting on a
barrel, a loaded pistol held negligently atop one knee,
evidently engag ed in amiable d iscourse with the sailor at the
helm.
“Auntie Claire! All right, are ye? ” he asked, jumping up and
gesturing me toward his barrel.
“Fine,” I  said, taking it. I didn’ t  think I had torn anything in
my knee, but it felt a little wobbly . “Claire Fraser ,” I said,
nodding politely to the gentleman at the helm, who was black
and bore facial tattoos of an elaborate sort, though from the
neck down he was dressed in ordinary sailor ’ s slops.
“Guinea Dick,” he said, with a broad grin that displayed—
no doubt about it—filed teeth. “Y ouah sahvint, Mum!”
I regarded him openmouthed for a moment, but then
regained some semblance of s elf-possession and smiled at
him.
“I see His Maj esty takes his seamen where he can get
them,” I murmured to Ian.
“He does for a fact. Mr . Dick here was pressed out of a
Guinea pirate, who took him fr om a slave ship, who in turn
took him  from a barracoon on th e Guinea coast. I’m no so sure
whether he thinks His Majesty’ s accommodations are animprovement—but he says he’ s  got nay particular reservation
about going along of us.”
“Is your trust upon him?” I asked, in halting Gaelic.
Ian gave me a mildly scandalized look.
“Of cou rse not,” he replied in the same language. “And you
will oblige me by not going t oo close to him, wife of my
mother ’ s brothe r . He says to me that he does not eat human
flesh, but this is no surety that he is safe.”
“Right,” I said, returning to English. “What happened to—”
Before I could c omplete my question, a loud thump on deck
made m e turn, to see John Smith —he of the five gold earrings
—who had dropped out of the rigging. He, too, smiled when
he saw me, though his face was strained.
“W ell enough so far ,” he sai d to Ian, and touched his
forelock to me. “Y ou all right, ma’am?”
“Y es.” I looked aft, but saw no thing save tumbling waves.
The same in all the other directions, as well. “Er… do you
happen to know where we’re going, Mr . Smith?”
He looked a trifle surprised at that.
“Why , no, ma’am. The captain hasn’ t said.”
“The cap—”
“That would be Uncle Jamie,” Ian said, sounding amused.
“Puking his guts out below , is he?”
“Not wh en last seen.” I began t o have an uneasy feeling at
the base of my spine. “Do you mean to tell me that no  one
aboard this ship has any idea w here—or even which way—
we’re heading?”
An eloquent silence greeted this question.
I coughed.
“The, um , gunn er . Not the one with the slashed forehead—
the other one. Where is he, do you know?”
Ian turned and looked at the water .“Oh,” I said. There was a lar ge splotch of blood on the deck
where th e man had fallen when I stabbed him. “Oh,” I said
again.
“Och, which reminds me, Aunt ie. I found this lyin’ on the
deck.” Ian took my knife from his belt and handed it to me. It
had been cleaned, I saw .
“Thank you.” I slipped it bac k through the slit of my
petticoats and found the scabbard, still fastened round my
thigh, though someone had remo ved my torn skirt and pocket.
W ith thought for the gold in the  hem, I hoped it was Jamie. I
felt rath er pecul iar , as though m y bones were filled with air . I
coughed and swallowed again, massaging my bruised throat,
then returned to my earlier point.
“So no  one knows which way we’re heading?”
John Smith smiled a little.
“W ell, w e’re not a-heading out t o sea, ma’am, if that’ s what
you were fearing.”
“I was, actually . How do you know?”
All three of them smiled at that.
“Him su n over dere,” Mr . Dick said, shrugging a shoulder at
the o bject in qu estion. He nodded in the same direction. “So
him land over dere, too.”
“Ah.” W ell, that was comforting, to be sure. And in fact,
since “h im sun”  was  ove r the re—that is, sinking rap idly in the
west—that meant we were in fact headed north.
Jamie joined the party at this point, looking pale.
“Captain Fraser ,” Smith said respectfully .
“Mister Smith.”
“Orders, Cap’n?”
Jamie stared at him bleakly .
“I’ll be pleased if we don’ t sink. Can ye manage that?”
Mr . Smith didn’ t bother hiding his grin.“If we don’ t hit another ship o r a whale, sir , I think we’ll
stay afloat.”
“Good. Kindly don’ t.” Jamie w iped the back of his hand
across his mouth and straighte ned up. “Is there a port we
might reach within the next day or so? The helmsman says
there’ s f ood and  water enough f or three days, but the less of it
we need, the happier I’ll be.”
Smith tu rned to squint toward the invisible land, the setting
sun glinting of f his earrings.
“W ell, we’re past Norfolk,” he said, thoughtful. “The next
big regular port would be New Y ork.”
Jamie gave him a jaundiced look.
“Is the British navy not anchored in New Y ork?”
Mr . Smith coughed.
“I b’ lieve they w ere, last I heard. ‘Course, they might have
moved.”
“I was more in mind of a sma ll port,” Jamie said. “V erra
small.”
“Where the arrival of a royal naval cutter will make the
maximum impression on the citizenry?” I inquired. I
sympathized wit h his strong desire to set foot on land as soon
as possible, but the question was—what then?
The enormity of our position w as only now beginning to
dawn on me. W e had gone in  the space of an hour from
passengers on the way to Scotla nd to fugitives, on the way to
God knew where.
Jamie closed his eyes and drew a long, deep breath. There
was a heavy swell, and he wa s looking green again, I saw .
And, with a pan g of uneasiness, realized that I had lost my
acupuncture nee dles, left behind in my hasty exodus from the
T eal .
“What about Rhode Island, or New Haven, Connecticut?” I
asked. “ New Ha ven is where t he T eal  was going, anyway—and I think we’re much less likely to run into Loyalists or
British troops in either of those ports.”
Jamie nodded, eyes still closed, grimacing at the movement.
“A ye, maybe.”
“Not Rh ode Island,” Smith objected. “The British sailed
into Newport in December , an d the American navy—what
there is of it—is  blockaded inside Providence. They might not
fire on us, if we come a-sailing into Newport with the British
colors flying”— he gestured at the mast, where the Union Jack
still fluttered—”but the reception once ashore might be
warmer than we might find comfortable.”
Jamie had cracked one eye ope n and was regarding Smith
consideringly .
“I take it ye’ve no Loyalist leanings yourself, Mr . Smith?
For if ye had, nothing simpler than to tell me to land at
Newport; I’d not have known any better .”
“No, sir .” Smith tugged at one of his earrings. “Mind, I’m
not a Separatist, neither . But I have got a marked disinclination
to be sunk again. Reckon I’ve just about used up my luck in
that direction.”
Jamie nodded, looking ill.
“New Haven, then,” he said, a nd I felt a small thump of
uneasy excitement. Might I meet with Hannah Arnold, after
all? Or— and there was an uneasier notion still—Colonel
Arnold himself?  I supposed he must visit his family once in a
while.
A certai n amount of technical discussion, involving a lot of
shouting to and fro between deck and rigging, ensued,
regarding navig ation: Jamie knew how to use both a sextant
and an astrolabe—the former was actually available—but had
no idea how to apply the result s to the sailing of a ship. The
impressed hands from the T eal  wer e m ore or less agreeable to
sailing the ship wherever we cared to take her , as their only
immediate altern ative was being arrested, tried, and executed
for i nvoluntary piracy , but while all were good able seamen,none of them p ossessed anything in the way of navigational
skills.
This left us with the alternative strategies of interviewing
the captive seamen in the hold , discovering whether any of
them could sail the ship, and if so, of fering such inducements
in th e w ay of violence or gold as might compel him to do so,
or sailing within sight of land and hugging the coast, which
was slower , much more dangerous in terms of encountering
either sa ndbanks or British men of war , and uncertain, insofar
as none of the T eal  hands presently with us had ever seen the
port of New Haven before.
Having nothing useful to contribute to this discussion, I
went to stand by the rail, watching the sun come down the sky
and wondering how likely we w ere to run aground in the dark,
without the sun to steer by?
The thought was cold, but the w ind was colder . I had been
wearing only a light jacket whe n I made my abrupt exit from
the T eal , and without my woolen overskirt, the sea wind was
cutting through my clothes like a knife. That unfortunate
imagery reminded me of the dead gunner , and, steeling myself,
I gla nced over my shoulder toward the dark bloodstain on
deck.
As I did so, my eye caught the flicker of a movement from
the h elm, and I opened my mouth to call out. I hadn’ t managed
a sou nd, but Jam ie happened to be looking in my direction and
whatever was showing on my face was enough. He turned and
threw himself without hesitation at Guinea Dick, who had
produced a knife from somewh ere about his person and was
preparing to plunge it into Ian’ s negligently turned back.
Ian whirled round at the noise, saw what was up, and,
thrusting the pistol into Mr . Smith’ s surprised hands, flung
himself on the thrashing ball of  humanity rolling round under
the swin ging helm. Fallen of f her steerage, the ship slowed,
her sails slackening, and she began to roll alarmingly .
I took two steps across the slanting deck and plucked the
pistol neatly out of Mr . Smit h’ s hand. He looked at me,blinking in bewilderment.
“It’ s not that I don’ t trust you,” I said apologetically . “It’ s
just that I can ’ t take the chance. All things considered.”
Calmly—all thin gs considered— I checked the pistol’ s priming
—it was primed and cocked; a  wonder it hadn’ t gone of f by
itself, w ith all this rough handli ng—and aimed it at the center
of the melee, waiting to see who might emer ge from it.
Mr . Smith looked back and fort h, from me to the fight, and
then backed slowly away , hands delicately raised.
“I’ll… just… be up top,” he said. “If wanted.”
The outcome had been a foregone conclusion, but Mr . Dick
had acquitted himself nobly a s a British seaman. Ian rose
slowly , swearing and pressing his forearm against his shirt,
where a jagged wound left red blotches.
“The tr eacherous bugger bit  me!” he said, furious.
“Goddamned cannibal heathen!” He kicked his erstwhile foe,
who grunted at the impact but r emained inert, and then seized
the swin ging helm with an angr y oath. He moved this slowly
to an d fro, seek ing direction, and the ship steadied, her head
turning into the wind as her sails filled again.
Jamie rolled of f the supine body of Mr . Dick and sat on the
deck beside him, head hanging, panting for breath. I lowered
the gun and uncocked it.
“All righ t?” I asked him, for form ’ s sake. I felt very calm, in
a remote, strange sort of way .
“T ryin’ to recall how many li ves I’ve got left,” he said,
between gasps.
“Four , I think. Or five. Surely  you don’ t consider this a
near -miss, do you?” I glanced at Mr . Dick, whose face was
considerably the worse for wear . Jamie himself had a lar ge red
patch do wn the side of his face that would undoubtedly be
black an d blue within hours, an d was holding his middle, but
seemed otherwise undamaged.
“Does nearly dyin’ of seasickness count?”“No.” W ith a w ary eye on the fallen helmsman, I squatted
beside J amie and peered at him . The red light of the sinking
sun bathed the deck, making it impossible to judge his color ,
even had the col or of his skin made this easy . Jamie held out a
hand, and I gave him the pistol, which he tucked into his belt.
Where, I saw , he had restored his dirk and its scabbard.
“Did you not have time to draw that?” I asked, nodding at it.
“Didna want to kill him. He’ s  no dead, is he?” W ith a
noticeable ef fort, he rolled onto hands and knees and breathed
for a moment before thrusting himself to his feet.
“No. He’ll come round in a min ute or two.” I looked toward
Ian, who se face was averted but whose body language was
eloquent. His stif f shoulders, suf fused back of neck, and
bulging forearms conveyed fury and shame, which were
understandable, but there was a droop to his spine that spoke
of d esolation. I wondered at tha t last, until a thought occurred
to m e, a nd that odd sense of cal m vanished abruptly in a burst
of h orror as I realized what must have made him drop his
guard.
“Rollo!” I whispered, clutching Jamie’ s arm. He looked up,
startled, saw Ian, and exchanged appalled glances with me.
“Oh, God,” he said softly .
The acu puncture needles were not the only things of value
left behind aboard the T eal .
Rollo had been Ian’ s closest companion for years. The
immense byproduct of a casual encounter between an Irish
wolfhound and a wolf, he terri fied the hands on the T eal  to
such an extent t hat Ian had shu t him in the cabin; otherwise,
chances were that he would h ave taken the throat out of
Captain Stebbin gs when the sail ors seized Ian. What would he
do w hen he re alized that Ian was gone? And what would
Captain Stebbin gs, his men, or the crew of the T eal do  to him
in response?
“Jesus. They’ll shoot the dog and drop him overboard,”
Jamie said, voicing my thought, and crossed himself.I tho ught of the hammerhead a gain, and a violent shudder
ran through me. Jamie squeezed my hand tightly .
“Oh, God,” he said again, very  quietly . He stood thinking
for a moment, t hen shook himself, rather like Rollo shaking
water from his fur , and let go my hand.
“I’ll have to speak to the crew , and we must feed them—and
the sailors in th e hold. W ill ye go below , Sassenach, and see
what ye can do w i’ the galley? I’ll just… have a word with Ian
first.” I saw his throat move as he glanced at Ian, standing stif f
as a wooden Indian at the helm, the dying light harsh on his
tearless face.
I n odded , and made my way unsteadily to the black, gaping
hole of the companionway , and the descent into darkness.
 
THE GALLEY W AS NO more than a four -by-four space
belowdecks at the end of the m ess, with a sort of low brick
altar containing the fire, several cupboards on the bulkhead,
and a hanging ra ck of coppers, pot-lifters, rags, and other bits
of kitchen impedimenta. No pro blem in spotting it; there was
still a sullen red  glow from the galley fire, where—thank God!
—a few embers still lived.
There was a sandbox, a coal box, and a basket of kindling,
tidied under the tiny countertop , and I set at once to coaxing
the fire back into life. A cauldron hung over the fire; some of
the contents had slopped over the side as a result of the ship’ s
rolling, partially extinguishing the fire and leaving gummy
streaks down the side of the cauldron. Luck again, I thought.
Had the slop not  put the fire mostly out, the contents of the pot
would long since have boiled dry and burned, leaving me with
the job of starting some kind of supper from scratch.
Perhaps literally from scratch. There were several stacked
cages of  chickens near the gall ey; they’d been dozing in the
warm darkness but roused at my movement, fluttering,
muttering, and jerking their silly heads to and fro in agitatedinquiry , beady eyes blinking redly at me through the wooden
lattice.
I wondered whether there might be other livestock aboard,
but if there was,  it wasn’ t living  in the galley , thank goodness.
I sti rred the pot , which seemed to contain a glutinous sort of
stew , and then began to look for bread. There would be some
sort of farinaceous substance, I  knew; sailors lived on either
hardtack—the v ery aptly named unleavened ship’ s biscuit—or
soft tack, this b eing any kind of leavened bread, though the
term “so ft” was often relative. Still, they would have bread.
Where … ?
I fou nd it at last: hard round br own loaves in a netting bag
hung from a hook in a dark c orner . T o keep it from rats, I
supposed, and glanced narrowly around the floor , just in case.
There sh ould be flour , as well , I thought—oh, of course. It
would be in the hold, along with the other ship’ s stores. And
the disgruntled remnants of the original crew . W ell, we’d
worry about them later . There was enough here to feed
everyone aboard supper . I’d worry about breakfast later , too.
The exertion of building up the fire and searching the galley
and mess warmed me and distra cted me from my bruises. The
sense of  chilled disbelief that had attended me ever since I
went over the T eal ‘s rail began to dissipate.
This wasn’ t entirely a good th ing. As I began to emer ge
from my state o f stunned shock, I also began to apprehend the
true dim ensions of the current situation. W e were no longer
headed for Scotland and the dan gers of the Atlantic, but were
under w ay to an unknown destination in an unfamiliar craft
with an inexperienced, panic-stricken crew . And we had, in
fact, just committed piracy o n the high seas, as well as
whatever crimes  were involved in resisting impressment and
assaulting His Majesty’ s navy . And murder . I swallowed, my
throat st ill tender , and my skin prickled despite the warmth of
the fire.
The jar of the knife hitting bone still reverberated in the
bones of my own hand and forearm. How could I have killedhim? I knew I hadn’ t penetra ted his chest cavity , couldn’ t
possibly have struck the lar ge vessels of the neck…. Shock, of
course… but could shock alone… ?
I cou ldn’ t think about the dead g unner just now , and pushed
the t hought of h im firmly away . Later , I told myself. I would
come to terms with it—it had been self-defense, after all—and
I would pray for his soul, but later . Not now .
Not that the other things presenting themselves to me as I
worked were much more appealing. Ian and Rollo—no, I
couldn’ t think about that, either .
I sc raped the b ottom of the pot determinedly with a big
wooden spoon. The stew was a  little scorched at the bottom,
but still edible. There were bones in it, and it was thick and
gummy , with lumps. Gagging slightly , I filled a smaller pot
from a water butt and hung it to boil.
Navigation. I settled on that as a  topic for worry , on grounds
that whi le it was deeply concerning, it lacked the emotional
aspects o f some of the other things on my mental agenda. How
full was the moo n? I tried to recall what it had looked like the
night be fore, from the deck of the T eal . I hadn’ t really noticed,
so it wasn’ t near the full; the fu ll moon rising out of the sea is
breathtaking, with that shining path across the water that
makes y ou feel how simple it w ould be to step over the rail
and walk straight on, into that peaceful radiance.
No, no peaceful radiance last nig ht. I’d gone up to the ship’ s
head, though, quite late, inste ad of using a chamber pot,
because I’d wanted air . It had  been dark on deck, and I’d
paused for a moment by the rail, because there was
phosphorescence in the long, rolling waves, a beautiful eerie
glimmer of green light under th e water , and the wake of the
ship plowed a glowing furrow through the sea.
Dark moon, then, I decided, or a sliver , which would
amount to the sa me thing. W e couldn’ t come close into shore
by n ight, then. I  didn’ t know how far north we were—maybe
John Smith did?—but was aware that the coastline of the
Chesapeake involved all kinds of channels, sandbars, tide flats,and ship traf fic. W ait, though, Smith had said we’d passed
Norfolk…
“W ell, bloody hell!” I said exasperated. “Where is
Norfolk?” I knew where it was  in relation to Highway I-64,
but h ad no notio n whatever what the blasted place looked like
from the ocean.
And if we were obliged to stand far out from land during the
night, what was to keep us from drifting very  far out to sea?
“W ell, on the go od side, we needn’ t trouble about running
out o f gas,” I said encouragingly to myself. Food and water…
well, not yet, at least.
I see med to be running out of good impersonal worrying
material. What about Jamie’ s  seasickness? Or any other
medical catastrophe that might occur aboard? Y es, that was a
good one. I had no herbs, no nee dles, no sutures, no bandages,
no instruments—I was for the moment completely without any
practical medici ne at all, save boiling water and what skill
might be contained in my two hands.
“I suppo se I could reduce a dislocation or put my thumb on
a spurting artery ,” I said aloud, “but that’ s about it.”
“Uhh …” said a deeply uncert ain voice behind me, and I
spun round, inadvertently spattering stew from my ladle.
“Oh. Mr . Smith.”
“Didn’ t mean to take you unawa res, ma’am.” He sidled into
the light  like a wary spider , keeping a cautious distance from
me. ” ‘Specially  not as I saw yo ur nephew hand you back that
knife of yours.” He smiled a little, to indicate that this was a
joke, bu t he was plainly uneasy . “Y ou… um… were right
handy with it, I must say .”
“Y es,” I said fla tly , picking up a rag to mop the splatters.
“I’ve had practice.”
This led  to a marked silence. After a moment or two, he
coughed.“Mr . Fra ser sent me to ask—in  a gingerly sort of way—
whether there might be anything to eat soon?”
I gave a grudging snort of laughter at that.
“W as the ‘gingerly’ his idea or yours?”
“His,” he replied promptly .
“Y ou ca n tell him the food is re ady , whenever anyone likes
to come and eat it. Oh—Mr . Smith?”
He turned back at once, earrings swinging.
“I only wondered—what do the men … well, they must be
very upset, of course, but what do the hands from the T eal  feel
about… er… recent developments? If you happen to know ,
that is,” I added.
“I know . Mr . Fra ser asked me th at, not ten minutes ago,” he
said, looking mildly amused. “ W e been a-talking, up in the
tops, as you may imagine, ma’am.”
“Oh, I do.”
“W ell, w e’re much relieved not to be pressed, of course.
W as that to hap pen, likely none of us would see home nor
family again for years. T o say n othing of being forced maybe
to fi ght our own  countrymen.” He scratched at his chin; like
all the men, he was becoming bristly and piratical-looking.
“On t’o ther hand, though … well, you must allow of our
situation at the moment being not all our friends might wish.
Perilous, I mean to say , and us  now minus our pay and our
clothes, to boot.”
“Y es, I can see t hat. From your p oint of view , what might be
the most desirable outcome of our situation?”
“Make l and as near to New Hav en as we can get, but not in
the h arbor . Run her aground on a gravel bar and set her afire,”
he replie d promptly . “T ake her boat ashore, then run like the
dickens.”
“W ould you burn the ship with  the sailors in the hold?” I
asked, a s a matter of curiosity . T o my relief, he appearedshocked at the suggestion.
“Oh, no, ma’am! Might be as Mr . Fraser would want to turn
them ov er to the Continentals to  use for exchange, maybe, but
we wouldn’ t mind was they to be set free, either .”
“That’ s very magnanimous of you,” I assured him gravely .
“And I ’m sure Mr . Fraser is very grateful for your
recommendations. Do you, er , know where the Continental
army is  just now?”
“Somewhere in New Jersey is what I heard,” he replied,
with a brief smile. “I don’ t supp ose they’d be that hard to find,
though, if you wanted ‘em.”
Aside from the royal navy , the last thing I personally wanted
to see was the Continental army , even at a distance. New
Jersey seemed safely remote, though.
I s ent him to ru mmage the crew’ s quarters for utensils—
each man would have his own mess kid and spoon—and set
about th e tricky  task of lighting  the two lamps that hung over
the mess table, in hopes that we might see what we were
eating.
Having got a closer look at the stew , I changed my mind
about the desirability of more illumination, but considering
how much trouble it had bee n to light the lamps, wasn’ t
disposed to blow them out, either .
All in all, the m eal wasn’ t bad. Though it likely wouldn’ t
have ma ttered if  I’d fed them raw grits and fish heads; the men
were famished.  They devoured the food like a horde of
cheerful locusts,  their spirits remarkably high, considering our
situation. Not for the first time , I marveled at the ability of
men to function capably in t he midst of uncertainty and
danger .
Part of it, of cou rse, was Jamie. One couldn’ t overlook the
irony of someone who hated the sea and ships as he did
suddenly becom ing the de facto  captain of a naval cutter , but
while he  might loathe ships, he did in fact know more or lesshow one was run—and he had the knack of calm in the face of
chaos, as well as a natural sense of command.
If yo u can keep  your head when all about you ar e losing
theirs an d blam ing it on you …  I thought, watching him talk
calmly and sensibly to the men.
Pure adrenaline had kept me go ing until now , but, now out
of immediate danger , it was fading fast. Between fatigue,
worry , and a bru ised throat, I wa s able to eat only a bite or two
of th e st ew . My other bruises had begun to throb, and my knee
still felt tender . I was taking a morbid inventory of physical
damage when I saw Jamie’ s eyes fixed on me.
“Y e need food, Sassenach,” he said mildly . “Eat.” I opened
my m outh to say  that I wasn’ t hungry , but thought better of it.
The last thing he needed was to worry about me.
“A ye, ay e, Capt ain,” I said, an d resignedly picked up my
spoon. A GUIDED T OUR THROUGH THE CHAMBERS
OF THE HEAR T
 
I  SHOULD BE GOING to sleep. God knew I needed
sleep. And there would be preci ous little of it until we reached
New Haven. If we ever do , the back of my mind commented
skeptically , but I ignored this  remark as unhelpful to the
current situation.
I lon ged to plunge into sleep, as much to escape the fears
and unc ertainties of my mind a s to restore my much abused
flesh. I was so t ired, though, that mind and body had begun to
separate.
It was a fami liar phenomeno n. Doctors, soldiers, and
mothers encounter it routinely;  I had, any number of times.
Unable to respond to an immediate emer gency while clouded
by fa tigue, the m ind simply withdraws a little, separating itself
fastidiously from the body’ s overwhelming self-centered
needs. From this clinical distance, it can direct things,
bypassing emot ions, pain, and tiredness, making necessary
decisions, cold -bloodedly overruling the mindless body’ s
needs for food, w ater , sleep, love, grief, pushing it past its fail-
safe points.
Why emotions? I wondered dimly . Surely emotion was a
function of the mind. And yet it seemed so deeply rooted in
the flesh that th is abdication of the mind always suppressed
emotion, too.
The body resents this abdication, I think. Ignored and
abused, it will not easily let the mind return. Often, the
separation persists until one is finally allowed to sleep. W ith
the body  absorb ed in its quiet intensities of regeneration, the
mind settles cautiously back into  the turbulent flesh, feeling its
delicate way through the twisting passages of dreams, making
peace. And you wake once more whole.But not yet. I had the feeling tha t something remained to be
done but no idea what. I had fed the men, sent food to the
prisoners, checked the wounded… reloaded all the pistols …
cleaned the stewpot… My slowing mind went blank.
I set  my hands on the table, fin gertips feeling out the grain
of th e wood as though the tiny ridges, worn smooth by years
of service, might be the map that would enable me to find my
way to sleep.
I co uld see myself in the eye of the mind, sitting there.
Slender , nearly scrawny; the edge of my radius showed sharp
against t he skin of my forearm. I’d got thinner than I realized,
over the last few weeks of traveling. Round-shouldered with
fatigue. Hair a bushy , tangled mass of writhing strands,
streaked with silver and white,  a dozen shades of dark and
light. It reminde d me of someth ing Jamie had told me, some
expression the Cherokee had… combing snakes from the hair ,
that was it. T o relieve the mind of worry , anger , fear ,
possession by demons—that was to comb the snakes from
your hair . V ery apt.
I did  no t, of course, possess a c omb at the moment. I’d had
one in my pocket, but had lost it in the struggle.
My mind felt lik e a balloon, tugging stubbornly at its tether .
I wo uldn’ t let i t go, though; I was suddenly and irrationally
afraid that it might not come back at all.
Instead, I focused my attention fiercely on small physical
details: the weight of the chicke n stew and bread in my belly;
the s mell of the  oil in the lamps, hot and fishy . The thump of
feet on the deck  above, and the  song of the wind. The hiss of
water down the sides of the ship.
The feel of a blade in flesh. Not the power of purpose, the
guided destructi on of sur gery , damage done in order to heal. A
panicked stab, the jump and st utter of a blade striking bone
unexpected, the wild careen of an uncontrolled knife. And the
wide dark stain on the deck, fresh-wet and smelling of iron.“I didn’ t mean it,” I whispered  aloud. “Oh, God. I didn’ t
mean it.”
Quite without warning, I bega n to cry . No sobbing, no
throat-gripping spasms. W ater simply welled in my eyes and
flowed down my cheeks, slo w as cold honey . A quiet
acknowledgment of despair as things spiraled slowly out of
control.
“What is it, lass?” Jamie’ s voice came softly from the door .
“I’m so tired,” I said thickly . “So tired.”
The ben ch creaked under his w eight as he sat beside me,
and a filthy han dkerchief dabbe d gently at my cheeks. He put
an arm round me and whispered to me in Gaelic, the soothing
endearments one  makes to a startled animal. I turned my cheek
into his shirt and  closed my eye s. The tears were still running
down my face, but I was beginning to feel better; still weary
unto death, but not utterly destroyed.
“I wish I hadn’ t  killed that man ,” I whispered. His fingers
had been smoothing the hair behind my ear; they paused for a
moment, then resumed.
“Y e didna kill anyone,” he said, sounding surprised. “W as
that what’ s been troubling ye, Sassenach?”
“Among other things, yes.” I sat up, wiping my nose on my
sleeve, a nd stared at him. “I didn’ t kill the gunner? Are you
sure?”
His mou th drew  up in what might have been a smile, if it
were a shade less grim.
“I’m sure. I killed him, a nighean .”
“Y ou—oh.” I snif fed, and looked at him closely . “Y ou aren’ t
saying that to make me feel better .”
“I am not.” The smile faded. “ I wish I hadna killed him,
either . No much choice about it , though.” He reached out and
pushed a lock of hair behind my ear with a forefinger . “Dinna
fash yourself about it, Sassenach. I can stand it.”I was crying again—but this time with feeling. I wept with
pain and with s orrow , certainly with fear . But the pain and
sorrow w ere for  Jamie and the man he had no choice but to
kill, and that made all the dif ference.
After a bit, the s torm subsided, leaving me limp but whole.
The buzzing sense of detachment had gone. Jamie had turned
round on the bench, his back against the table as he held me on
his l ap, and we sat in peaceful silence for a bit, watching the
glow of the fading coals in the galley fire and the wisps of
steam rising from the cauldron of hot water . I should put
something on to cook thr ough the night , I thought drowsily . I
glanced at the cages, where the chickens had settled
themselves to sleep, with no more than an occasional brief
cluck of startlement as one roused from whatever chickens
dream about.
No, I couldn’ t b ring myself to kill a hen tonight. The men
would have to do with whatever came to hand in the morning.
Jamie had also noticed the chickens, though to dif ferent
ef fect.
“D’ye re call Mrs. Bug’ s chickens?” he said, with a rueful
humor . “W ee Jem and Roger Mac?”
“Oh, God. Poor Mrs. Bug.”
Jem, aged five or so, had been entrusted with the daily chore
of counting the hens to be sure they had all returned to their
coop at night. A fter which, of course, the door was fastened
securely , to keep out foxes, badgers, or other chicken-loving
predators. Only  Jem had for go tten. Just once, but once was
enough. A fox had got into the hen coop, and the carnage had
been terrible.
It’ s all rot to say that man is the only creature who kills for
pleasure. Possibly they learned  it from men, but all the dog
family do it, too—foxes, wolves, and theoretically
domesticated do gs, as well. The walls of the hen coop had
been plastered with blood and feathers.“Oh, my bairnies!” Mrs. Baird kept saying, tears rolling
down her cheeks like beads. “Oh, my puir wee bairnies!”
Jem, called into the kitchen, couldn’ t look.
“I’m sorry ,” he whispered, eyes on the floor . “I’m really
sorry .”
“W ell, and so ye should be,” Roger had said to him. “But
sorry’ s no going to help much, is it?”
Jemmy shook his head, mute, and tears welled in his eyes.
Roger cleared his throat, with a noise of gruf f menace.
“W ell, h ere it is, then. If ye’re old enough to be trusted with
a job, ye’re old enough to take the consequences of breaking
that trust. D’ye understand me?”
It was rather obvious that he didn’ t, but he bobbed his head
earnestly , snif fling.
Roger took in a deep breath through his nose.
“I mean,” he said, “I’m going to whip you.”
Jem’ s small, round face went q uite blank. He blinked and
looked at his mother , openmouthed.
Brianna made a small movement toward him, but Jamie’ s
hand closed on her arm, stopping her .
W ithout lookin g at Bree, Ro ger put a hand on Jem’ s
shoulder and turned him firmly toward the door .
“Right, mate. Out.” He pointed toward the door . “Up to the
stable and wait for me.”
Jemmy gulped audibly . He’d go ne a sickly gray when Mrs.
Bug brought in the first feathery corpse, and subsequent events
had not improved his color .
I thought he might throw up, but he didn’ t. He’d stopped
crying and didn’ t start again, but seemed to shrink into
himself, shoulders hunching.
“Go,” said Roger , and he went.As J emmy trudged out, head hanging, he looked so exactly
like a prisoner headed for execution that I wasn’ t sure whether
to laugh or cry . I caught Brianna’ s eye and saw that she was
struggling with a similar feeling; she looked distressed, but her
mouth twitched at the corner , and she looked hastily away .
Roger heaved an explosive sigh and made to follow ,
squaring his shoulders.
“Christ,” he muttered.
Jamie had been standing silent in the corner , watching the
exchange, though not withou t sympathy . He moved just
slightly , and Roger glanced at him. He coughed.
“Mmphm. I ken it’ s the first time—but I think ye’d best
make it hard,” he said softly . “The poor wee lad feels terrible.”
Brianna cut her eyes at him, su rprised, but Roger nodded,
the g rim line of  his mouth relaxing a little. He followed Jem
out, unbuckling his belt as he left.
The three of us stood awkwar dly round the kitchen, not
quite sur e what to do next. Brian na drew herself up with a sigh
rather like Roger ’ s, shook herself like a dog, and reached for
one of the dead chickens.
“Can we eat them?”
I prodde d one of the hens experimentally; the flesh moved
under the skin, limp and wobbly , but the skin hadn’ t yet begun
to separ ate. I picked the rooster up and snif fed; there was a
sharp ta ng of dried blood and  the musty scent of dribbled
feces, but no sweet smell of rot.
“I think so, if they’re thoroughly cooked. The feathers won’ t
be much good, but we can stew some, and boil the rest for
broth and fricassee.”
Jamie went to fe tch onions, garlic, and carrots from the root
cellar , w hile Mrs. Bug retired t o lie down and Brianna and I
began the messy job of plucking and gutting the victims. W e
didn’ t say much, beyond brief murmured queries and answers
about the job at  hand. When Jamie came back, though, Breelooked up at him  as he set the basket of vegetables on the table
beside her .
“It will help?” she asked seriously . “Really?”
He’d nodded. “Y e feel badly when ye’ve done something
wrong, a nd wan t to put it right, aye? But there’ s no means to
put something like that right ag ain.” He gestured toward the
pile of dead chickens. Flies were beginning to gather , crawling
over the soft feathers.
“The best ye can do is feel ye’ve paid for it.”
A fa int shriek reached us throug h the window . Brianna had
started instinctively at the sound, but then shook her head
slightly and reached for a chicken, waving away the flies.
“I r emember ,” I now said sof tly . “So does Jemmy , I’m
sure.”
Jamie made a s mall sound of amusement, then lapsed into
silence. I could feel his heart beating against my back, slow
and steady .
 
WE KEPT W A TCH A T two- hour intervals all night,
making sure that either Jamie, Ia n, or myself was awake. John
Smith seemed solid—but there was always the possibility that
someone from the T eal  might take it into his head to liberate
the sailors in the hold, thinking that might save them from
being hanged as pirates later .
I managed the midnight watch well enough, but rousing at
dawn was a struggle. I fought my way up out of a deep well
lined with soft black wool, an aching fatigue clinging to my
bruised and creaking limbs.
Jamie had promptly fallen into the blanket-lined hammock,
directly I was ou t of it, and despite the ur gent reflexive desire
to tip him out and climb back in myself, I smiled a little. Either
he h ad c omplete trust in my ab ility to keep watch, or he was
about to die from  fatigue and seasickness. Or both, I reflected,picking up the sea of ficer ’ s cloak he’d just discarded. That was
one thin g gained from the prese nt situation: I’d left the horrid
dead leper ’ s cloak aboard the  T eal . Th is one was  a vast
improvement, being made of new dark-blue thick wool, lined
with scarlet silk, and still holdin g a good deal of Jamie’ s body
heat.
I pulled it close around me, stroked his head to see if he
would sm ile in his sleep—he did, just a twitch of the mouth—
and made my way to the galley , yawning.
Another small benefit: a canister of good Darjeeling tea in
the cupb oard. I’d built up the fire under the cauldron of water
when I came to bed; it was hot clear through now , and I dipped
out a cup, usin g what was ob viously the captain’ s private
china, painted with violets.
I c arried  this above, and after an of ficial stroll round the
decks, eyeing the two hands on duty—Mr . Smith had the helm
—I stoo d by the rail to drink my fragrant booty , watching the
dawn come up out of the sea.
If o ne were in the mood to c ount blessings—and, oddly
enough, I seemed to be—here was another one. I had seen
dawnings in warm seas that c ame like the bloom of some
tremendous flower , a great, slow unfurling of heat and light.
This wa s a northern sunrise, like the slow opening of a
bivalve’ s shell—cold and delica te, the sky shimmering nacre
over a soft gray sea. There was  something intimate about it, I
thought, as though it presaged a day of secrets.
Just as I was g etting well stuck into the poetic thoughts,
they were interrupted by a shou t of “Sail, ho!” from directly
above me. Captain Stebbings’ s violet-painted china cup
shattered on the deck, and I whirled to see the tip of a white
triangle on the horizon behind us, growing lar ger by the
second.
 THE N EXT FEW MOMENTS were filled with low
comedy , as I ru shed into the captain’ s cabin so flustered and
out of breath that I was unable to do more than gasp, “Ho!…
s’l… Ho !” like a demented Santa Claus. Jamie, who could
spring to instant wakefulness o ut of a deep sleep, did so. He
also attempted to spring out of bed, for getting in the stress of
the m oment that he was in a hammock. By the time he picked
himself up, swearing, from the floor , feet were thundering on
the d eck as the rest of the T eal’ s  hands sprang more adroitly
from their own hammocks and ran to see what was up.
“Is it the T eal ?” I asked John Smith, straining my eyes to
see. “Can you tell?”
“Y es,” he said absently , squinting at the sail. “Or no, rather .
I can tell, and she isn’ t. She’ s got three masts.”
“I’ll take your word for it .” At this distance, the
approaching ship looked like a wavering cloud scudding
toward u s over the water; I cou ldn’ t make out her hull at all
yet.
“W e don’ t need to run from her , do we?” I asked Jamie, who
had rooted out a spyglass fro m Stebbings’ s desk and was
examining our pursuer with a deep frown. He lowered the
glass at this, shaking his head.
“It doesna matter whether we need to or not; we’d no stand
a ch ance.” He p assed the glass t o Smith, who clapped it to his
eye, muttering, “Colors… she’ s got no colors flying—”
Jamie’ s head jerked sharply up  and around at that, and I
realized abruptly that the Pitt was  still flying the Union Jack.
“That’ s good, don’ t you think?” I asked. “They won’ t
trouble a naval ship, surely .”
Jamie and John Smith both looked exceedingly dubious at
this piece of logic.
“If they come within hailing distance, they’ll likely notice
something’ s fish y and it ain’ t a whale,” Smith said. He glanced
sideways at Jamie. “Still… would you maybe think of puttin’
on the captain’ s coat? It might help—at a distance.”“If t hey get clo se enough for it to matter , it willna matter
anyway ,” Jamie said, looking grim.
Still, he  disappeared, pausing briefly to retch over the rail,
and returned moments later looking splendid—if you stood
well back and s quinted—in Ca ptain Stebbings’ s uniform. As
Stebbings was perhaps a foot s horter than Jamie and a good
deal lar ger round the middle, the coat strained across the
shoulders and flapped around the waist, both sleeves and
breeches showed a much greater expanse of shirtsleeve and
stocking than was usual, and the  breeches had been cinched up
in folds with Jam ie’ s sword belt in order not to fall of f. He was
now sporting the captain’ s swor d, I saw , and  a pair of loaded
pistols, as well as his own dirk.
Ian’ s brows went up at sight o f his uncle thus attired, but
Jamie glared at him, and Ian said nothing, though his
expression light ened for the first time since we had met the
Pitt .
“Not so bad,” Mr . Smith said, encouraging. “Might’ s well
try to brass it out, eh? Nothing to be lost, after all.”
“Mmphm.”
” The boy stood o n the burning deck, whence all but he had
fled,”  I said, causing Jamie to switch the glare to me.
Having seen Guinea Dick, I wasn’ t worried about Ian’ s
passing muster as a hand in the royal navy , tattoos and all. The
rest of the T eal’ s  han ds w ere fair ly unexceptiona ble. W e might
just get away with it.
The oncoming ship was close en ough now for me to see her
figurehead, a black-haired female who seemed to be clutching
a—
“Is that really a snake she’ s hold ing?” I asked dubiously . Ian
leaned forward, squinting over my shoulder .
“It’ s got fangs.”
“So’ s the ship, lad.” John Smith  nodded at the vessel, and at
this poin t I saw that indeed it did: the long snouts of two smallbrass gu ns protruded from the bow , and as the wind drove her
toward us at a slight angle, I could also see that she had
gunports. They might or might not be real; merchantmen
sometimes painted their sides with false gunports, to
discourage interference.
The bow chasers were real, tho ugh. One of them fired, a
puf f of white smoke and a small ball that splashed into the
water near us.
“Is that courteous?” Jamie asked dubiously . “Does he mean
to signal us?”
Evidently not; both bow chasers spoke together , and a ball
tore through one of the sails o verhead, leaving a lar ge hole
with singed edges. W e gaped at it.
“What does he think he’ s abou t, firing on a King’ s ship?”
Smith demanded indignantly .
“He thinks he’ s a bloody private er , and he means to take us,
is what, ” Jamie  said, recovering from his shock and hastily
disrobing. “Strike the colors, for God’ s sake!”
Smith glanced uneasily between Jamie and the oncoming
ship. Men were visible at the railings. Armed men.
“They have cannon and muskets, Mr . Smith,” Jamie said,
throwing his coat overboard with a heave that sent it spiraling
out onto the waves. “I’m no going to try to fight them for His
Majesty’ s ship. Run down that flag!”
Mr . Smi th bolted, and began rooting among the myriad lines
for the one conn ected to the Un ion Jack. Another boom came
from the bow chasers, though this time a lucky roll of the sea
carried us into a trough and both balls passed over us.
The colo rs came rattling down, to land in an ignominious
heap on the de ck. I had a moment’ s scandalized, reflexive
impulse to rush over and pick them up, but stopped myself.
“Now what?” I asked, an uneasy eye on the ship. It was near
enough that I co uld make out th e shapes of the gunners, who
were definitely reloading the brass bow chasers and re-aimingthem. And the men at the raili ngs behind them were indeed
bristling with armament; I tho ught I made out swords and
cutlasses, as well as muskets and pistols.
The gunners had paused; someone was pointing over the
railing, turning to call to some one behind him. Shading my
eyes with my h and, I saw the captain’ s coat, afloat on the
rising swell. That appeared to have baf fled the privateer; I saw
a man hop up onto the bow and stare toward us.
What now? I wondered. Privateers could be anything from
professional cap tains sailing under a letter of marque from one
government or another to out-and-out pirates. If the vessel on
our tail was the former , chance s were that we would fare all
right as passengers. If the latt er , they could easily cut our
throats and throw us into the sea.
The ma n in the bow shouted something to his men and
hopped down. The ship had ha uled her wind for a moment;
now the  bow turned and the sails filled with an audible thump
of wind.
“She’ s g oing to ram us,” Smith said, his tone one of blank
disbelief.
I w as sure he w as right. The fi gurehead was close enough
that I could see the snake grasped in the woman’ s hand,
pressed against her bare breast . Such is the nature of shock
that I was consc ious of my mind idly considering whether the
ship was more likely named Cleopatra  or Asp , when it passed
us in a foaming rush and the air  shattered in a crash of searing
metal.
The wor ld dissolved and I was  lying flat, my face pressed
into ground that smelled of butchery , deafened and straining
for my life to hear the scream of the next mortar round, the
one that would strike us dead center .
Something heavy had fallen on me, and I struggled
mindlessly to get out from unde r it, to get to my feet and run,
run anywhere, anywhere away… away…I g radua lly realized from the feel of my throat that I was
making whimpering noises and that the surface under my
flattened cheek was salt-sticky board, not blood-soaked mud.
The weight on my back moved suddenly of its own volition, as
Jamie rolled of f, rising to his knees.
“Jesus Christ !” he shouted in fury . “What’ s wr ong  wi’
you!?”
The only answer to this was a single boom, this coming
evidently from a gun at the ster n of the other ship, which had
passed us.
I stood up, trembling, but so f ar past simple fright that I
noticed with a p urely detached sort of interest that there was a
leg lying on the deck a few feet away . It was barefooted, clad
in the torn-of f leg of a pair of canvas breeches. There was a
good deal of blood spattered here and there.
“Holy God, holy GOD,” someone kept saying. I glanced
incuriously to the side and saw M r . Smith, staring upward with
a look of horror .
I loo ked, too. Th e top of the single mast was gone, and the
remains of sails and rigging sagged in a tattered, smoking
mass over half the deck. Evidently the privateer ’ s gunports
were not  just for show .
Dazed as I was, I hadn’ t even begun to ask myself why
they’d done this. Jamie wasn’ t wasting any time asking
questions, either . He seized Mr . Smith by the arm.
“Bloody hell! The wicked namhaid ar e  comin’ back!”
They were. The other ship had been moving too fast, I
belatedly realized. She’d shot past as she unleashed her
broadside, but likely only one of the heavy cannonballs had
actually hit us, taking out the mast and the unfortunate T eal
who’d been in the rigging.
The rest of the T eals were now on deck, shouting questions.
The onl y answer was dealt by  the privateer , who was now
describing a wide circle, only too clearly meaning to come
back and finish what she’d started.I s aw Ian glance  sharply at the Pitt ’ s  can non—but that was
plainly futile. Even if the T eal ‘s men included some with
gunnery experience, there was no possibility of them being
able to man the guns on the spur of the moment.
The privateer had completed her circle. She was coming
back. All over the Pitt ’ s  dec k, men we re shouting, waving
their arms, crashing into one an other as they stumbled toward
the rail.
“W e surrender , you filthy buggers!” one of them screamed.
“Are you deaf?!”
Evidently so; a stray waft of wind brought me the sulfurous
smell of slow match, and I could see muskets being brought to
bear on us. A few of the men near me lost their heads and
rushed belowdecks. I found myself thinking that perhaps that
was not such a bad idea.
Jamie had been waving and shouting beside me. Suddenly
he w as gone, th ough, and I turned to see him running across
the d eck. He wh ipped his shirt of f over his head and leapt up
onto our bow chaser , a gleaming brass gun called a long nine.
He wave d the shirt in a huge, fluttering white arc, his free
hand clamped on Ian’ s shoulder for balance. That caused
confusion for a moment; the cra ckle of firing stopped, though
the sloo p continued her deadly circle. Jamie waved the shirt
again, to and fro. Surely they must see him!
The wind was toward us; I co uld hear the rumble of the
guns running out again, and the blood froze in my chest.
“They’re going to sink us!” Mr . Smith shrieked, and this
was echoed in cries of terror from some of the other men.
The smell of black powder cam e to us on the wind, sharp
and acri d. There  were shouts fro m the men in the rigging, half
of them now desperately waving their shirts, as well. I saw
Jamie pa use for an instant, swa llow , then bend down and say
something to Ian. He squeezed Ian’ s shoulder hard, then
lowered himself on hands and knees to the gun.
Ian shot past me, nearly knocking me over in his haste.“Where are you going?” I cried.
“T o let the pris oners out! They’ll drown if we sink!” he
called over his shoulder , disappearing into the companionway .
I turned back to the oncoming ship, to find that Jamie had
not com e down of f the gun, as I’d thought. Instead, he had
scrambled round so his back was to the oncoming sloop.
Braced against the wind, arms sp read for balance, and knees
gripping the brass of the gun for  all he was worth, he stretched
to hi s full heigh t, arms out, displaying his bare back—and the
web of scars on it, these gone red with the blanching of his
skin in the cold wind.
The on coming ship had slowed, maneuvering to slide
alongside us and blast us out of the water with a final
broadside. I could see the heads of men poking up over her
rail, lean ing out from her riggin g, all craning in curiosity . But
not firing.
I sudden ly felt my heart beating with huge, painful thumps,
as thoug h it had actually stop ped for a minute and now ,
reminded of its duty , was trying to make up for lost time.
The side  of the sloop loomed above us, and the deck fell
into dee p, cold shadow . So close, I could hear the talk of the
gun crews, puzzled, questioning ; hear the deep clink and rattle
of shot in its racks, the creak of the gun carriages. I couldn’ t
look up, didn’ t dare to move.
“Who ar e  you?” said a nasal, very American voice from
above. It sounded deeply suspicious and very annoyed.
“If ye mean the ship, she’ s called the Pitt .” Jamie  had got
down fr om the gun and stood beside me, half naked and so
pebbled with gooseflesh that the  hairs stood out from his body
like copper wires. He was shaking, though whether from
terror , rage, or simply from co ld, I didn’ t know . His voice
didn’ t shake, though; it was filled with fury .
“If ye mean me , I am Colonel James Fraser , of the North
Carolina militia.”A momentary silence, as the master of the privateer digested
that.
“Where’ s Captain Stebbings?” the voice asked. The
suspicion in it was undiminished, but the annoyance had
waned a bit.
“It’ s a bloody lo ng story ,” Jamie said, sounding cross. “But
he’ s no aboard. If ye want to come over and look for him, do
so. D’ye mind if I put my shirt back on?”
A pause , a murmur , and the clicks of hammers being eased.
At this point, I unfroze enough to look up. The rail was a-
bristle with the barrels of mus kets and pistols, but most of
these had been withdrawn and were now pointing harmlessly
upward, while their owners pressed forward to gawk over the
rail.
“Just a minute. T urn about,” the voice said.
Jamie dr ew a deep breath in thro ugh his nose, but did so. He
glanced at me, briefly , then s tood with his head up, jaw
clenched, and eyes fixed on the mast, around which the
prisoners from the hold were now assembled, under Ian’ s eye.
They looked completely baf fled, gaping up at the privateer ,
then loo king wil dly round the d eck before spotting Jamie, half
naked a nd glaring like a basilisk. Had I not begun to worry
that I was having a heart attack, I would have found it funny .
“Deserter from the British army , were you?” said the voice
from the sloop, sounding interested. Jamie turned round,
preserving the glare.
“I am not,” he s aid shortly . “I am a free man—and always
have been.”
“Have you, then?” The voice was beginning to sound
amused. “All right. Put your shirt on, and come aboard.”
I cou ld barely breathe and was bathed in cold sweat, but my
heart began to beat more reasonably .
Jamie, now clothed, took my arm.“My wif e and nephew are comi ng with me,” he called, and
without waiting  for assent from the sloop, seized me by the
waist and lifted me to stand on the Pitt ’ s  rail, from where I
could grab the rope ladder that  the sloop’ s crew had thrown
down. H e was taking no chances on being separated from
either me or Ian again.
The ship  was rolling in the swe ll, and I had to cling tightly
to the ladder wi th my eyes clos ed for a moment, as dizziness
swept ov er me. I felt nauseated a s well as dizzy , but surely that
was only a reaction to shock. W ith my eyes closed, my
stomach settled a little, and I was able to set my foot on the
next rung.
“Sail, ho!”
T ilting my head far back, I could just see the waving arm of
the man  above. I turned to look, the ladder twisting under me,
and saw the sai l approaching. On the deck above, the nasal
voice was shouting orders, an d bare feet drummed on the
wood as the crew ran for their stations.
Jamie was on the rail of the Pitt , gri pping me by  the waist to
save me falling.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” he said, in tones of utter
astonishment, an d I looked over my shoulder to see him turned
to watch the oncoming ship. “It’ s the bloody T eal.”
 
A T ALL, VER Y THIN man with gray hair , a prominent
Adam’ s apple, and piercing ice-blue eyes met us at the top of
the ladder .
“Captain Asa Hickman,” he barked at me, and then instantly
switched his attention to Jamie. “What’ s that ship? And
where’ s Stebbings?”
Ian scrambled over the rail behind me, looking anxiously
back over his shoulder .“I’d pull that lad der up if I were you,” he said briefly to one
of the sailors.
I glanced down at the deck of the Pitt , wh ere a milling
confusion of men was swarmin g toward the rail, pushing and
shoving. There was a good deal of arm-waving and shouting,
the nava l seamen and the pressed men trying to put their cases,
but Captain Hickman wasn’ t in the mood.
“Pull it up,” he said to the sailor , and, “Come with me,” to
Jamie. He stalked of f along t he deck, not waiting for an
answer a nd not turning to see whether he was followed. Jamie
gave the sailors surrounding us  a narrow look but apparently
decided they were safe enough,  and, with a terse “Look after
your auntie” to Ian, went of f after Hickman.
Ian was not pay ing attention to anything save the oncoming
T eal .
“Jesus,” he whispered, eyes fix ed on the sail. “D’ye think
he’ s all right?”
“Rollo? I certainly hope so.” M y face was cold; colder than
just from  the ocean spray; my l ips had gone numb. And there
were small flashing lights at the edges of my sight. “Ian,” I
said, as calmly as possible. “I think I’m going to faint.”
The pressure in my chest seemed to rise, choking me. I
forced a  cough and felt a momentary easing. Dear God, was  I
having a  heart attack? Pain in le ft arm? No. Pain in jaw? Y es,
but I was clenching my teeth, no wonder…. I didn’ t feel
myself fall, but felt the pressure  of hands as someone caught
and lowered me to the deck. My eyes were open, I thought, but
I co uldn’ t see anything. Dimly , it occurred to me that I might
be dying, but I rejected that notion out of hand. No, I bloody
wasn’ t . I  couldn’ t. But  there was an odd sort of gray swirling
mist approaching me.
“Ian,” I said—or thought I said . I felt very calm. “Ian, just
in c ase—tell Jamie that I love  him.” Everything did not go
black, ra ther to my surprise, but the mist reached me, and I felt
gently envelope d in a peaceful gray cloud. All the pressure,the c hoking, the pain had eased . I could have floated, happily
mindless, in the gray mist, save that I could not be sure I’d
really spoken, and the need to co nvey the message niggled like
a cocklebur in the sole of a foot.
“T ell Jamie,” I kept saying to a misty Ian. “T ell Jamie that I
love him.”
“Open your eyes and tell me y ourself, Sassenach,” said a
deep, ur gent voice somewhere close.
I trie d opening m y eyes and found that I could. Apparently I
had not died after all. I essayed  a cautious breath and found
that my chest m oved easily . My hair was damp, and I was
lying on something hard, cover ed by a blanket. Jamie’ s face
swam above me, then steadied as I blinked.
“T ell me,” he repeated, smiling a little, though anxiety
creased the skin beside his eyes.
“T ell yo u… oh! I love you. Where… ?” Memory of recent
events f looded in upon me, and I sat up abruptly . “The T eal?
What—”
“I havena got the slightest idea. When did ye last have
anything to eat, Sassenach?”
“I don’ t remember . Last night. What do you mean, you
haven’ t the slightest idea? Is it still ther e? ”
“Oh, aye,” he said, with a certain grimness. “It is. It fired
two shots at us a few minutes gone—though I suppose ye
couldna hear them.”
“It f ired shots at—” I rubbed a hand over my face, pleased
to find that I could now feel my lips, and that normal warmth
had retu rned to my skin. “Do I look gray and sweaty?” I asked
Jamie. “Are my lips blue?”
He look ed startled at that, but bent to peer closely at my
mouth.
“No,” he said positively , straightening up after a thorough
inspection. Then he bent and quickly kissed them, putting a
seal on my state  of pinkness. “ I love ye, too,” he whispered.“I’m gla d ye’re  no dead. Y et,” he added in a normal tone of
voice, straightening up as an unmistakable cannon shot came
from somewhere at a distance.
“I assume Captain Stebbings has taken over the T eal?”  I
asked. “Captain  Roberts wouldn’ t be going around taking
potshots at strange ships, I don ’ t think. But why is Stebbings
firing at  us, I w onder? Why isn’ t he trying to board the Pitt
and take her back? It’ s his for the taking now .”
My symptoms had all but disa ppeared by now , and I felt
quite clearheade d. Sitting up, I discovered that I had been laid
out on a pair of lar ge, flat-topped chests in what appeared to be
a small hold; there was a la tticed hatch cover overhead,
through which I caught the flutte ring shadows of moving sails,
and the walls were stacked with  a miscellaneous assortment of
barrels, bundles, and boxes. The air was thick with the smells
of tar , copper , cl oth, gunpowder , and… cof fee? I snif fed more
deeply , feeling stronger by the moment. Y es, cof fee!
The sou nd of another muf fled cannon-shot came through
the w alls, muf fled by distance, a nd a small visceral quiver ran
through me. The notion of being trapped in the hold of a ship
that mig ht at any moment be sunk was enough to overcome
even the smell of cof fee.
Jamie h ad turned in response t o the shot, too, half rising.
Before I could stand and sug gest that we go above, and
quickly , there was a shift in the light, and a round, bristly head
poked through the hatchway .
“Is the lady summat recovered?” a young boy asked
politely . “Cap’n says if she’ s dead, you’re no longer needed
here, and he desires you to come above and speak to him
prompt, sir .”
“And if I’m not  dead?” I inqui red, trying to straighten out
my p etticoats, which were wet round the hems, damp through,
and hopelessly rumpled. Drat . Now I had left my gold-
weighted skirt and pocket aboa rd the Pitt . A t this rate, I’ d be
lucky to arrive on dry land in my chemise and stays.The boy—at second glance, h e was likely twelve or so,
though he looked much younger—smiled at this.
“In that case, h e of fered to com e and drop you overboard
himself, ma’am , in hopes of concentrating your husband’ s
mind. C ap’n Hickman’ s a bit h asty in his speech,” he added,
with an apologetic grimace. “H e doesn’ t mean much by it.
Usually .”
“I’ll com e with you.” I stood up without losing my balance,
but did accept Jamie’ s arm. W e made our way through the
ship, led  by our new acquaintance, who helpfully informed me
that his name w as Abram Zenn (“My pa being a reading man,
and much taken by Mr . Johnso n’ s Dictionary , he was tickled
by th e th ought o f me being A through Zed, you see”), that he
was the ship’ s b oy (the ship’ s name was  in fact Asp , which
pleased me), and that the reason for Captain Hickman’ s
present agitatio n was a longst anding grievance against the
navy’ s Captain Stebbings: “which there’ s been more than one
run-in b etwixt the two, and Cap’n Hickman’ s sworn that there
won’ t be but one more.”
“I g ather Captain Stebbings is of like mind?” Jamie asked
dryly , to which Abram nodded vigorous assent.
“Fellow in a tavern in Roanok e told me Cap’n Stebbings
was drin king the re and said to the assembled as how he meant
to hang Cap’n H ickman from his own yardarm, and leave him
for the gulls to peck his eyes. They would, too,” he added
darkly , with a g lance at the seabirds wheeling over the ocean
nearby . “They’re wicked buggers, gulls.”
Further interesting tidbits were curtailed by our arrival in
Captain Hickman’ s inner sanctum, a cramped stern cabin, as
crammed with car go as the hold had been. Ian was there, doing
his impression of a captured Mohawk about to be burned at the
stake, fr om which I deduced th at he hadn’ t taken to Captain
Hickman. The feeling seemed t o be mutual, judging from the
hectic patches of color burning in the latter ’ s rawboned
cheeks.“Ah,” Hickman said shortly , seeing us. “Glad to see you’ve
not departed this life yet, ma’am. Be a sad loss to your
husband, such a devoted woman.” There was a sarcastic
intonation to this last that made me wonder uncomfortably just
how many times I’d told Ian to r elay my love to Jamie and just
how many people had heard m e doing it, but Jamie simply
ignored the comment, showing me to a seat on the captain’ s
unmade bed before turning to deal with the man himself.
“I’m told that the T eal is  firing at us,” he observed mildly .
“Does this occasion ye no concern, sir?”
“Not ye t it doesn’ t.” Hickman spared a negligent glance at
his stern windows, half of them covered with deadlights,
presumably because of broken glass; a good many of the panes
were shattered. “He’ s just firin g in hopes of a lucky shot.
W e’ve g ot the weather gauge o n him, and will likely keep it
for the next couple of hours.”
“I see,” said Jamie, with a con vincing attitude of knowing
what this meant.
“Captain Hickman is debating in his mind whether to
engage the T eal  in action, Uncle,” Ian put in tactfully , “or
whether to run. Having the w eather gauge is a matter of
maneuverability , and thus gives  him somewhat more latitude
in the matter than the T eal  has presently , I think.”
“Heard the one about He who fights and runs away , li ves to
fight another day? ” Hi ckman said, giving Ian a glare. “If I can
sink him, I will. If I can shoot him on his own quarterdeck and
take the ship, I’ll like that better , but I’ll settle for sending him
to the bottom if I have to. But I won’ t let him sink me , not
today .”
“Why not today?” I asked. “R ather than any other day , I
mean?”
Hickman looked surprised; he had obviously assumed I was
purely ornamental.
“Because I have an important car go to deliver , ma’am. One
that I daren’ t risk. Not unless I could get my hands on that ratStebbings without taking any  great chances,” he added
broodingly .
“I gather that your assumption that Captain Stebbings was
aboard accounts for your most d etermined attempt to sink the
Pitt ?” J amie asked. The ceiling of the cabin was so low that
he, Ian,  and Hickman were a ll obliged to converse in a
crouching position, like a convention of chimpanzees. There
was real ly nowh ere to sit other than the bed, and kneeling on
the floo r would of course lac k the requisite dignity for a
meeting of gentlemen.
“It w as, sir , and I’m obliged to y ou for stopping me in time.
Perhaps we may share a jar , when there’ s more leisure, and
you can tell me what happened to your back.”
“Perhaps not,” Jamie said polite ly . “I gather further that we
are under sail. Where is the Pitt  presently?”
“Adrift, about two miles of f th e larboard quarter . If I can
deal with Stebbings,” and Hickman’ s eyes fairly glowed red at
the prospect, “I’ll come back and take her , too.”
“If there ’ s anyone left alive on board to sail her ,” Ian said.
“There was a fair -sized riot on her deck, when last I saw it.
What might predispose ye to take on the T eal , sir? ” h e asked,
raising h is voice. “My uncle a nd I can give ye information
regarding her guns and crew—and even if Stebbings has taken
the s hip, I doubt but he’ll have a job to fight her . He’ s got no
more than ten m en of his own,  and Captain Roberts and his
crew will want nay part of an engagement, I’m sure.”
Jamie gave Ian a narrow look.
“Y e ken they’ve likely killed him already .”
Ian didn ’ t resemble Jamie at all , but the look of implacable
stubbornness on his face was one I knew intimately .
“A ye, maybe. W ould ye leave me  beh ind, if ye only thought
I might  be dead?”
I c ould see Jami e open his mouth to say , “ He’ s a dog .” But
he didn’ t. He closed his eyes and sighed, obviouslycontemplating the prospect of instigating a sea battle—and
incidentally risk ing all of our lives six ways from Sunday , to
say noth ing of the lives of the men aboard the T eal— for the
sake of an aging dog, who might be already dead, if not
devoured by a shark. Then he opened them and nodded.
“A ye, all right.” He straightened , as much as was possible in
the cramped cabin, and turned to Hickman. “My nephew’ s
particular friend  is aboard the T eal  and  like ly in danger . I ken
that’ s no concern of yours, but it explains our own interest. As
for your s… in addition to Capt ain Stebbings, there is a car go
aboard the T eal  in whic h ye may have an intere st, as well—six
cases of rifles.”
Ian and I both gasped. Hickman straightened up abruptly ,
cracking his head on a timber .
“Ow! Holy Moses. Y ou’re sure of that?”
“I am . And I imagine the Continental army might make use
of them?”
I though t that was treading on dangerous ground; after all,
the fact that Hi ckman had a s trong animus toward Captain
Stebbings didn’ t necessarily mean he was an American patriot.
From the little I’d seen of hi m, Captain Stebbings looked
entirely capable of inspiring purely personal animus, quite
separate from any political considerations.
But Hickman made no denial; in fact, he’d barely noticed
Jamie’ s remark, inflamed by me ntion of the rifles. W as it true?
I wonde red. But Jamie had spoken with complete certainty . I
cast my mind back over the contents of the T eal ‘s hold,
looking for anything…
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said. “The boxes bound for
New Haven?” I barely kept my self from blurting out Hannah
Arnold’ s name, realizing just in time that if  Hickman was
indeed a patriot—for it did occ ur to me that he might merely
be a  businessman, as willing to  sell to either side—he might
well rec ognize the name and realize that these rifles werealmost certainly already intended to reach the Continentals via
Colonel Arnold.
Jamie nodded, watching Hickman, who was gazing at a
small barometer on the wall as  though it were a crystal ball.
Whatever it told him seemed to be favorable, for Hickman
nodded once, then dashed out of the cabin as though his
breeches were on fire.
“Where’ s he gone?” Ian demanded, staring after him.
“T o che ck the wind, I imagine, ” I said, proud of knowing
something. “T o make certain he still has the weather gauge.”
Jamie was rifling Hickman’ s des k, and emer ged at this point
with a rather wizened apple, which he tossed into my lap. “Eat
that, Sassenach. What the devil is  a weather gauge?”
“Ah. W e ll, there  you have me,” I admitted. “But it has to do
with wind, and it seems to be important.” I snif fed the apple; it
had plainly seen better days, bu t still held a faint, sweet smell
that sud denly raised the ghost o f my vanished appetite. I took
a ca utious bite and felt saliva flood my mouth. I ate it in two
more bites, ravenous.
Captain Hickma n’ s high nasal voice came piercingly from
the deck . I couldn’ t hear what he said, but the response was
immediate; feet thumped to and fro on deck, and the ship
shifted s uddenly , turning as her sails were adjusted. The chime
and grunt of sho t being lifted and the rumble of gun carriages
echoed through the ship. Apparently , the weather gauge was
still ours.
I cou ld see a fierce excitement light Ian’ s face and rejoiced
to see it, but couldn’ t help voicing a qualm or two.
“Y ou haven’ t any hesitation abo ut this?” I said to Jamie. “I
mean—after all, he is  a dog.”
He gave me an eye and a moody shrug.
“A ye, well. I’ve known battles fought for worse reasons.
And since this time yesterday , I’ve committed piracy , mutiny ,
and murder . I may as well add treason and make a day of it.”“Besides, Auntie,” Ian said reprovingly , “he’ s a good  dog.”
 
WEA THER GA UGE OR NO, it took an endless time of
cautious maneuvering before the ships drew within what
seemed a dangerous distance of each other . The sun was no
more tha n a handsbreadth above the horizon by now , the sails
were beginning to glow a baleful red, and my chastely pristine
dawn looked like ending in a wallowing sea of blood.
The T eal  was  cruising gently , no more than half her canvas
set, less than ha lf a mile away . Captain Hickman stood on the
Asp’ s  dec k, hands c lenched on the rail as though it were
Stebbings’ s throat, wearing the look of a greyhound just before
the rabbit is released.
“T ime you went below , ma’am,” Hickman said, not looking
at me. “Matters will be hotting up directly here.” His hands
flexed once in anticipation.
I didn’ t ar gue. The tension on deck was so thick I could
smell it, testosterone spiced with brimstone and black powder .
Men being the remarkable creatures that they are, everyone
seemed cheerful.
I pa used to kiss  Jamie—a gesture he returned with a gusto
that left my low er lip throbbing slightly—resolutely ignoring
the poss ibility t hat the next tim e I saw him, it might be in
separate pieces.  I’d faced that possibility a number of times
before, and while it didn’ t get less daunting with practice, I
had got better at ignoring it.
Or at least I thought I had. Sitting in the main hold in near -
total dar kness, smelling the low-tide reek of the bilges and
listening to what I was sure we re rats rustling in the chains, I
had a harder time ignoring the sounds from above: the
rumbling of gun carriages. The Asp  h ad only four guns to a
side, but they were twelve-pounders: heavy armament for a
coastal schoone r . The T eal , equipped as an oceangoing
merchantman who might have  to fight of f all manner ofmenace, fought eight to a side, sixteen-pounders, with two
carronades on the upper deck, plus two bow chasers and a
stern gun.
“She’d run from a man-o’-war ,” Abram explained to me, he
having asked me to describe the T eal’ s  a rmame nt. “An d she
wouldn’ t be likely to try to seize  or sink another vessel, so she
wouldn’ t ship tremendous hardware, even was she built for it,
and I doubt she is. Now , I doubt as well that Captain Stebbings
can man even a whole side to good ef fect, though, so we
mustn’ t be downhearted.” He spoke with great confidence,
which I found amusing and also oddly reassuring. He seemed
to realiz e this, for he leaned forward and patted my hand
gently .
“Now , you needn’ t fret, ma’am,” he said. “Mr . Fraser said to
me I must be su re to let no harm come to you, and I shall not
—be sure of that.”
“Thank you,” I said gravely . No t wanting either to laugh or
to cr y , I cleared  my throat instead and asked, “Do you know
what ca used th e trouble between Captain Hickman and
Captain Stebbings?”
“Oh, yes, ma’am,” he replied promptly . “Captain Stebbings
has been a plague on the district for some years, stopping ships
what he hasn’ t any right to search, taking of f legal goods what
he says are contraband—and we take leave to doubt that any
of it ever sees the inside of a Customs warehouse!” he added,
obviously quoting something he’d heard more than once. “But
it was what happened with the Annabelle , really .”
The Annabelle  w as a lar ge ketch, owned by Captain
Hickman’ s brother . The Pitt  had  sto pped he r and attempted to
press men from her crew . Theo Hickman had protested,
resistance had broken out, and Stebbings had ordered his men
to fire into the Annabelle , killing  three crewmen—Theo
Hickman among them.
There had been considerable pu blic outcry over this, and an
ef fort w as made to bring Capta in Stebbings to justice for his
deeds. T he captain had insisted that no local court had theright to try him  for anything, though; if anyone wished to
bring an  action against him, it must be done in an English
court. And the local justices had agreed with this.
“W as this before war was de clared last year?” I asked
curiously . “For if after—”
“W ell before,” young Zenn admitted. “Still,” he added with
righteous indignation, “they are cowardly dogs and ought be
tarred and feathered, the lot of them, and Stebbings, too!”
“No doubt,” I said. “Do you think—”
But I had no opp ortunity to explore his opinions further , for
at this point the ship gave a violent lurch, throwing us both
onto the  damp floorboards, and the sound of a violent and
prolonged explosion shattered the air around us.
I c ouldn ’ t at first tell which ship had fired—but an instant
later , the Asp’ s  guns spoke overhead, and I knew the first
broadside had been from the T eal .
The Asp’ s  reply was ragged, the guns along her starboard
side going of f at more or les s random intervals overhead,
punctuated by the flat bangs of small-arms fire.
I resisted Abram’ s gallant attempts to throw his meager
body pro tectively on top of mine  and, rolling over , got up onto
my hands and knees, listening intently . There was a lot of
shouting, none of it comprehensible, though the shooting had
stopped. W e appeared not to be leaking water , so far as I could
tell, so presum ably we had not been struck below the
waterline.
“They can’ t have given up, surely?” Abram said, scrambling
to his feet. He sounded disappointed.
“I doubt it.” I got to my own feet, bracing a hand against a
lar ge barrel. The main hold w as quite as crowded as the
forward one, though with bulkie r items; there was barely room
for A bram and me to worm our  way between the netted bulk
of crates  and tiers of casks—some of which smelled strongly
of beer . The ship was heeling to one side now . W e must be
coming about— probably to try again. The wheels of the guncarriages ground on the deck above; yes, they were reloading.
Had any one yet been hurt? I wondered. And what the devil
was I going to do about it if they had?
The sound of a single cannon-shot came from overhead.
“The dog must be fleeing,” Abram whispered. “W e’re
chasing him down.”
There was a lon g period of relative silence, during which I
thought the ship was tacking but couldn’ t really tell. Maybe
Hickman was  pursuing the T eal .
Sudden yelling from overhead, with a sound of surprised
alarm, and the s hip heaved violently , flinging us to the floor
once again. This time I landed o n top. I delicately removed my
knee fro m Abram’ s stomach and helped him to sit up, gasping
like a landed fish.
“What—” he wheezed, but got no further . There was a
hideous jolt that knocked us bo th flat again, followed at once
by a grinding, r ending noise of squealing timbers. It sounded
as though the ship was coming apart around us, and I had no
doubt that it was.
Shrieking like banshees and the thunder of feet on deck.
“W e’re being boarded!” I could hear Abram swallow , and
my h and went to  the slit in my p etticoat, touching my knife for
courage. If—
“No,” I whisper ed, straining my eyes up into darkness as
though that would help me hea r better . “No. W e’re boarding
them .” For the pounding feet above had vanished.
 
THE YELLING  HADN’T ; EVEN muf fled by distance, I
could hear the note of insanity in it, the clear joy of the
berserker . I thought I could make out Jamie’ s Highland
screech, but that was likely imagination; they all sounded
equally demented.“Our Fa ther , who art in heaven  … Our Father , who art in
heaven … ” Abram was whispering to himself in the dark, but
had stuck on the first line.
I c lench ed my fists and closed my eyes in reflex, screwing
up my face as though by sheer force of will I could help.
Neither of us could.
It was an age of  muf fled noises, occasional shots, thuds and
bangs, grunting and shouting. And then silence.
I could just see Abram’ s head turn toward me, questioning. I
squeezed his hand.
And the n a ship’ s gun went of f with a crash that echoed
across th e deck above, and a s hock wave thrummed through
the air of the hold, hard enough that my ears popped. Another
followed, I felt rather than heard a thunk , and then the floor
heaved and tilted, and the ship’ s timbers reverberated with an
odd, deep bwong . I shook my head hard, swallowing, trying to
force air through my Eustachian tubes. They popped again,
finally , and I hea rd feet on the side of the ship. More than one
pair . Moving slowly .
I lea pt to my feet, grabbed Abram, and hauled him bodily
up, p ropelling him toward the l adder . I could hear water . Not
racing along the ship’ s sides; a gushing noise, as of water
gur gling into the hold.
The hatchway had been closed overhead but not battened
down, a nd I knocked it loose with a desperate bang of both
hands, nearly losing my balance and plunging into darkness
but l uckily sustained by Abram Zenn, who planted a small but
solid shoulder under my buttocks by way of support.
“Thank you, Mr . Zenn,” I said , and, reaching behind me,
pulled him up the ladder into the light.
There w as blood  on the deck; that was the first thing I saw .
W ounded men, too—but not Jamie. He was the second thing I
saw , leaning heavily over the re mains of a shattered rail with
several other men. I hurried to s ee what they were looking at,
and saw the T eal  a few hundred yards away .Her sails were fluttering wildly , and her masts seemed oddly
tilted. Then I re alized that the s hip herself was tilted, the bow
raised half out of the water .
“Rot me ,” said Abram, in tones of amazement. “She’ s run
onto rocks.”
“So have we, son, but not so bad,” said Hickman, glancing
aside at the cab in boy’ s voice. “Is there water in the hold,
Abram?”
“There is,” I rep lied before Abram, lost in contemplation of
the wounded T eal , could gather his wits to answer . “Have you
any medical instruments aboard, Captain Hickman?”
“Have I  what?” he blinked at me, distracted. “This is no
time for—why?”
“I’m a sur geon, sir ,” I said, “and you need me.”
 
WITHIN A QUAR TER HOUR, I found myself back in
the sma ll forward car go hold where I had roused from my
fainting spell a f ew hours earlier , this being now designated as
the sick bay .
The Asp  did not travel w ith a sur geon, but had a small store
of medicinals: a half-full bottl e of laudanum, a fleam and
bleeding bowl, a lar ge pair of  tweezers, a jar of dead and
desiccated leec hes, two rusty amputation saws, a broken
tenaculum, a bag of lint for pack ing wounds, and a huge jar of
camphorated grease.
I was strongly t empted to drink the laudanum myself, but
duty called. I t ied back my hair and began poking about
among the car go, in search of a nything useful. Mr . Smith and
Ian had rowed across to the T eal  in hopes of retrieving my own
kit, but given the amount of da mage I could see in the area
where our cabin had been, I did n’ t have much hope. A lucky
shot from  the Asp  had holed the T eal  below the waterline; had
she not run agr ound, she would likely have sunk sooner or
later .I’d d one a rapid  triage on deck; one man killed outright,
several minor injuries, three serious but not instantly life-
threatening. There were likely more on the T eal;  from what the
men said , the ships had exchang ed broadsides at a distance of
no more than a few yards. A quick and bloody little action.
A fe w m inutes after the conclus ion, the Pitt  had  lim ped into
sight, her contentiously mixed crew having evidently come to
a s uf fici ent accommodation as to allow her to sail, and she was
now occupied in ferrying the wounded. I heard the faint shout
of her bosun’ s hail over the whine of the wind above.
“Incoming,” I murmured, and, p icking up the smaller of the
amputation saws, prepared for my own quick and bloody
action.
 
“YOU HA VE GUNS,” I pointed  out to Abram Zenn, who
was rigging a couple of hang ing lanterns for me, the sun
having now almost set. “Presumably this means that Captain
Hickman was prepared to use them. Didn’ t he think there
might be a possibility of casualties?”
Abram shrugged apologetically .
“It’ s our first voyage as a letter of marque, ma’am. W e’ll do
better next time, I’m sure.”
“Y our first? What sort of—how long has Captain Hickman
been sailing?” I demanded. I was ruthlessly rummaging the
car go by  now , and was pleased t o find a chest that held lengths
of printed calico.
Abram frowned at the wick he was trimming, thinking.
“W ell,” he said slowly , “he had a fishing boat for some time,
out of Marblehead. Him—he, I mean—and his brother owned
it toget her . Bu t after his br other ran afoul of Captain
Stebbings, he went to work for Emmanuel Bailey , as first mate
on one of his—Mr . Bailey’ s, I mean—ships. Mr . Bailey’ s a
Jew ,” he explained, seeing my r aised eyebrow . “Owns a bank
in Phila delphia and three ships as sail regularly to the W estIndies. H e owns  this ship, too, and it’ s him who got the letter
of m arque from the Congress fo r Captain Hickman, when the
war was announced.”
“I se e,” I said, more than slightly taken aback. “But this is
Captain Hickman’ s first cruise as captain of a sloop?”
“Y es, m a’am. But privateers don’ t usually have a
supercar go, do you see,” he sa id earnestly . “It would be the
supercar go’ s job  to provision the ship and see to such things as
the medical supplies.”
“And you know this because—how long have you  been
sailing?” I asked curiously , liberating a bottle of what looked
like very expensive brandy , to use as antiseptic.
“Oh, sin ce I was eight years old , ma’am,” he said. He stood
a-tiptoe to hang the lantern, which cast a warm, reassuring
glow over my impromptu operating theater . “I’ve six elder
brothers, and the oldest runs the farm, with his sons. The
others… well, one’ s a shipwright in Newport News, and he got
to talkin g with a captain one day and mentioned me, and next
thing I know , I’m one of the cabin boys on the Antioch , her
being an  Indiaman. I went back  with the captain to London,
and we sailed to  Calcutta the very day after .” He came down
onto his  heels and smiled at me. “I’ve been a-sea ever since,
ma’am. I find it suits me.”
“That’ s very good,” I said. “Y our parents—are they still
alive?”
“Oh, no, ma’am. My mother d ied birthing me, and my pa
when I was seven.” He seemed untroubled by this. But after
all, I reflected, ripping calico i nto bandage lengths, that was
half his lifetime ago.
“W ell, I hope the sea will continue to suit you,” I said. “Do
you have any doubts, though—after today?”
He thou ght abo ut that, his earn est young face furrowed in
the lantern shadows.
“No,” he said slowly , and looked up at me, his eyes serious
—and n ot nearly  so young as they had been a few hours ago.“I knew  when I signed on with Captain Hickman that there
might be fighting.” His lips tig htened, perhaps to keep them
from quivering. “I don’ t mind killing a man, if I have to.”
“Not now… you don’ t,” said one of the wounded men, very
softly . He was lying in the shadows, stretched across two
crates of English china, breathing slowly .
“No, not now , y ou don’ t,” I agreed dryly . “Y ou might want
to speak  to my nephew or my husband about it, though, when
things have settled a bit.”
I t hought that w ould be the end  of it, but Abram followed
me as I laid out my rudimentary tools and set about such
sterilization as could be managed, splashing out brandy with
abandon, ‘til the hold smelled  like a distillery—this to the
scandalization o f the wounded men, who thought it waste to
use good  drink so. The galley fi re had been put out during the
battle, though; it would be some time before I had hot water .
“Are yo u a patriot, ma’am? If you don’ t mind me asking,”
he added, blushing with awkwardness.
The question took me back a bit. The straightforward
answer would be “Y es, of course.” Jamie was, after all, a rebel,
so decla red by his own hand. And while he had made the
original declaration out of simple necessity , I thought necessity
had now  becom e conviction. But me? Certainly I had been,
once.
“Y es,” I said—I couldn’ t very well say anything else.
“Plainly you are, Abram. Why?”
“Why?” He seemed staggered that I would ask, and stood
blinking at me over the top of the lantern he held.
“T ell me later ,” I suggested, taking the lantern. I’d done
what I could on deck; the wounded who needed further
attention were being brought down. It was no time for political
discussion. Or so I thought.
Abram bravely settled down to help me and did fairly well,
though h e had to stop now and  then to vomit into a bucket.
After the second occurrence of this, he took to askingquestions of the wounded—thos e in any condition to answer . I
didn’ t know whether this was si mple curiosity or an attempt to
distract himself from what I was doing.
“What do you think of the Revolution, sir?” he earnestly
asked one grizzled seaman from the Pitt with  a  crushed foot.
The man gave him a distinctly jaundiced look but replied,
probably in order to distract himself.
“Bloody waste of time,” he said gruf fly , digging his fingers
into the edge of  the chest he sat on. “Better to be fighting the
frogs tha n Englishmen. What’ s to be gained by it? Dear Lord,”
he said under his breath, going pale.
“Give h im something to bite on , Abram, will you?” I said,
busy pic king shattered bits of b one out of the wreckage and
wondering whether he might do better with a swift
amputation. Perhaps less risk of infection, and he would
always walk with a painful limp in any case, but still, I hated
to …
“No, tha t’ s all right, mum,” he  said, sucking in a breath.
“What do you  think of it, then, youngster?”
“I think it is righ t and necessary , sir ,” Abram replied stoutly .
“The King is a  tyrant, and tyranny must be resisted by all
proper men.”
“What?” said the seaman, shocked. “The King, a tyrant?
Who says such a naughty thing?”
“Why… Mr . Jef ferson. And—a nd all of us! W e all think
so,” Abram said, taken aback at such vehement disagreement.
“W ell, then, you’re all a pack of bleedin’ fools—saving
your pre sence, m um,” he added, with a nod to me. He got a
look at his foot and swayed a bit, closing his eyes, but asked,
“Y ou don’ t think such a silly thing, do you, mum? Y ou ought
to talk sense into your boy here.”
“T alk sense?” cried Abram, roused. “Y ou think it sense that
we may not speak or write as we wish?”
The seaman opened one eye.“Of cou rse that’ s sense,” he said , with an evident attempt to
be re asonable. “Y ou get silly bu ggers—your pardon, mum—a-
saying all kinds of things regardless, stirrin’ folk up to no good
end, and  what’ s it lead to? Riot, that’ s what, and what you may
call disorderliness, with folk having their houses burnt and
being kn ocked down in the street. Ever hear of the Cutter riots,
boy?”
Abram rather obviously had not, but countered with a
vigorous denunciation of the Intolerable Acts, which caused
Mr . Ormiston—we had got onto personal terms by now—to
scof f loudly and recount the privations Londoners endured by
comparison with the luxury enjoyed by the ungrateful
colonists.
“Ungrateful!” Abram said, his face congested. “And what
should we be grateful for , then ? For having soldiers foisted
upon us?”
“Oh, foisted, is it?” cried Mr . Ormiston in righteous
indignation. “Su ch a word! An d if it means what I think it
does, young man, you should get down on your knees and
thank G od for such foistingness! Who do you think saved you
all f rom being scalped by red  Indians or overrun by the
French? And who do you think paid for it all, eh?”
This shrewd riposte drew cheers—and not a few jeers—
from the waiting men, who had all been drawn into the
discussion by now .
“That is absolute … desolute … stultiloquy ,” began Abram,
puf fing u p his insignificant chest like a scrawny pigeon, but he
was interrupted by the entrance of Mr . Smith, a canvas bag in
hand and an apologetic look on his face.
“I’m afraid your cabin was all ahoo, ma’am,” he said. “But I
picked up what bits was scattered on the floor , in case they—”
“Jonah Marsden!” Mr . Ormiston, on the ver ge of standing
up, plum ped back onto the chest , openmouthed. “Bless me if it
isn’ t!”
“Who?” I asked, startled.“Jonah—well, ‘tisn’ t his real name, what was it… oh, Bill, I
think it was, but we took to calling him Jonah, owing to him
being sunk so many times.”
“Now , Joe.” Mr . Smith—or M r . Marsden—was backing
toward the door , smiling nervou sly . “That was all a long time
ago, and—”
“Not so long as  all that.” Mr . Ormiston got ponderously to
his feet, balancing with one hand on a stack of herring barrels
so a s no t to put weight on his bandaged foot. “Not so long as
would make the navy for get you, you filthy deserter!”
Mr . Smith disappeared abruptly up the ladder , pushing past
two seamen attempting to come down these, handling a third
like a side of beef between them. Muttering curses, they
dropped him on the deck in front of me with a thud and stood
back, gasping. It was Captain Stebbings.
” ‘e’ s not dead,” one of them informed me helpfully .
“Oh, good,” I said. My tone of voice might have left
something to be desired, for the captain opened one eye and
glared at me.
“Y ou’re leaving me… to be but chered… by this bitch?” he
said ho arsely , between labored gasps. “I’d ra-rather die
honhonorablblbl…” The sentiment gur gled of f into a bubbling
noise that made me rip open his smoke-stained, blood-soaked
second-best coat and shirt. Sure enough, there was a neat
round hole in h is right breast and the nasty wet slurp of a
sucking chest wound coming from it.
I sai d a very ba d word, and the  two men who had brought
him to me shuf f led and muttered. I said it again, louder , and,
seizing Stebbings’ s hand, slapped it over the hole.
“Hold t hat there, if you want a chance at an honorable
death,” I said t o him. “Y ou!” I shouted at one of the men
trying to edge away . “Bring m e some oil from the galley .
Now! And you— ” My voice caught the other , who jerked
guiltily to a halt. “Sailcloth and tar . Fast as you can!”“Don’ t talk,” I advised Stebbings, who seemed inclined to
make remarks. “Y ou have a col lapsed lung, and either I get it
reinflated or you die like a dog, right here.”
“Hg,” he  said, which I took for assent. His hand was a nice
meaty one, and doing a reason ably good job of sealing the
hole for the moment. The trouble was that he undoubtedly had
not only a hole in his chest but a hole in the lung, too. I had to
provide a seal for the external hole so air couldn’ t get into the
chest an d keep the lung compressed, but had also to make sure
there wa s a way for air from the pleural space around the lung
to m ake an exit.  As it was, every time he exhaled, air from the
injured lung went straight into t hat space, making the problem
worse.
He mig ht also be drowning in  his own blood, but there
wasn’ t a  hell of a lot I could do a bout that, so I wouldn’ t worry
about it.
“On the good side,” I told him, “it was a bullet, and not
shrapnel or a spl inter . One thing about red-hot iron: it sterilizes
the w ound. Lift your hand for a moment, please. Breathe out.”
I grabbed his hand myself and lifted it for the count of two
while he exhaled, then slapped it back over the wound. It made
a sq uelching sound, owing to the blood. It was a lot of blood
for a hole like  that, but he wasn’ t coughing or spitting
blood…. Where—oh.
“Is this blood yours or someone else’ s?” I demanded,
pointing at it.
His eyes were half shut, but at this he turned his head and
bared his bad teeth at me in a wolf ’ s grin.
“Y our… husband’ s,” he said in a hoarse whisper .
“W anker ,” I said crossly , lifting his hand again. “Breathe
out.” Th e men had seen me dealing with Stebbings; there were
other casualties from the T eal  coming or being carried along,
but most of them seemed ambulatory . I gave cursory directions
to the able-bodied with them, regarding the application ofpressure to wounds or the placement of broken limbs so as to
avoid further injury .
It se emed an ag e before the oil and cloth arrived, and I had
suf ficient time to wonder where  Jamie and Ian were, but the
first-aid supplies  came at last. I ripped of f a patch of sailcloth
with my  knife, tore a longish strip of calico to use as field
dressing, then pushed Stebbings’ s hand away , wiped of f the
blood with a fo ld of my petticoat, sloshed lamp oil over his
chest and the sailcloth patch, then pressed the cloth down to
form a rudiment ary seal, putting his hand back over it in such
a wa y th at one end of the patch  remained free, while I wound
the improvised field dressing round his torso.
“All righ t,” I said. “I’ll need to stick the patch down with tar
for a better seal,  but it will take a little time to warm that. Y ou
can go and be d oing that now ,” I advised the sailor who had
brought the oil, who was once again trying to execute a quiet
sneak. I scooted round to view the casualties squatting or
sprawling on the deck. “Right. Who’ s dying?”
For a wonder , only two of the men brought in from the T eal
were dead, one with hideous head wounds from flying
splinters and grapeshot, the other exsanguinated as a result of
losing half his left leg, probably to a cannonball.
Might have saved that one , I  thought, but  the moment’ s
regret was subsumed in the needs of the next moment.
Not all that bad , I  thought, wor king my way qu ickly down
the line on my  knees, doing a hasty triage and issuing
instructions to my unwilling assistants. Splinter wounds, two
grazed b y muske t balls, one wit h half an ear torn of f, one with
an embe dded ball in the thigh, but nowhere near the femoral
artery , thank God…
Bangings and shuf flings were coming from the lower hold,
where repairs were being ef fe cted. As I worked, I pieced
together the actions of the battl e from the remarks passed by
the wounded men awaiting my attention.Following a ragged exchange of broadsides, which had
brought down the T eal’ s  crac ked mainmast and holed the Asp
above the waterline, the T eal— opinions dif fere d on whether
Captain Roberts had done it a-purpose or not—had veered
sharply toward the Asp , s craping the side of the ship  and
bringing the two vessels railing to railing.
It seemed inconceivable that Stebbings had intended to
board the Asp , with so few de pendable men as he had; if it had
been de liberate, he might have meant to ram us. I glanced
down, but the c aptain’ s eyes were closed, and he was a nasty
color . I lifted h is hand and he ard a small hiss of air , then
placed it  back on his chest and went on with my work. Plainly
he was in no s hape to set the record straight regarding his
intentions.
Whatever they had been, Captain Hickman had forestalled
them, leaping over the T eal’ s  rail  with a shriek, followed by a
swarm of Asps. They had cu t their way across the deck
without much resistance, though the men from the Pitt  had
gathered together around Stebbings near the helm and fought
ferociously . It was clear that the Asps must win the day ,
though—and th en the T eal  had struck heavily aground,
throwing everyone flat on deck.
Convinced that the ship was about to sink, everyone who
could move did, boarders and defenders together going back
over the  rail onto the Asp— which sheered abruptly away , with
some be nighted defender who remained on the T eal  sending a
last shot  or two after her , only to scrape her own bottom on a
gravel bar .
“Not to worry , m a’am,” one of the men assured me. “She’ll
swim directly the tide comes in.”
The nois es from below began to  diminish, and I looked over
my s houlder every few moment s, in hopes of seeing Jamie or
Ian.
I w as examining  one poor fello w who’d taken a splinter in
one eyeball, when his other ey e suddenly widened in horror ,
and I turned to find Rollo panting and dripping by my side,enormous teeth exposed in a gr in that put Stebbings’ s feeble
attempt to shame.
“Dog!” I cried, delighted. I couldn’ t hug him—well, I
wouldn’ t, really—but looked quickly round for Ian, who was
limping in my direction, sopping wet, too, but with a matching
grin.
“W e fell into th e water ,” he said hoarsely , squatting on the
deck beside me. A small puddle formed under him.
“So I see. Breath e deeply for me,” I said to the man with the
splinter in his eye. “One … yes, that’ s right… two … yes…”
As he exhaled, I took hold of the splinter and pulled, hard. It
slid free, followed by a gush of vitreous humor and blood that
made m e grit my teeth and mad e Ian retch. Not a lot of blood,
though. If it hasn’ t gone  thr ough the orbit, I might be able to
stave off infection by r emoving  the eyeball and packing the
socket. T hat’ll have to wait, thou gh . I slashe d a ribbon of cloth
from the  man’ s shirttail, folded it hastily into a wad, soaked it
in brand y , press ed it to the ruined eye, and made him hold it
firmly in place. He did, thou gh he groaned and swayed
alarmingly , and I feared he might fall over .
“Where’ s your uncle?” I asked Ian, with a gnawing sense
that I didn’ t want to hear the answer .
“Right t here,” Ian said, nodding to one side. I swung round,
one hand  still bracing the shoulder of the one-eyed man, to see
Jamie coming down the ladder , in heated ar gument with
Captain Hickman, who was following him. Jamie’ s shirt was
soaked with blood, and he was  holding a wad of something
likewise blood-soaked against his shoulder with one hand.
Possibly Stebbings hadn’ t been merely trying to aggravate me.
Jamie wasn’ t falling down, thou gh, and while he was white, he
was also  furious. I was reasonab ly sure he wouldn’ t die while
angry a nd seized another strip of sailcloth to stabilize a
compound fracture of the arm.
“Dog!” said Hickman, coming to a stop beside the supine
Stebbings. He didn’ t say it wi th the same intonation I had
used, though, and Stebbings opened one eye.“Dog, yourself,” he said thickly .
“Dog, dog, dog! Fucking dog!” Hickman added for good
measure, and aimed a kick at S tebbings’ s side. I grabbed for
his foot and managed to shove him of f balance, so that he
lurched sideways. Jamie caught him, grunting with pain, but
Hickman struggled upright, pushing Jamie away .
“Y e canna murder the man in cold blood!”
“Can, too,” Hickman replied promptly . “W atch me!” He
drew an  enormous horse pistol out of a ratty leather holster
and cocked it. Jamie took it by the barrel and plucked it neatly
out of his hand, leaving him flexing his fingers and looking
surprised.
“Surely , sir ,” Jamie said, striving for reasonableness, “ye
canna m ean to kill a wounded e nemy—one in uniform, taken
under hi s own flag, and a man who has surrendered himself to
ye. That couldna be condoned by any honorable man.”
Hickman drew himself up, going puce.
“Are you impugning my honor , sir?”
I s aw the muscl es in Jamie’ s ne ck and shoulders tense, but
before he could speak, Ian stepp ed up beside him, shoulder to
shoulder .
“A ye, he is. So am I.”
Rollo, his fur s till sticking up in wet spikes, growled and
rolled back his b lack lips, showing most of his teeth in token
of his support of this opinion.
Hickman glance d from Ian’ s sc owling, tattooed visage, to
Rollo’ s impressive carnassials, and back to Jamie, who had
uncocked the pistol and put it in his own belt. He breathed
heavily .
“On you r head be it, then,” he said abruptly , and turned
away .
Captain Stebbings was breathing heavily , too, a wet, nasty
sound. He was w hite to the lips , and the lips themselves wereblue. St ill, he was conscious. His eyes had been fixed on
Hickman throug hout the conversation and followed him now
as h e left the cabin. When the door had closed behind
Hickman, Stebbings relaxed a little, shifting his gaze to Jamie.
“Might’ve… sa ved yourself… the trouble,” he wheezed.
“But you  have… my thanks. Fo r what…” He gave a strangled
cough, pressed a hand hard ag ainst his chest, and shook his
head, grimacing. “… what they’re worth,” he managed.
He clos ed his eyes, breathing slowly and painfully—but
still, breathing. I rose stif fly to my feet and at last had a
moment to look at my husband.
“No but a wee cut,” he assured m e, in answer to my look of
suspicious inquiry . “I’ll do for now .”
“Is a ll of that blood yours?” He glanced down at the shirt
pasted to his ribs and lifted the non-wounded shoulder
dismissively .
“I’ve enough left to be going on with.” He smiled at me,
then gla nced around the deck. “I see ye’ve got matters well in
hand here. I’ll have Smith bring ye a bit of food, aye? It’ s
going to rain soon.”
It was; the smel l of the oncomi ng storm swept through the
hold, fre sh and tingling with o zone, lifting the hair of f my
damp neck.
“Possibly not Smith,” I said. “And where are you going?” I
asked, seeing him turn away .
“I need to speak wi’ Captain Hickman and Captain
Roberts,” he said, with a certain grimness. He glanced upward,
and the matted hair behind his ears stirred in the breeze. “I
dinna think we’re going to Scotland in the T eal , but damned if
I ken where we ar e  going.”
 
THE SHIP EVENTUALL Y grew quiet—or as quiet as a
lar ge object composed of crea king boards, flapping canvas,and that  eerie hum made by tau t rigging can get. The tide had
come in, and the ship did swim; we were moving north again,
under light sail.
I ha d seen of f  the last of the casualties; only Captain
Stebbings remained, laid on a c rude pallet behind a chest of
smuggled tea. He was still b reathing, and not in terrible
discomfort, I thought, but his condition was much too
precarious for me to let him out of my sight.
By some  miracle, the bullet see med to have seared its way
into his lung, rather than simply severing blood vessels in its
wake. T hat didn’ t mean he wasn’ t bleeding into his lung, but if
so, it was a slow  seep; I would long since have known about it,
otherwise. He must have been shot at close range, I thought
sleepily . The ball had still been red-hot when it struck him.
I ha d sent Abram to bed. I sh ould lie down myself, for
tiredness dragge d at my shoulders and had settled in aching
lumps at the base of my spine. Not yet, though.
Jamie had not yet come back. I knew he would come to find
me w hen he’d fi nished his summit meeting with Hickman and
Roberts. And there were a few  preparations still to be made,
just in case.
In the course of Jamie’ s e arlier rummaging through
Hickman’ s desk  in search of food, I’d noticed a bundle of
fresh go ose quil ls. I’d sent Abra m to beg a couple of these and
to bring me the lar gest sailmaker ’ s needle to be found—and a
couple o f wing bones discarded from the chicken stew aboard
the Pitt .
I cho pped of f th e ends of a slender bone, looked to be sure
the marrow had all been leached out by cooking, then shaped
one end into a careful point, using the ship’ s carpenter ’ s small
sharpening stone for the purpose. The quill was easier; the tip
had already been cut to a point for writing; all I had to do was
to cut of f the barbs, then submer ge quill, bone, and needle in a
shallow dish of brandy . That would do, then.The smell of the brandy rose sweet and heavy in the air ,
competing with the tar , turpentine, tobacco, and the salt-
soaked old timbers of the sh ip. It did at least partially
obliterate the scents of blood and fecal matter left by my
patients.
I’d discovered a case of bottled Meursault wine in the car go,
and now  thoughtfully extracted  a bottle, adding it to the half
bottle o f brandy and a stack of clean calico bandages and
dressings. Sittin g down on a keg of tar , I leaned back against a
big hogs head of  tobacco, yawning and wondering idly why it
was called that. It did not appear to be shaped like a hog’ s
head, certainly not like the head of any hog I  knew .
I dismissed that thought and closed my eyes. I could feel my
pulse throbbing in fingertips an d eyelids. I didn’ t sleep, but I
slowly descended into a sort of half consciousness, dimly
aware of the sough of water past the ship’ s sides, the louder
sigh of Stebbing s’ s breath, the unhurried bellows of my own
lungs, and the slow , placid thumping of my heart.
It s eemed years since the t errors and uproar of the
afternoon, and from the distance imposed by fatigue and
intensity , my worry that I mig ht have been having a heart
attack seemed ridiculous. W as it, though? It wasn’ t impossible.
Surely it had been nothing more than panic and
hyperventilation—ridiculous in themselves, but not
threatening. Still…
I pu t tw o finger s on my chest and waited for the pulsing in
my f ingertips to equalize with th e pulsing of my heart. Slowly ,
almost dreamin g, I began to pass through my body , from
crown to toes, feeling my way through the long quiet passages
of v eins, the de ep violet color of the sky just before night.
Nearby I saw the brightness of arteries, wide and fierce with
crimson life. Entered into the c hambers of my heart and felt
enclosed, the thick walls moving in a solid, comforting,
unending, uninterrupted rhythm. No, no damage, not to the
heart nor to its valves.I felt my dige stive tract, tightly knotted up under my
diaphragm for hours, relax and settle with a grateful gur gle,
and a sense of  well-being flowed down like warm honey
through limbs and spine.
“I dinna ken what ye’re doing, Sassenach,” a soft voice said
nearby . “But ye look well content.”
I op ened my eyes and sat up. Ja mie came down the ladder ,
moving carefully , and sat down.
He was very pale, and his shoulders were slumped with
exhaustion. He smiled faintly at me, though, and his eyes were
clear . M y heart,  solid and relia ble as I just proved it to be,
warmed and softened as though it had been made of butter .
“How do you—” I began, but he raised a hand, stopping me.
“I’ll do,” he sa id, with a glance at the pallet where the
recumbent Stebb ings lay , breathing shallowly and audibly . “Is
he asleep?”
“I hope so. And you should  b e,” I o bserved. “Let me tend
you so you can lie down.”
“It’ s no verra ba d,” he said, gingerly picking at the wad of
crusty fabric tucked inside his s hirt. “But it could use a stitch
or two, I suppose.”
“I suppose so, too,” I said, eyeing the brown stains down the
right side of h is shirt. Given his customary inclination to
understatement, he likely had a gaping slash down his breast.
At le ast it would  be easy to get at, unlike the awkward wound
suf fered by one of the Pitt’ s  s ail ors, who ha d somehow been
struck just behind the scrotum  by a pellet of grapeshot. I
thought it must have struck something else first and bounced
upward, for it luckily hadn’ t penetrated deeply , but was
flattened as a six pence when I g ot it out. I’d given it to him as
a souvenir .
Abram h ad brought a can of fresh hot water just before he
left. I put a finger into it and was pleased to find it still warm.“Right,” I said, with a nod at the bottles on the chest. “Do
you want brandy , or wine, before we start?”
The corner of his mouth twitched, and he reached for the
wine bottle.
“Let me keep the illusion of civilization for a wee bit
longer .”
“Oh, I think that’ s reasonably civilized stuf f,” I said. “I
haven’ t a cork screw , though.”
He read the label, and his eyebrows rose.
“No matter . Is there something to pour it into?”
“Just here.” I pu lled a small, el egant wooden box out of a
nest of straw ins ide a packing ca se and opened it triumphantly
to display a Chinese porcelain tea set, gilt-edged and decorated
with tiny  red and blue turtles, all looking inscrutably Asiatic,
swimming through a forest of gold chrysanthemums.
Jamie laughed— no more than a breath, but definitely
laughter—and, scoring the neck of the bottle with the point of
his dirk, knocked it neatly of f against the rim of a tobacco
hogshead. He poured the wine carefully into the two cups I’d
set out, nodding at the vivid turtles.
“The wee blue one there remin ds me of Mr . W illoughby ,
aye?”
I laughed myself, then glanced guiltily at Stebbings’ s feet—
all th at w as show ing of him at the moment. I’d taken his boots
of f, and  the loose toes of h is grimy stockings drooped
comically over his feet. The feet  didn’ t twitch, though, and the
slow , labored breathing went on as before.
“I haven ’ t thought of Mr . W illoughby in years,” I observed,
lifting my cup in toast. “Here’ s to absent friends.”
Jamie replied briefly in Chinese and touched the rim of his
own cup to mine with a faint tink!
“Y ou remember how to speak Chinese?” I asked, intrigued,
but he shook his head.“No muc h. I havena had occasion to speak it since I last saw
him.” H e breathed in the bouquet of the wine, closing his eyes.
“That seems a verra long time ago.”
“Long a go and far away .” The wine smelled warmly of
almonds and apples, and was dry but full-bodied, clinging
richly to the pa late. Jamaica, to be exact, and more than ten
years ago. “T ime flies when yo u’re having fun. Do you think
he’ s still alive—Mr . W illoughby?”
He considered that, sipping.
“A ye, I do. A m an who escaped from a Chinese emperor
and saile d halfw ay round the wo rld to keep his balls is one wi’
a good deal of determination.”
He seemed disinclined to reminisce further about auld
acquaintance, though, and I let him drink in silence, feeling the
night set tle comfortably around us with the gentle rise and fall
of the ship. After his second cup of wine, I peeled his crusty
shirt of f and gingerly lifted the blood-caked wad of
handkerchief that he’d used to stanch the wound.
Rather to my surprise, he was right: the wound was small,
and wouldn’ t need more than tw o or three stitches to put right.
A blade had gone in deep, just under his collarbone, and
ripped a triangular flap of flesh coming out.
“Is this all yo ur blood?” I asked, puzzled, lifting the
discarded shirt.
“Nay , I’ve got a bit left,” he said, eyes creasing at me over
the teacup. “Not much, mind.”
“Y ou know quite well what I mean,” I said severely .
“A ye, it ’ s mine.” He drained h is cup and reached for the
bottle.
“But fro m such a small… oh, dear God.” I felt slightly faint.
I cou ld see the tender blue line of his subclavian vein, passing
just under the collarbone and running directly above the
clotted gape of the wound.“A ye, I was surprised,” he said casually , cradling the
delicate china in both big hand s. “When he jerked the blade
out, the blood sp rayed out like a fountain and soaked us both.
I’ve never seen it do like that before.”
“Y ou have probably not had anyone nick your subclavian
artery before,” I said, with what attempt at calm I could
muster . I cast a sideways glance  at the wound. It had  clotted;
the edge s of the flap had turned blue and the sliced flesh
beneath was nearly black with  dried blood. No oozing, let
alone an  arterial spray . The bla de had thrust up from below ,
missing the vein and just piercing the artery behind it.
I too k a long, deep breath, trying with no success whatever
not to imagine what would have happened had the blade gone
the bare st fraction of an inch deeper , or what might have
happened, had Jamie not had a handkerchief and the
knowledge and opportunity to use pressure on the wound.
Belatedly , I realized what he’d said: “The blood sprayed out
like a fountain and soaked us both .” And when I’d asked
Stebbings wheth er it was his own blood soaking his shirt, he’d
leered a nd said,  “Y our husband’ s.”  I’d tho ught he  was only
being unpleasant, but—
“W as it Captain Stebbings who stabbed you?”
“Mmphm.” He made a brief af f irmative noise as he shifted
his weight, leaning back to le t me get at the wound. He
drained the cup again and set it down, looking resigned. “I was
surprised he managed it. I thought I’d dropped him, but he hit
the floor and came up wi’ a knife in his hand, the wee bugger .”
“Y ou  shot him?”
He blinked at my tone of voice.
“A ye, of course.”
I c ouldn ’ t think of any bad words suf ficient as to encompass
the situ ation and, muttering “Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ !”
under my breath, set about swabbing and suturing.“Now , listen to me,” I said, in my best military sur geon’ s
voice. “So far a s I can tell, it w as a very small nick, and you
managed to stop the bleeding long enough for a clot to form.
But that clot is all  that is keeping you from bleeding to death.
Do y ou understand me?” This was not completely true—or it
wouldn’ t be, once I’d stitched the supporting flesh back into
place—but this was no time to give him a loophole.
He looked at me for a long moment, quite expressionless.
“I do.”
“That means,” I emphasized, stabbing the needle into his
flesh wi th suf fic ient force that he yelped, “you must not  use
your rig ht arm for at least the next forty-eight hours. Y ou must
not haul on rop es, you must not climb rigging, you must not
punch people, you must not so m uch as scratch your arse with
your right hand, do you hear me?”
“I expec t the whole ship hears ye,” he muttered, but glanced
down his cheek, trying to see  his collarbone. “I generally
scratch my arse wi’ my left hand, anyway .”
Captain Stebbings had definitely heard us; a low chuckle
came fro m behind the tea chest, followed by a rumbling cough
and a faint wheeze of amusement.
“And,” I continued, drawing the thread through the skin,
“you may not  get angry .”
His breath drew in with a hiss.
“Why not?”
“Because it will make your hea rt beat harder , thus raising
your blood pressure, which will—”
“Blow me up li ke a bottle of beer that’ s been corked too
long?”
“Much the same. Now—”
Whatever I had been going to s ay vanished from my mind
in the next instant as Stebbings’ s breathing suddenly changed.
I droppe d the needle and, turning, seized the dish. I shoved thetea chest aside, p utting the dish on it, and fell to my knees next
to Stebbings’ s body .
His lips and eyelids were blue, and the rest of his face was
the colo r of putty . He was maki ng a horrid gasping noise, his
mouth gaping wide, gulping air that wasn’ t helping.
There w ere luckily well-known bad words for this  situation,
and I used a few of them, swiftly turning back the blanket and
digging my fingers into his pud gy side in search of ribs. He
squirmed and emitted a high, ludicrous heeheehee , which
made Jamie—the needle still swinging by its thread from his
collarbone—give a nervous laugh in response.
“This is no time  to be ticklish,” I said crossly . “Jamie—take
one of those qui lls and slide the  needle inside.” While he did
this, I rapidly swabbed Stebbings’ s skin with a brandy-soaked
wad of cloth, th en took the quill-and-needle in one hand, the
brandy b ottle in the other , and drove the quill point-first into
the seco nd intercostal space, like hammering in a nail. I felt
the subterranean pop  as it went through the cartilage into the
pleural space.
He made a high eeeeeee  sound at that, but it wasn’ t laughter .
I’d c ut t he quill a little shorter t han the needle, but the needle
had sunk in whe n I’d hit it. I ha d a moment of panic, trying to
get hold  of the needle with my  fingernails to pull it out, but
finally managed. Stale-smelling blood and fluid sprayed out
through the hollow quill, but only for a moment, then
diminished to a faint hiss of air .
“Breathe slowly ,” I said more quietly . “ Both  of you.”
I was watching the quill anxiously , looking for any further
drainage of blood—plainly , if he was bleeding heavily into the
lung, the re was almost nothing I could do—but I was seeing
only the light seepage from the puncture wound, a red smear
on the outside of the quill.
“Sit down,” I said to Jamie, who did, ending cross-legged
on the floor beside me.Stebbings was looking better; th e lung had at least partially
inflated, and he was white now , his lips pale, but pale pink.
The hiss ing from the hollow qu ill died to a sigh, and I put my
finger over the open end of it.
“Ideally ,” I said in a conversational tone, “I’d be able to run
a length of tubing from your chest into a jar of water . That way
the air around your lung could  escape, but air couldn’ t get
back in. As I haven’ t got anything tubelike that’ s longer than a
few inch es, that ’ s not going to work.” I rose up on my knees,
motioning to Jamie.
“Come h ere and  put your finger  over the end of this quill. If
he starts suf focating again, take  it of f for a moment, until the
air stops hissing out.”
He couldn’ t conveniently reach Stebbings with his left
hand; wi th a sidelong glance at me, he reached slowly out with
his right and stoppered the quill with his thumb.
I got to my feet , groaning, and went to rummage the car go
again. It might have to be tar . I’d tacked the oiled patch to his
chest on three s ides with warm tar , and there was plenty left.
Not ideal; I likely couldn’ t get it out again in a hurry . W ould a
small plug of wet fabric be better?
In one of Hannah Arnold’ s chests, though, I found treasure:
a sm all collection of dried herbs in jars—including one of
powdered gum arabic. The herbs were interesting and useful in
themselves, bein g plainly imported: cinchona bark—I must try
to se nd that bac k to North Caro lina for Lizzie, if we ever got
of f this horrible tub—mandrake, and ginger , things that never
grew in  the Colonies. Having them to hand made me feel
suddenly rich. Stebbings groane d behind me, and I heard the
scuf f of fabric and a soft hiss as Jamie took his thumb away
for a moment.
Not even the riches of the fabled East would do Stebbings
much go od. I opened the jar of gum arabic and, scooping out a
bit into the palm of my hand, dribbled water into it and set
about fashioning the resultant gooey ball into a roughly
cylindrical plug,  which I wrapped in a scrap of yellow calicoprinted w ith hon eybees, finishin g it of f with a neat twist at the
top. Thi s accomplished to my satisfaction, I came back and,
without comment, pulled the hollow quill—already showing
signs of cracking from the work ing of Stebbings’ s rib muscles
—out of its hole and wriggled the sturdier—and lar ger—
hollow chicken bone into its place.
He didn’ t laugh this time, either . I plugged the end of the
bone ne atly and, kneeling in front of Jamie, resumed my
stitching on his collarbone.
I felt perfectly clearheaded—but in that oddly surreal way
that is an indication of total exh austion. I’d done what had to
be done, but I knew I couldn’ t stay upright much longer .
“What does Captain Hickman h ave to say?” I asked, much
more by  way of distracting both of us than because I really
wanted to know .
“A g reat number of things, as ye might imagine.” He took a
deep breath and fixed his eyes on a huge turtle shell that had
been wedged in among the boxes. “Discarding the purely
personal opinions and a certain amount of excessive language,
though… we’re bound up the Hudson. For Fort T iconderoga.”
“W e… what?” I frowned at the needle pushed halfway
through the skin. “Why?”
His hand s were braced on the deck, fingers pressing into the
boards so hard the nails were white.
“That’ s where he was bound  when the complications
occurred, and that’ s where he m eans to go. He’ s a gentleman
of verra fixed views, I find.”
A loud snort came from behind the tea chest.
“I did notice something of the sort.” I tied the last suture and
clipped the thread neatly wit h my knife. “Did you say
something, Captain Stebbings?”
The sn ort was repeated, more loudly , but without
emendation.
“Can’ t he be convinced to put us ashore?”Jamie’ s fingers hovered over the fresh stitching, obviously
wanting to rub the stinging site, but I pushed them away .
“A ye, well… there are further complications, Sassenach.”
“Do tell,” I murmured, standing up and stretching. “Oh,
God, my back. What sort  o f complicatio ns? Do you w ant
some tea?”
“Only if  there’ s a good deal of whisky in it.” He leaned his
head back against the bulkhead,  closing his eyes. There was a
hint of color in  his cheeks, though his forehead shone with
sweat.
“Brandy do you?” I needed tea—minus alcohol—badly
myself, and headed for the ladd er , not waiting for his nod. I
saw him  reach for the wine bottle as I set foot on the lowest
rung.
There was a brisk wind blowing up above; it swirled the
long cloak out a round me as I emer ged from the depths, and
whooshed up my petticoats in a most revivifying fashion. It
revivified Mr . Smith—or , rather , Mr . Marsden—too, who
blinked and looked hastily away .
“Evening, ma’am,” he said politely , when I’d got my
assorted garments back under control. “The colonel doing
well, I hope?”
“Y es, he’ s—” I broke of f and g ave him a sharp look. “The
colonel?” I had a slight sinking sensation.
“Y es’m. He’ s a militia colonel, isn’ t he?”
“He was ,” I said with emphasis.
Smith’ s face broke into a smile.
“No was  abo ut it, ma’am ,” he said. “He’ s done us the honor
to take command of a company—Fraser ’ s Irregulars, we’re to
be called.”
“How apt,” I said. “What the devil—how did this happen?”
He tugg ed nervously at one of  his earrings, seeing that I
perhaps wasn’ t as pleased by the news as might be hoped.“Ah. W ell, to tell the truth, ma’am, I’m afraid it was my
fault.” H e ducked his head, abas hed. “One of the hands aboard
the Pitt  rec ognized me, and when he told the captain who I
was…”
The reve lation o f Mr . Marsden’ s real name—in combination
with his  adornm ents—had caus ed considerable uproar among
the motley crew presently on b oard the Asp . Suf ficiently so
that he had been in some danger of being thrown overboard or
set a drift in a boat. After a certain amount of acrimonious
discussion, Jamie had suggested that perhaps Mr . Marsden
could be persuaded to change his profession and become a
soldier—for a number of the hands aboard the Asp  had already
proposed to leave her and join the Continental forces at
T iconderoga, portaging the goods and weapons across to Lake
Champlain and then remaining as militia volunteers.
This fou nd gene ral approbation —though a few disgruntled
persons were still heard to mutter that a Jonah was a Jonah,
didn’ t matter if he was a sailo r or not. “That being why I
thought I best m ake myself scarce below , if you see what I
mean, ma’am,” Mr . Marsden concluded.
It also solved the  problem of what to do with the imprisoned
hands fr om the Pitt  a nd the displac ed seamen from the T eal;
those who preferred joining the American militia would be
allowed to do so, while those British seamen who preferred the
prospect of life as prisoners of war could be accommodated in
this desire at Fo rt T iconderoga. About half the men from the
T eal  had expressed a decided preference for employment on
land, after their recent seagoing adventures, and they also
would join the Irregulars.
“I see,” I said,  rubbing two fingers between my brows.
“W ell, if you’ll excuse me, Mr…. Marsden, I must be going
and making a cup of tea. W ith a lot of brandy in it.”
 
THE TEA HEAR TENED ME, suf ficiently to send Abram
—found drowsing by the galley fire in spite of having beenordered to bed—to take some to  Jamie and Captain Stebbings
while I made t he rounds of my other patients. They were
mostly as comfortable as might be expected—that is, not very ,
but stoic about it, and in no need of exigent medical
intervention.
The temporary strength lent m e by tea and brandy had
mostly ebbed by the time I made my way back down the
ladder into the h old, though, and my foot slipped of f the final
rung, causing me to drop heavil y onto the deck, with a thump
that elic ited a startled cry from Stebbings, followed by a
groan. W aving away Jamie’ s raised brow , I hurried over to
check the patient.
He was very hot to the touch, his full face flushed, and a
nearly full cup of tea lay discarded near him.
“I tried to make him drink, but he said he couldna swallow
more than a mouthful.” Jamie had followed me, and spoke
softly behind me.
I bent and placed my ear near Stebbings’ s chest,
auscultating as best I could t hrough the layer of blubber
covering it. The chicken-bone tube, momentarily unplugged,
gave on ly a modest hiss of air  and no more than a trace of
blood.
“So far as I can tell, the lung’ s expanded at least partially ,” I
said, addressing Stebbings for form’ s sake, though he merely
stared at me, gl assy-eyed. “And I think the bullet must have
cauterized a good deal of the da mage; otherwise, I think we’d
be seeing much more alarming symptoms.” Otherwise, he’d be
dead by now , b ut I thought it more tactful not to say so. He
might ea sily be dead soon, in an y case, from fever , but I didn’ t
say that, either .
I persuaded him to drink some water and sponged his head
and tors o with more of it. The hatch cover had been left of f,
and it was reasonably cool in the hold, though the air didn’ t
move m uch dow n below . Still, I saw no benefit in taking him
into the wind on deck, and the less he was moved, the better .“Is that… my… cloak?” he asked suddenly , opening one
eye.
“Er… probably ,” I replied, disconcerted. “Do you want it
back?”
He made  a brief grimace and sh ook his head, then lay back,
eyes closed, breathing shallowly .
Jamie w as prop ped against the tea chest, head back, eyes
closed, a nd breathing heavily . Feeling me sit down beside him,
though, he raised his head and opened his eyes.
“Y e look as thou gh ye’re about to fall over , Sassenach,” he
said softly . “Lie down, aye? I’ll mind the captain.”
I sa w his point . In fact, I saw two of them—and him. I
blinked and shook my head, momentarily reuniting the two
Jamies, but there was no denying that he was right. I’d lost
touch with my body again, but my mind, instead of sticking to
the job,  had simply wandered of f somewhere in a daze. I
rubbed my hands hard over my face, but it didn’ t help
appreciably .
“I’ll have to sleep,” I explained to the men, all four of them
now wat ching m e with the perfe ct wide-eyed attention of barn
owls. “I f you feel the pressure building up again—and I think
it wi ll,” I said to Stebbings, “pull the plug out of the tube until
it ea ses, then pu t it back. If either of you think you’re dying,
wake me up.”
W ith no  further ado, and feeling  as though I were watching
myself doing it, I eased down o nto the planking, put my head
on a fold of Stebbings’ s cloak, and fell asleep.
 
I WOKE AN UNACCOUNT ABLE time later and lay for
some minutes lacking coherent thought, my mind rising and
falling with the movement of the deck beneath me. At some
point, I began to  distinguish the murmur of men’ s voices from
the shush and bang of seagoing noises.I ha d fallen so deeply into oblivion that the events prior to
my falling asleep took a mom ent to recall, but the voices
brought them back. W ounds, t he reek of brandy , the rip of
sailcloth tearing , rough in my hands, and the smell of the dye
in the bright, wet calico. Jamie’ s bloody shirt. The sucking
sound o f the hole in Stebbings ’ s chest. The memory of that
would have brought me uprigh t at once, but I had stif fened
from lyi ng on the boards. A sharp twinge of agony lanced
from my  right knee to my groin , and the muscles of my back
and arm s hurt amazingly . Befor e I could stretch them enough
to struggle to my feet, I heard the captain’ s voice.
“Call Hickman.” Stebbings’ s voice was hoarse and low , but
definite. “I’d rather be shot than do this anymore.”
I didn’ t think he was joking. Neither did Jamie.
“I dinna  blame ye,” he said. His voice was soft but serious,
as definite as Stebbings’ s.
My eyes were b eginning to focus again, as the paralyzing
ache in my muscles eased a lit tle. From where I lay , I could
see S tebbings from the knees do wn and most of Jamie, sitting
beside him, head bowed on his own knees, tall form slumped
against the tea chest.
There w as a pause, and then Stebbings said, “Y ou don’ t, eh?
Good. Go get Hickman.”
“Why?” Jamie asked, after what seemed an equal pause for
thought—or perhaps only to gather strength to answer . He
didn’ t lift his head; he sounded  almost drugged with fatigue.
“Nay ne ed to rouse the man from his bed, is there? If ye want
to die, just pull that thing out of your chest.”
Stebbings made some sort of noise. It might have started as
a laugh, a groan, or an angry retort, but ended in a hiss of air
between clenche d teeth. My body tensed. Had he actually tried
to pull it out?
No. I heard the heavy movement of his body , saw his feet
curl briefly as he sought a more comfortable position, and
heard Jamie’ s grunt as he leaned over to help.“Someone… might as well get… satisfaction from me …
dying,” he wheezed.
“I put yon hole in ye,” Jamie pointed out. He straightened
up and stretche d with painful care. “It wouldna please me
overmuch to watch ye die from it.” I thought he must be well
past the  point of exhaustion, and plainly he was as stif f as I
was. I must get up, make him go lie down. But he was still
talking to Stebbings, sounding unconcerned, like a man
discussing an abstruse point of natural philosophy .
“As for satisfying Captain Hickman—d’ye feel some sense
of obligation toward him?”
“I don’ t .” That one came out short and sharp, though
succeeded by a deep gasp for air .
“It’ s a clean de ath,” Stebbings managed after a few more
breaths. “Quick.”
“A ye, that’ s what I thought,” Jamie said, sounding drowsy .
“When it was me.”
Stebbings gave a grunt that might have been interrogative.
Jamie sighed. After a moment, I heard the rustle of cloth and
saw him move his left leg, groaning as he did so, and turn back
the cloth of his kilt.
“See that?” His finger ran slowl y up the length of his thigh,
from just above the knee, almost to the groin.
Stebbings gave a slightly more interested grunt, this one
definitely questioning. The drooping toes of his socks moved
as his feet twitched.
“Bayonet,” Jamie said, casually flipping his kilt back over
the t wisting, runneled scar . “I l ay for two days after , wi’ the
fever eating me alive. My leg sw elled, and it stank. And when
the E nglish of ficer came to blow  our brains out, I was pleased
enough.”
A brief silence.
“Culloden?” Stebbings asked. His voice was still hoarse,
and I could hear the fever in it, but there was interest therenow , too. “Heard… about it.”
Jamie said nothing in response but yawned suddenly , not
bothering to smother it, and rubbed his hands slowly over his
face. I could hear the soft rasp of beard stubble.
Silence, but the quality of it had changed. I could feel
Stebbings’ s ang er , his pain and fright—but there was a faint
sense of amusement in his labored breath.
“Going to … make me… ask?”
Jamie shook his head.
“T oo lon g a story , and one I dinn a care to tell. Leave it that I
wanted h im to shoot me, verra badly , and the bastard wouldna
do it.”
The air in the lit tle hold was stal e but uneasy , filled with the
shifting scents of blood and lux ury , of industry and illness. I
breathed in, gently , deep, and could smell the tang of the
men’ s bodies, a sharp copper s avage smell, bitter with ef fort
and exhaustion. W omen never smelled like that, I thought,
even in extremity .
“Revenge, then, is it?” Stebbings asked after a bit. His
restless feet had stilled. His di rty stockings drooped and his
voice was tired.
Jamie’ s shoulder s moved, slowly , as he sighed, and his own
voice was nearly as tired as Stebbings’ s.
“No,” he said, very softly . “Call it payment of a debt.”
A debt?  I  thoug ht. T o whom? T o the Lord Melton who had
declined to kill him, out of honor , who had instead sent him
home from Culloden, hidden in  a wagon filled with hay? T o
his siste r , who had refused to let him die, who had dragged
him bac k to life by sheer strengt h of will? Or to those who had
died when he had not?
I ha d stretched myself enough now to be able to rise, but
didn’ t, y et. There was no ur gen cy . The men were silent, their
breathing part of the breathing of the ship, the sigh of the sea
outside.It came to me, quiet but sure, that I knew . I had glimpsed
the abys s often, over someone’ s shoulder as they stood on the
edge, looking down. But I had looked once, too. I knew the
vastness and the lure of it, the of fer of surcease.
I kne w they wer e standing now , side by side and each alone,
looking down.P AR T  F OUR Conjunction
 
  A FLURR Y OF SUSPICION
 
Lor d John Gr ey to Mr . Arthur Norrington
 4 February 1777
 (Cipher 158)
My dear Norrington ,
Pursuant to our conversation, I have made certain
discoveries which I think it prudent to confide .
I p aid a visit to  France at the  end of the year and,
while ther e, visited the Bar on Am andine. I stayed with the
bar on for several days, in fact,  and had conversation of
him on a numbe r of occasions. I have r eason to believe
that Beauchamp is indeed concerned in the matter we
discussed and  has formed an attachment to
Beaumar chais, who is thus likely similarly involved. I
think Amandine  is not hims elf concerned but that
Beauchamp may use him as a fr ont of some kind .
I r equested an audience with Beaumar chais, but was
denied. As he would normally have r eceived me, I think I
have poked a st ick into some n est. It would be useful to
watch that quarter .
Be also alert to any mention in the Fr ench
corr espondence of a company called  Rodrigue Hortalez
et Cie (I beg you will s peak with the person handling the
Spanish corr espondence, as well). I cannot discover
anything amiss, but neither can I discover anything solid
r egar ding them,  such as the names of the dir ectors, and
that in itself strikes me as suspicious .
If your duty allow , I should be pleased to hear of
anything you learn concerning these matters .Y our servant, sir ,
 Lor d John Gr ey
Postscriptum: If you can tell me, who is pr esently in
char ge of the American Department, with r egar d to
corr espondence?
 
 
Lor d John Gr ey to Har old, Duke of Par dloe
 4 February 1777
 (family cipher)
Hal—
I saw Amandine. W ainwright does live at the manor
house—a place called  T rois Fleches— and does maintain
an unwholesome r elationship with the bar on. I met the
bar on’ s sister , W ainwright’ s wife. She certainly knows of
the l ink between her br other an d her husband, but does
not adm it it openly . Beyond that, she appears to know
nothing whatever . I have seldom met a mor e stupid
woman. She is openly lewd in manner and a very bad
car dplayer . So is the bar on, by which token I am
convinced that he  does know so mething of W ainwright’ s
political machinations; he behav ed shiftily when I steer ed
the c onversation in that dir ection, and I am sur e he is not
schooled in the art of misdir e ction. He is not stupid,
though. Even if he wer e, he will certainly have told
W ainwright of my visit. I have alerted Norrington to
watch for any activity on that fr ont .
Knowing what I do of W ain wright’ s abilities and
connexions (or rather , the lack of them), I cannot quite
fathom his involvement. Granted, if the Fr ench
government does have such schemes in mind as heindicated, they would har dly m ake open communication
r egar ding them,  and sending someone like W ainwright to
speak to someone like me might be consider ed sufficiently
sub rosa. Certainly such an appr oach has the benefit of
being deniable. And yet something seems wr ong in this, in
a way I cannot yet define .
I will be with you soon, and hope by then to be in
possession of some definite information r egar ding one
Captain Ezekiel  Richar dson, likewise one Captain Denys
Randall-Isaacs. Should you be able to investigate either
of these names thr ough your own connexions, you would
gr eatly oblige
Y our most affectionate br other ,
 John
Postscriptum: I trust your health is mending .
 
 
Har old, Duke of Par dloe, to Lor d John Gr ey
 6 Mar ch 1777
 Bath
 (family cipher)
I’m not dead. W ish I wer e. Bath is vile. I am daily
wrapped in canvas and carried off like a par cel to be
sunk in boiling water that smells of r otten eggs, then
hauled out and for ced to  drink it, bu t M innie sa ys  she will
divor ce me by petition in the House of Lor ds on the
gr ounds of insanity caused by immoral acts if I don’ t
submit. I doubt this, but her e I am .
Denys Randall-Isaacs is the son of a Englishwoman
named Mary Hawkins and a British army officer: one
Jonathan W olverton Randall, captain of dragoons,
deceased, killed at Culloden. The mother is still alive and
married to a Je w named Robert Isaacs, a mer chant in
Bristol. He’ s still alive, too, an d has a half inter est in awar ehouse in Br est. Denys is one of your damned
politicals, got ties to Germain, but I can’ t find out mor e
than tha t without being too overt for your tastes. Can’ t
find out anything in bloody Bath .
Don’ t know much about Richar dson, but will find out
dir ectly . Sent letters to some peo ple in America. Y es, I am
discr eet, thank you, and so ar e they .
John Bur goyne is her e, taking the cur e. V ery cock-a-
hoop, as Germain has appr oved his scheme to invade
fr om Ca nada. I  have mentioned W illiam to him, as his
Fr ench a nd German ar e good a nd Bur goyne is to have a
number of Brunswickers. Still, tell W illie to be car eful;
Bur goyne seems to think he is to be commander -in-chief
of the army in America—a no tion that I dar esay will
come as rather a  surprise both to Guy Carleton and Dick
Howe .
T rois Fleches. Thr ee arr ows. Who is the thir d?
 
 
London
 Mar ch 26, 1777
 The Society for the Appr eciation of the
 English Beefsteak, a Gentleman’ s Club
 
W ho is the third?” Grey repeated in astonishment,
staring at the note he had just opened.
“The third what?” Harry Quarry handed his sopping cloak
to the steward a nd sank heavily into the chair beside Grey’ s,
sighing with relief as he held hi s hands out to the fire. “God’ s
teeth, I’m frozen solid. Y ou’re g oing to Southampton in this ?”
He f lung one big cold-blanched hand at the window , which
framed a dismal prospect of icy sleet, driven almost horizontal
by the wind.
“Not ‘til tomorrow . It may have cleared by then.”Harry gave the window a look of deep suspicion and shook
his head. “Not a chance. Steward!”
Mr . Bodley was already tottering toward them under the
weight of a tea tray laden with seedcake, sponge cake,
strawberry jam, marmalade, hot buttered crumpets in a basket
wrapped in white linen, sco nes, clotted cream, almond
biscuits, sardines on toast, a po t of beans baked with bacon
and onion, a plate of sliced ham with gherkins, a bottle of
brandy with two glasses, and—perhaps as an afterthought—a
steaming teapot with two china cups and saucers alongside.
“Ah!” said Harry , looking happier . “I see you expected me.”
Grey smiled. If not on campai gn or called away by duty ,
Harry Quarry invariably entered the Beefsteak at four -thirty on
a W ednesday .
“I thoug ht you’d need sustenance, with Hal on the sick list.”
Harry was one of the two regimental colonels—as distinct
from Hal, who was Colonel of the Regiment, it being his own
regiment. Not all colonels took an active hand in the
operations of their regiments, but Hal did.
“Malingering bu gger ,” Harry said, reaching for the brandy .
“How is he?”
“Quite his usual self, to judge from his correspondence.”
Grey handed Quarry the unfold ed letter , which the latter read
with a bur geoning grin.
“A ye, Minnie will have him sorted like a hand of whist.” He
put d own the let ter , nodding at it  as he raised his glass. “Who’ s
Richardson and why do you want to know about him?”
“Ezekiel Richar dson, Captain. Lancers, but detached for
intelligence work.”
“Oh, intelligence laddie, eh? One of your Black Chamber
lot?” Quarry wrinkled his no se, though it was not clear
whether this was a response to the notion of intelligence
laddies or the presence of a  dish of grated horseradish
accompanying the sardines.“No, I don’ t know the man well personally ,” Grey admitted,
and felt the same pang of deep unease that had been af flicting
him with increased frequency ever since his receipt of
W illiam’ s letter  from Quebec a week before. “I had been
introduced to him by Sir Geor ge, who knew his father , but we
didn’ t ta lk much  on that occasio n. I had heard a few things to
his credit—in a quiet sort of way—”
“That being, I suppose, the only way one wants to hear
anything about a man in that line of business. Huuuuuh!”
Harry drew a tre mendous gasp of air through his open mouth
and up into his s inuses, by the s ound of it, then coughed once
or tw ice, eyes watering, and shook his head in admiration.
“Fresh horseradish,” he croaked, taking another lar ge
spoonful. “V ery … huuuuuuh … fresh.”
“Quite. Anyway , I met him again in North Carolina, we
talked a bit mo re, and he asked my permission to approach
W illiam with a proposition regarding intelligencing.”
Quarry stopped, a slice of sardin e-laden toast halfway to his
mouth.
“Y ou don’ t mean to say you’ve  let him lure W illie of f into
the weeds?”
“That w as certa inly not my int ent,” Grey said, nettled. “I
had some reason to feel that the  suggestion would be good for
W illie; for one thing, it would get him out of North Carolina
and end with him attached to Howe’ s staf f.”
Quarry nodded, masticating with care, and swallowed
thickly .
“A ye, right. But now you have doubts?”
“I do . T he more  so because I can find very few people who
actually know Richardson well. Everyone who recommended
him to me in the first place did so by reason of someone else’ s
recommendation, it seems. Except for Sir Geor ge Stanley , who
is presen tly in Spain with my mother , and old Nigel Bruce,
who’ s rather inconveniently died in the meantime.”
“Thoughtless.”“Y es. I imagine I could root o ut more information, had I
time, but I hav en’ t. Dottie and I sail day after tomorrow .
W eather permitting,” he added, with a glance at the window .
“Ah, this would be where I c ome in,” Harry observed,
without animus. “What shall I d o with any information I find?
T ell Hal, or send it to you?”
“T ell Hal,” Grey said with a sigh. “God knows what the post
may be like in America, even with the Congress sitting in
Philadelphia. If anything seem s ur gent, Hal can expedite
matters here far more easily than I can there.”
Quarry nodded and refilled Grey’ s glass. “Y ou’re not
eating,” he observed.
“I lu nched late.” Quite late. In f act, he hadn’ t had luncheon
yet. He took a scone and spread it desultorily with jam.
“And Denys W ossname?” Quarry asked, flicking the letter
with a pickle fork. “Shall I inquire about him, too?”
“By all means. Though I may make better progress with him
on the America n end of the matter . That’ s at least where he
was last  seen.” He took a bite of scone, observing that it had
achieved that delicate balance b etween crumbliness and half-
set mortar that is the ideal of every scone, and felt some
stirrings of appetite return. He wondered whether he should
put Harry onto the worthy Jew  with the warehouse in Brest,
but decided not. The question of  French connections was more
than delicate, and while Harry was thorough, he was not
subtle.
“Right, then.” Harry selected a s lice of sponge cake, topped
it wi th two almo nd biscuits and a dollop of clotted cream, and
inserted the whole into his mouth. Where did he put it? Grey
wondered. Harry was thickset and burly , but never stout. No
doubt he  sweate d it of f during ener getic exercise in brothels,
that being his favorite sport despite advancing age.
How old  was Harry? he wondered suddenly . A few years
older than Grey , a few years y ounger than Hal. He’d never
thought about it, no more than he had with reference to Hal.The two of them  had always seemed immortal; he had never
once contemplat ed a future lacking either one of them. But the
skull beneath Harry’ s wig was n early hairless now—he had, in
his u sual way , re moved it to scra tch his head at some point and
set it casually back without regard to straightness—and the
joints of his fi ngers were swollen, though he handled his
teacup with his usual delicacy .
Grey felt of a sudden his own mortality , in the stif fening of
a thu mb, the twinge of a knee. Most of all, in the fear that he
might n ot be there to protect  W illiam, while he was still
needed.
“Eh?” s aid Harry , raising a brow at whatever showed on
Grey’ s face. “What?”
Grey smiled and shook his head, taking up his brandy glass
once more.
“T imor mortis conturbat me,”  he said.
“Ah,” said Quarry thoughtfully , and raised his own. “I’ll
drink to that.” THE PLOT THICKENS
 28 February , A.D.  1777
 London
 
Major General John Bur goyne,
to Sir Geor ge Germain
… I do not conc eive any expedition fr om the sea can be
so formi dable to the enemy , or  so effectual to close the
war , as an invasion fr om Canada by T iconder oga .
April 4, 1777
 on boar d HMS  T artar
 
H E’D T O LD DOTTIE that the T artar  was only a
twenty-eight-gun frigate and that she must therefore be modest
in her packing. Even so, he w as surprised to see the single
trunk—granted, a lar ge one—two portmanteaux, and a bag of
needlework that comprised her entire luggage.
“What, not a single flowered mantua?” he teased. “W illiam
won’ t know you.”
“Bosh,” she replied with her father ’ s talent for succinct
clarity . But she smiled a little —she was very pale, and he
hoped it wasn’ t incipient seasickness—and he squeezed her
hand an d went on holding it a ll the time until the last dark
sliver of England sank into the sea.
He was still am azed that she’d managed it. Hal must be
more fra il than he’d let on, to be bamboozled into allowing his
daughter to take ship for America, even under Grey’ s
protection and for the laudable purpose of nursing her
wounded brother . Minnie, of course, would not be parted from
Hal for a moment, though naturally worried sick for her son.
But that she had uttered no word of protest at this adventure …
“Y our m other ’ s in on it, is she?” he asked casually ,
provoking a startled look through a veil of windblown hair .“On what?” Dottie pawed at the blond spiderweb of her
hair , escaped en masse  from the inconsequent snood in which
she’d bo und it and dancing ov er her head like flames. “Oh,
help!”
He captured her hair , smoothing it tight to her head with
both hands, then gathering it at her neck, where he plaited it
expertly , to the admiration of a passing seaman, clubbed it, and
tied it up with the velvet ribbon that was all that remained
from the wreck of her snood.
“On what, forsooth,” he told t he back of her head, as he
finished the job. “On whatever  the dreadful enterprise is on
which you’ve embarked.”
She turned round and faced him, her stare direct.
“If you want t o describe rescuing Henry as a dreadful
enterprise, I agree entirely ,” sh e said with dignity . “But my
mother w ould naturally do anything she could to get him back.
So would you, presumably , or you wouldn’ t be here.” And
without waiting for a reply , she turned smartly on her heel and
made for the companionway , leaving him speechless.
One of the first ships of the spring had brought a letter with
further word of Henry . He was still alive, thank God, but had
been badly wounded: shot in the abdomen, and very ill in
consequence through the brut al winter . He had survived,
though, and been moved to Ph iladelphia with a number of
other British prisoners. The letter had been written by a fellow
of ficer there, another prisoner , but Henry had managed to
scribble a few words of love to his family at the bottom and
sign his name; the memory of  that straggling scrawl ate at
John’ s heart.
He was encouraged somewha t by the fact that it was
Philadelphia, though. He had met a prominent Philadelphian
while he was in France and had formed an immediate liking
for him that he thought wa s returned; there might be
something of use in the acquaintance. He grinned
involuntarily , recalling the instant of his meeting with the
American gentleman.He hadn’ t paused long in Paris, only long enough to make
inquiries after Percival Beauc hamp, who was not there.
Retired to his home in the country for the winter , he was told.
The Beauchamp family’ s main estate, a place called T r ois
Fleches , near Compiegne. And so he had bought a fur -lined
hat and a pair of seaboots, wrapped himself in his warmest
cloak, hired a horse, and set grimly of f into the teeth of a
howling gale.
Arriving mud-caked and frozen, he had been greeted with
suspicion, but the quality of his accoutrements and his title had
gained him entrance, and he had been shown to a well-
appointed parlor —with, thank God, an excellent fire—to await
the baron’ s pleasure.
He’d formed an expectation of the Baron Amandine on the
basis of Percy’ s  remarks, though he thought Percy had likely
been practicing upon him. He also knew how futile it was to
theorize in advance of observation, but it was inhuman not to
imagine.
In terms of imag ining, he’d done a good job of not thinking
of Percy during the last… was it eighteen years, nineteen? But
once it became  obvious that thinking of him was now a
professional as well as a personal necessity , he was both
surprised and disconcerted to find just how much he
remembered. He knew what Percy liked and therefore had
evolved a mental picture of Amandine in accordance.
The rea lity was dif ferent. The baron was an older man,
perhaps a few years Grey’ s se nior , short and rather plump,
with an open, pleasant face. W ell dressed, but without
ostentation. He greeted Grey w ith great courtesy . But then he
took Gre y’ s hand, and a small electric shock ran through the
Englishman. Th e baron’ s expression was civil, no more—but
the eyes  held a look of interest and avidity , and despite the
baron’ s unprepo ssessing appearance, Grey’ s flesh answered
the look.
Of course. Percy had told Amandine about him.Surprised and wary , he gave the brief explanation he had
prepared, only to be informed that, helas , Monsieur
Beauchamp was not at home but had gone with Monsieur
Beaumarchais to  hunt wolves in  Alsace. W ell, there was one
supposition confirmed, Grey th ought. But surely his lordship
would condesce nd to accept th e hospitality of T r ois Fleches ,
for the night at least?
He accepted this invitation w ith many expressions of
unworthy thanks, and having dof fed his outer clothes and
replaced his seaboots with Dottie’ s garish carpet slippers—
which made Amandine blink, though he at once praised them
exceedingly—he was propelled down a long corridor lined
with portraits.
“W e will take some refreshment in the library ,” Amandine
was say ing. “Plainly , you are perishing of cold and inanition.
But if you do not mind, allow me to introduce you en r oute  to
my other guest; we will invite him to join us.”
Grey had murmured acquiescence, distracted by the light
pressure of Amandine’ s hand, which rested on his back—
slightly lower than was usual.
“He is an Ameri can,” the baron was saying, as they reached
a do or toward th e end of the corridor , and his voice conveyed
considerable in the way of amusement in that word. He had a
most un usual voice—soft, warm, and somehow smoky , like
oolong tea with a lot of sugar .
“He enjo ys to spend some time each day in the solar ,” the
baron went on, pushing open the door and gesturing Grey
ahead of him. “He says it keeps him in a state of robust
health.”
Grey had been looking politely at the baron during this
introduction, bu t now turned to  speak to the American guest
and so was introduced to Dr . Franklin, reclining comfortably
in a padded chair , lit by a flood of sunlight, stark naked.
In the subsequent conversation—conducted with the
greatest aplomb on the part of all parties—he learned that itwas Dr . Franklin’ s invariant pra ctice to bathe in air every day
when possible, as skin breathed quite as much as did lungs,
taking in air and releasing impurities; thus the ability of the
body to defend itself from infection was substantially impaired
if the skin were constantly suf focated in insanitary clothing.
Throughout the introductions and conversation, Grey was
acutely aware of Amandine’ s eyes upon him, full of
speculation and amusement, and of the cumbersome feel of his
own insanitary clothing upon his doubtless suf focating skin.
It was an odd feeling, to meet a stranger and know that said
stranger was already privy to his deepest secret, that he in fact
—if Percy were not altogether lying, and Grey didn’ t think he
had been—shar ed it. It gave him a feeling of danger and
vertigo, as though he leaned out  from some sharp precipice. It
also bloody excited him, and that  alarmed him very much.
The American (now speaking pleasantly about an unusual
geological form ation he had seen on his journey from Paris;
had his lordship noticed it?) was  an elderly man, and his body ,
while in fair condition aside fr om patches of some purplish
eczema about the lower limbs,  was not an object of sexual
consideration. N onetheless, Gr ey’ s flesh was tight on his
bones, a nd not enough of his bl ood was in his head. He could
feel Amandine’ s eyes on him, frankly evaluating him, and
recalled all too clearly the exchange with Percy regarding
Percy’ s wife and his brother -in-law the baron: Both, on
occasion. T ogether?  H ad the baron’ s sister accompanied her
husband, or was she perhaps a t home? For one of the few
times in his life,  Grey wondered seriously whether he might be
a pervert.
“Shall w e join the good doctor in his beneficial practice, my
lord?”
Grey jerked his eyes away from  Franklin, to see the baron
beginning to peel of f his coat. Fortunately , before he could
think of  anything to say , Frankl in rose, remarking that he felt
he had had suf fi cient benefit for the day . “Though of course,”
he said, meeting Grey’ s eyes d irectly , with an expression ofthe deepest interest—and not a little amusement, too, “you
must no t allow my departure to prevent your own indulgence,
messieurs .”
The baron, impeccably polite, at once resumed his coat, and
saying he would join them for un aperitif  in the library ,
disappeared into the corridor .
Franklin had a silk dressing go wn; Grey held it for him,
watching the white, slightly sagging—but remarkably firm and
unwrinkled—buttocks disappea r as the American slowly
worked his arms into the sleeves, remarking as he did so upon
a touch of arthritis in his shoulder joints.
T urning and tying the sash, he fi xed an open gray gaze upon
Grey .
“Thank you, my lord,” he said. “I take it you were not
previously acquainted with Amandine?”
“No. I knew hi s… brother -in- law , Monsieur Beauchamp,
some years ago. In England,”  he added, for no particular
reason.
Something flickered in Franklin’ s eyes at the name
“Beauchamp,” causing Grey to ask, “Y ou know him?”
“I know the name,” Franklin replied equably . “Is
Beauchamp an Englishman, then?”
A numb er of astonishing possibilities had flashed through
Grey’ s m ind at that simple remark “ I kno w t he name ,”  but an
equally rapid evaluation of them decided him upon the truth as
safest, and he m erely said, “Y es,” in a tone indicating that this
was simple fact, no more.
Over the next few days, he and Franklin had had a number
of interesting conversations, in which the name of Percy
Beauchamp was conspicuous by its absence. When Franklin
returned to Paris, though, Grey  was left both with a genuine
liking for the elderly gentleman—who upon learning that Grey
was bound for the Colonies in the spring had insisted upon
giving him letters of introduction to several friends there—anda conviction that Dr . Franklin knew precisely what Percy
Beauchamp was and had been.
“Beg pardon, sir ,” said one of the T artar ’ s  hands, elbowing
Grey un -gently out of the way  and breaking his reverie. He
blinked, coming back to find that his ungloved hands had
turned to  ice in the wind and his cheeks were numb. Leaving
the sailo rs to their freezing ta sk, he went below , feeling a
peculiar small and shameful war mth at the memory of his visit
to T r ois Fleches .
 
3 May , 1777
 New Y ork
Dear Papa ,
I have just r eceived your Letter about Cousin Henry ,
and hope very m uch that you will be able to discover his
Wher eabouts and obtain his Release. If I can hear
Anything of him, I will do my best to let you know . Is ther e
anyone to whom I should addr ess Letters to you in the
Colonies? (If I hear of no Alternative, I shall send them in
car e of Mr . Sanders in Philad elphia, with a Copy for
Safety to Judge O’Keefe in Richmond.)
I ho pe you will excuse my own sad Delinquency in
corr esponding. I t does not—alas—stem fr om any pr ess of
ur gent Activity on my Part, but rather fr om  ennui and
lack of anything of Inter est about which to write. After a
tedious W inter immur ed in Quebec (though I did
considerable Hunting, and sho t a very vicious Thing
called a  Glutton), I finally r eceived my new or ders fr om
General Howe’ s Aide-de-camp in late Mar ch, when some
of Sir Guy’ s pe ople came back to the Citadel, and I
r eturned to New Y ork in consequence of them .
I never r eceived any W or d fr om Captain Randall-
Isaacs, nor have I been able to hear anything of him since
my R eturn. I fea r very much that  he may have been lost inthe Blizz ar d. If you know his people, per haps you would
send the m a Note with my Hopes for his Survival? I
would d o so myself, save that I am not sur e wher e to find
them, nor how to  phrase my Sentiments delicately , in case
they ar e  also in Doubt of his Fate, or worse, ar e not in
Doubt. Y ou will know what to say , though; you always do .
I was somewhat luckier in my own T ravels, having
suffer ed only minor Shipwr eck on my way downriver (we
came to Grief during the Portage at T iconder oga, being
fir ed upon by a Party of American Sharpshooters fr om
the Fort. No o ne was harmed, but the Canoes wer e
pepper ed with Shot and some Holes wer e unfortunately
not discover ed befor e we put back into the W ater ,
wher eupon two of them sank abruptly), this followed by
waist-deep Mud  and the r eem er gence of carnivor ous
Insects when I took to the R oads. Since my Return,
though, we have done little of inter est, though ther e ar e
constant rumors of what we  may do. Finding that
Inactivity chafes  mor e in what you may call a civilized
Setting ( though none of the Girl s in New Y ork can dance
at all), I volunte er ed to ride Dispatches, and have found
some Relief in that .
Y ester day , howe ver , I r eceived Or ders sending me back
to Cana da, ther e to join Gener al Bur goyne’ s Staff. Do I
detect your fine Italian Hand in  this, Papa? If so, thank
you!
Also, I have seen Captain Richar dson again; he came
to my Rooms last Night. I had not seen him for nearly a
Y ear , and was much surprised . He did not ask for an
Account of our Journey into Quebec (not surprising, as
the Information would be sadly out-of-date by now), and
when I asked after Randall-Isaacs, only shook his Head
and said he did not know .
He had hear d I had an Err and to carry special
Dispatches to V ir ginia, befor e  going to Canada, and
while of course Nothing must d elay me in that Errand,
had thought of asking me to do a small Service for him as
I r eturne d northwar d. Somewhat wary as a Result of mylong Sojourn in the fr ozen North , I asked what this might
be, a nd was told  that it was no mor e than the Delivery of
a cipher Message to a gr oup of Loyalist gentlemen in
V ir ginia, something that would be simple for me, owing to
my F amiliarity with the T errain; the job would not delay
me mor e than a Day or two, he assur ed me .
I said I would do it, but mor e because I should like to
see some Parts o f V ir ginia that I r emember with fondness
than because I should like to oblige Captain Richar dson.
I am somewhat wary of him .
Godspeed your travels, Papa, and please give my Love
to m y pr ecious D ottie, whom I lo ng to see. (T ell her I shot
forty-two Ermine in Canada; she shall have a Cloak
made of the Skins!)
Y our most affectionate Repr obate,
 W illiam
  PSALMS, 30
 October 6, 1980
 Lallybroch
 
B RIANNA ’S ARRANGEMENT with the Hydro Electric
Board p rovided for her working three days a week doing site
inspections, ove rseeing mainten ance and repair operations as
required, but allowed her to stay  at home doing reports, forms,
and othe r paperwork the other two days. She was trying to
decipher Rob Cameron’ s notes regarding the power feed from
the seco nd turbine at Loch Errochty , which appeared to have
been wr itten with grease pencil on the remains of the bag that
had held his lunch, when she became aware of sounds in the
laird’ s study across the hall.
She’d be en vagu ely conscious of a low humming for some
time, but insofar as she’d noticed the sound had put it down to
a fly trapped b y the window . The hum had now acquired
words, though, and a fly would  not have been singing “The
King of Love my Shepher d is,”  to the tune of “St. Columba.”
She froze, realizing that she’d  r ecognized  the  tune. The
voice was rough as coarse-grit sandpaper , and it cracked now
and then  … but it went up and  it went down, and it was, it
r eally  was, a song.
The song stopped abruptly in a fit of coughing, but after
some he avy-duty throat-clearing and cautious humming, the
voice sta rted up again, this time using an old Scottish tune she
thought was called “Crimond.”
“The Lor d’ s my Shepher d, I’ll not want.
 He makes me down to lie.
 In pastur es gr een; He leadeth me
 The quiet waters by .”
 
“The quiet waters by”  was repeated once or twice in
dif ferent keys, and then, with increased vigor , the hymn went
on:“My soul He doth r estor e again:
 And me to walk doth make
 W ithin the paths of righteousness,
 Even for His Name’ s own sake.”
 
She sat at her desk, shaking, tears running down her cheeks
and a handkerch ief pressed to h er mouth so he wouldn’ t hear .
“Thank you,” she whispered into its folds. “Oh, thank you!”
The singing stopped, but the humming resumed, deep and
contented. She got herself back  under control and wiped the
tears hastily away; it was nearly noon—he’d be coming in any
time to ask if she was ready for lunch.
Roger had had considerable doubt about the assistant
choirmaster ’ s po sition—doubt h e’d tried not to let her see, and
doubt sh e’d shared until he cam e home to tell her he’d been
given the Children’ s Choir as hi s main responsibility . Her own
doubt had flown then; children were at once totally uninhibited
about voicing the sorts of remar ks regarding social oddity that
their eld ers never would, and entirely accepting of such oddity ,
once they got used to it.
“How long did it take them to ask about your scar?” she’d
asked, w hen he’d come home smiling from his first solo
practice with the kids.
“I didn’ t  time it, but maybe thirty seconds.” He rubbed two
fingers lightly over the ragged mark across his throat, but
didn’ t st op smili ng. “Please, Mr . MacKenzie, what’ s happened
to your neck? W as ye hangit?”
“And what did you tell them?”
“T old them aye, I was hangit in  America, but I lived, praise
God. And a co uple of them had elder siblings who’d seen
High Plains Drifter  and told them about it, so that raised my
stock a good bit. I think they expect me to wear my six-guns to
the next practice, though, now the secret’ s out.” He gave her a
Clint Ea stwood one-eyed squint, which had made her burst out
laughing.She laughed now , remembering it, and just in time, for
Roger stuck his head in, saying,  “How many dif ferent versions
of the T wenty- third Psalm would ye say there are, set to
music?”
“T wenty-three?” she guessed, rising.
“Only six in the Presbyterian hymnal,” he admitted, “but
there are  metric al settings for it —in English, I mean—that go
back to 1546. There’ s one in the Bay Psalm Book  and another
in th e ol d Scottish Psalter , and any number of others here and
there. I’ ve seen the Hebrew ve rsion, too, but I think I’d best
not try that one  on the St. Stephen’ s congregation. Do the
Catholics have a musical setting?”
“Catholics have a musical setting for everything,” she told
him, lift ing her nose to snif f for  indications of lunch from the
kitchen. “But psalms we usually sing to a chant setting. I know
four dif ferent Gregorian chan t forms,” she informed him
loftily , “but there are lots more.”
“Y eah? Chant it for me,” he dem anded, and stopped dead in
the corridor , while she hastily tried to recall the words to the
T wenty-third Psalm. The simp lest chant form came back
automatically—she’d sung it so  often in childhood that it was
part of her bones.
“That’ s really something,” he sa id, appreciative, when she’d
finished. “Go through it a time or two with me later? I’d like
to do it f or the kids, just for them to hear . I think they could do
Gregorian chant really well.”
The kitchen door burst open and Mandy scampered out,
clutching Mr . Polly , a stuf fed cr eature who had started out life
as a bird of some kind, but now resembled a grubby terry-cloth
bag with wings.
“Soup, Mama!” she shouted. “Come eat soup!”
And soup they ate, Campbell’ s Chicken Noodle made from
the can, and che ese sandwiches  and pickles to fill the cracks.
Annie MacDona ld was not a fancy cook, but everything she
made was edible, and that was  saying a good deal, Briannathought, with memories of other meals eaten around dying
fires on soggy mountaintops or scraped as burnt of ferings out
of an ashy hearth. She cast a glance of deep af fection at the
gas-fired Aga cooker that kept the kitchen the coziest room in
the house.
“Sing me, Daddy!” Mandy , teeth coated in cheese and
mustard round her mouth, gave Roger an entreating grin.
Roger coughed on a crumb and cleared his throat.
“Oh, aye? Sing what?”
” ‘Free Bly Mice’!”
“All right. Y e’ll need to sing w ith me, though—keep me
from get ting of f .” He smiled at Mandy and beat time softly on
the table with the handle of his spoon.
“Three blind mice…” he sang,  and pointed the handle at
Mandy , who drew a heroic br eath and echoed, “Free, Bly ,
MICE!” at the top of her lungs—but with perfect rhythm.
Roger raised his eyebrows at Bree and continued the song, in
the same counterpoint fashion. After five or six rousing
repetitions, Man dy tired of it, and, with a brief “M’ scuse me,”
rose from the ta ble and took of f like a low-flying bumblebee,
caroming of f the doorjamb on her way out.
“W ell, s he’ s got a definite sense of rhythm,” Roger said,
wincing as a lou d thud echoed b ack from the corridor , “if not
of coord ination. Be a little whil e before we know if she’ s got
any pitc h, thoug h. Y our da had a great sense of rhythm, but he
couldn’ t hit the same note twice.”
“That re minded me a bit of what you used to do on the
Ridge,” she said, on impulse. “Singing a line of a psalm and
having the people answer it back.”
His face changed a little at mention of that time. He’d come
newly to his v ocation then, and the certainty of it had
transformed him. She’d never seen him so happy before—or
since, an d her heart turned over at the flash of longing she saw
in his eyes.He smiled, though, and, reaching out a napkin-covered
finger , wiped a smear of mustard from beside her own mouth.
“Old-fashioned,” he said. “Though they still do it that way
—the line-singi ng in kirk—on the Isles, and maybe in the
remoter bits of the Gaeltacht. The American Presbyterians
won’ t have it, though.”
“They won’ t?”
“It is pr oper to sing without par celing out the psalm line by
line,”  he quoted. “The practice of r eading the psalm, line by
line, wa s intr oduced in times of  ignorance, when many in the
congr egation could not r ead; ther efor e, it is r ecommended that
it be laid asid e, so far as convenient . That’ s from the
Constitution of the American Presbyterian Church.”
Oh, so you did t hink about being or dained while we wer e in
Boston , she thought but didn’ t say aloud.
“T imes of ignorance,” she repeated, instead. “I’d like to
know what Hiram Crombie would have had to say to that!”
He laughed, but shook his head.
“W ell, it’ s true enough; most of the folk on the Ridge
couldn’ t read. But I’d disagree with the notion that ye’d only
sing the  psalms that way because of ignorance, or a lack of
books.” He paused for thought, idly scraping up a stray noodle
and eating it.
“Singing all together , that’ s gran d, no doubt about it. But to
do it in that back-and-forth way—I think there’ s maybe
something about it that draws t he people closer , makes them
feel more involved in what they’re singing, what’ s truly
happening. Maybe it’ s only because they’ve got to concentrate
harder to remember each line.” He smiled briefly , and looked
away .
Please!  she thought passionately , w hether to God, the
Blessed V ir gin, Roger ’ s guardian angel, or all three. Y ou’ve got
to let him find a way!“I… meant to ask ye something,” he said, suddenly
dif fident.
“What’ s that?”
“W ell… Jemmy . He can  s ing . W ould ye— of course he’d go
to Mass with you still—but would ye mind if he was to come
along with me, as well? Only if he liked,” he added hastily .
“But I think he might enjoy being in the choir . And I’d… like
him to see I hav e a job, too, I suppose,” he added, with a half-
rueful smile.
“He’d love that,” Brianna said, remarking mentally to the
heavenly host, W ell, that was fast!  Because she saw at once—
and won dered whether Roger had, but she didn’ t think so—
that this of fered a graceful way by which she and Mandy could
attend the Presbyterian services, as well, without any overt
conflict between their two faiths.
“W ould you come with us to the  early Mass at St. Mary’ s?”
she asked. “Because then we c ould all just go across to St.
Stephen’ s together and see you and Jem sing.”
“Y es, of course.”
He stopped, the sandwich halfw ay to his mouth, and smiled
at her , his eyes green as moss.
“It’ s better , isn’ t it?” he said.
“Lots,” she said.
 
LA TER IN THE AFTERNOON, Roger called her across
to the study . There was a map of Scotland laid on his desk,
next to the open  notebook in which he was compiling the thing
they had  taken to calling—with a jokiness that barely covered
the aversion they felt in even talking about it—”The
Hitchhiker ’ s Guide,” after the BBC radio comedy .
“Sorry to interrupt,” he said. “B ut I thought we’d best do it
before Jem comes home. If ye’r e going back to Loch Errochty
tomorrow…” He put the point of his pencil on the blue blotchlabeled L.Err ochty . “Y ou could maybe get an accu rate bearing
for the tunnel, if ye’re not quite sure where it is. Or are you?”
She swallowed, feeling the remains of her cheese sandwich
stir unea sily at the memory of t he dark tunnel, the rocking of
the little train, of passing through… it.
“I d on’ t, but I have something  better . W ait.” She stepped
across to her own of fice and brought back the binder of Loch
Errochty’ s specs.
“Here are the drawings for the tunnel construction,” she
said, flipping the binder open and laying it on the desk. “I have
the blueprints, too, but they’re at the main of fice.”
“No, this is grea t,” he assured her , poring over the drawing.
“All I really wanted is the compass orientation of the tunnel to
the dam.” He g lanced up at her . “Speaking of that—have ye
been all across the dam itself?”
“Not all across,” she said slowly . “Just the east side of the
servicing bay . But I don’ t thin k—I mean, look.” She put a
finger on the drawing. “I hit it somewhere in the middle of the
tunnel, and the tunnel is nearly in a straight line with the dam.
If it runs  in a line—is that what you think it does?” she added,
looking at him curiously . He shrugged.
“It’ s a place to  start. Though I suppose engineers would
have a better -sounding word than ‘guess’?”
“W orking hypothesis,” she said dryly . “Anyway , if it does
run in a line, rather than just existing in random spots, I’d
probably have felt it in the dam if it was there at all. But I
could go back and check.” Even she could hear the reluctance
in her voice; he certainly did, a nd ran a light hand down her
back in reassurance.
“No. I’ll do it.”
“What?”
“I’ll do it,” he repeated mildly . “W e’ll see if I feel it, too.”
“No!” She straightened up abruptly . “Y ou can’ t. Y ou don’ t
—I mean, what if something…  happens? Y ou can’ t take thatkind of risk!”
He looked at her thoughtfully for a moment, and nodded.
“A ye, I suppose there’ s somethi ng of a risk. But small. I’ve
been all  over the Highlands, ke n, in my younger years. And
now and again I ’ve felt something queer pass through me. So
have most folk who live her e,” he added with a smile.
“Queerness is part of the place, aye?”
“Y es,” s he said, with a brief shudder at thought of water
horses, ban-sidhe , and Nuckelavees. “But you know what sort
of queerness this is—and you know damned well it can kill
you, Roger!”
“Didn’ t kill you,” he pointed  out. “Didn’ t kill us on
Ocracoke.” He spoke lightly , bu t she could see the shadow of
that jou rney on his face with the speaking. It hadn’ t killed
them—but it had come close.
“No. But—” She looked at him and had a deep, wrenching
instant i n which she experienced at once the feel of his long,
warm b ody next to hers in bed, the sound of his deep,
corncrake voice—and the cold silence of his absence. “No,”
she said, and made it apparent by her tone that she was
prepared to be as stubborn as necessary about it. He heard that
and gave a mild snort.
“All right,” he said. “Let me  just put it down, then.”
Comparing drawing and map, he chose a spot on the map that
might c orrespond roughly with  the center of the tunnel and
raised one dark eyebrow in question. She nodded, and he made
a light pencil mark in the shape of a star .
There was a lar ge, definite star , made in black ink, over the
site of the stone circle on Craigh  na Dun. Smaller ones in light
pencil at the sites of other stone circles. Someday , they might
have to visit those circles. But not yet. Not now .
“Ever been to Lewis?” Roger asked—casually , but not as
though it were an idle question.
“No, why?” she said warily .“The Outer Hebrides are part of the Gaeltacht,” he said.
“They do the line-singing in the Gaidhlig  on Lewis, and on
Harris, too. Don’ t know about Uist and Barra—they’re mostly
Catholic—but maybe. I’m thinking I’d like to go and see what
it’ s like these days.”
She could see the Isle of Lewis on the map, shaped like a
pancreas, of f the west coast of Scotland. It was a lar ge map.
Lar ge en ough fo r her to see the small legend Callanish Stones ,
on the Isle of Lewis.
She exhaled slowly .
“Fine,” she said. “I’ll go with you.”
“Y e’ve got work, haven’ t you?”
“I’ll take time of f.”
They looked at each other in silence for a moment. Brianna
broke away first, glancing at the clock on the shelf.
“Jem’ll be home soon,” she said , the prosaic nature of daily
life asserting itself. “I’d better start something for supper .
Annie b rought us a nice salmon that her husband took. Shall I
marinate it and bake it, or would you like it grilled?”
He shook his head and, rising, began to fold the map away .
“I won’ t be in to supper tonight. It’ s lodge night.”
 
THE PROVIN CIAL GRAND Masonic Lodge of
Inverness-shire included a number of local lodges, two of
them in Inverness. Roger had  joined Number 6, the Old
Inverness Lodge, in his early t wenties, but had not set foot
inside th e building in fifteen years, and did so now with a
mingled sense of wariness and anticipation.
It was, though, the Highlands—and home. The first person
he saw upon walking in was Ba rney Gaugh, who had been the
burly , smiling station agent when Roger had come to Inverness
on th e train, age d five, to live with his great-uncle. Mr . Gaughhad shrunk considerably , and his tobacco-stained teeth had
long since been replaced by equ ally tobacco-stained dentures,
but he recognized Roger at o nce and beamed in delight,
seizing him by the arm and towing him into a group of other
old men, half of whom likewise exclaimed over his return.
It was weird, he thought a bit later , as they settled to the
business of the lodge, doing the  routine rituals of the Scottish
Rite. Like a time warp , he thought, and nearly laughed out
loud.
There were dif ferences, aye, but they were slight—and the
feeling  of it… He coul d close his eyes  and, if he imagined the
haze of stubbed-out cigarettes to be the smoke of a hearth, it
could be the Cr ombies’ cabin on the Ridge, where the lodge
there ha d met. The close murmu r of voices, line and response,
and then  the relaxation, the shif ting of bodies, fetching of tea
and cof fee, as the evening became purely social.
There were a good many presen t—many more than he was
used to—and he didn’ t at firs t notice Lionel Menzies. The
headmaster was  across the roo m, frowning in concentration,
listening to something a tall bloke in shirtsleeves was saying to
him, lea ning close. Roger hesitated, not wanting to break in
upon their conversation, but the man talking to Menzies
glanced up, saw Roger , returned to his conversation—but then
stopped abruptly , gaze jerking back to Roger . T o his throat,
specifically .
Everyone in lodge had stared at the scar , whether openly or
covertly . He’d worn an open-collared shirt under his jacket;
there wa s no point in trying to  hide it. Better to get it over
with. The stranger stared at th e scar so openly , though, as
almost to be of fensive.
Menzies notice d his companion’ s inattention—he could
hardly not—and, turning, saw Roger and broke into a smile.
“Mr . MacKenzie,” he said.
“Roger ,” Roger said, smiling; first names were usual in
lodge, when they weren’ t being formally “brother so-and-so.”Menzies nodded and tilted his head, drawing his companion
into introduction. “Rob Cameron, Roger MacKenzie. Rob’ s
my cousin—Roger ’ s one of my parents.”
“I th ought so,” Cameron said, shaking him warmly by the
hand. “T hought you must be the  new choirmaster , I mean. My
wee nephew’ s in your infants’ choir—that’ll be Bobby
Hurragh. He told us all about ye over supper last week.”
Roger had seen the private glance exchanged between the
men as Menzies introduced him and thought that the
headmaster must also have mentioned him to Cameron, likely
telling h im about his visit to the school following Jem’ s Gaelic
incident. That didn’ t concern him at the moment, though.
“Rob Cameron,” he repeated, giving the man’ s hand a
slightly stronger squeeze than usual before releasing it, this
causing him to look startled. “ Y ou work for the Hydro, do
you?”
“A ye. What—”
“Y e’ll k en my wife, I think.” R oger bared his teeth in what
might—or might not—be taken for a genial smile. “Brianna
MacKenzie?”
Cameron’ s mouth opened, but no sound came out. He
realized this and closed it abruptly , coughing.
“I—uh. Y eah. Sure.”
Roger h ad sized the man up automatically as he’d grasped
his hand, and k new if it came to a fight it’d be a short one.
Evidently , Cameron knew it, too.
“She, uh …”
“She told me, aye.”
“Hey , it was no but a wee joke, right?” Cameron eyed him
warily , in case Roger meant to invite him to step outside.
“Rob?” said Menzies curiously . “What—”
“What’ s this, what’ s this?” cried old Barney , bustling up to
them. “Nay politics in lodge, la d! Y e want to talk your SNPshite to brother Roger , take it roond to the pub later .” Seizing
Cameron by the elbow , Barney t owed him of f to another group
across the room, where Cameron at once settled into
conversation, with no more than a brief glance back at Roger .
“SNP shite?” Roger asked, brows raised at Menzies. The
headmaster lifted one shoulder , smiling.
“Ken wh at auld Barney said. N ay politics in lodge!” It was
a Masonic rule, one of the m ost basic—no discussion of
religion or politics in lodge —and probably the reason
Freemasonry had lasted as long as it had, Roger thought. He
didn’ t care much about the Scot tish National Party , but he did
want to know about Cameron.
“W ouldn’ t dream  of it,” Roger said. “Our Rob’ s a political,
though, is he?”
“My apologies, brother Roger ,” Menzies said. The look of
humorous good nature hadn’ t deserted him, but he did look
somewhat apologetic. “I didn’ t mean to expose your family’ s
business, but I did tell my wife about Jem and Mrs.
Glendenning, and women being  what they are, and my wife’ s
sister living next door to Rob, R ob got to hear about it. He was
interested because of the Gaidhlig , ay e? And he does get
carried a way a bit. But I’m sure  he didn’ t mean to be seeming
too familiar with your wife.”
It dawned on Ro ger that Menzies had hold of the wrong end
of the stick rega rding Rob Cameron and Brianna, but he didn’ t
mean to  enlighten him. It wasn’ t only the women; gossip was
a w ay of life in the Highlands, a nd if word got round about the
trick Ro b and his mates had played on Bree, it might cause
more trouble for her at her work.
“Ah,” he said, seeking for a way to steer the conversation
away fro m Brian na. “Of course. The SNP’ s all for resurrecting
the Gaidhlig , aren’ t they? Does Cameron have it himself?”
Menzies shook his head. “His parents were among those
who didn’ t want their kids to speak it. Now , of course, he’ s
keen to learn. S peak of that—” He broke of f abruptly , eyeingRoger w ith his head to one sid e. “I had a thought. After we
spoke the other day .”
“A ye?”
“I wond ered, just. W ould ye m aybe think of doing a wee
class no w and then? Maybe o nly for Jem’ s form, maybe a
presentation for the school as a whole, if you felt comfortable
about it.”
“A class? What, in the Gaidhlig ?”
“Y es. Y o u know , very basic stuf f, but maybe with a word or
two abo ut the history , maybe a bit of a song—Rob said ye’re
choirmaster at St. Stephen’ s?”
“Assistant,” Roger corrected. “And I don’ t know about the
singing. But the Gaidhlig…  aye, maybe. I’ll think about it.”
 
HE FOUND BRIANNA W AITING up, in his study , a
letter from her parents’ box in her hand, unopened.
“W e don’ t have to read it tonigh t,” she said, putting it down,
rising, and coming to kiss him. “I just felt like I wanted to be
close to them. How was lodge?”
“Odd.” The business of the lodg e was secret, of course, but
he could tell her about Menzies and Cameron, and did.
“What’ s the SNP?” she asked, frowning.
“The Scottish National Party .” He skinned out of his coat,
and shiv ered. It  was cold, and there was no fire in the study .
“Came in during the late thirtie s, but didn’ t get really going
until quite recently . Elected eleven members to Parliament by
1974, though—respectable. As ye might gather from the name,
their goal is Scottish independence.”
“Respectable,” she repeated, sounding dubious.
“W ell, moderately . Like any party , they have their lunatic
elements. For what it’ s worth,” he added, “I don’ t think Rob
Cameron’ s one of them. Just your average arsehole.”That made her l augh, and the sound of it warmed him. So
did her body , which she pressed against his, arms round his
shoulders.
“That would be Rob,” she agreed.
“Menzies says he’ s interested in the Gaelic, though. If I
teach a class, I hope he doesn’ t turn up in the front row .”
“W ait—what? Now you’re teaching Gaelic classes?”
“W ell, maybe. W e’ll see about it.” He found himself
reluctant to think too much about Menzies’ s suggestion.
Maybe it was on ly the mention of singing. Croaking out a tune
to guide the kids was one thing; singing alone in public—even
if it was only schoolkids—was something else again.
“That can wait,” he said, and k issed her . “Let’ s read your
letter .”
 
June 2, 1777
 Fort T iconder oga
 
“Fort T i conderoga?” Bree’ s voice rose in astonishment, and
she all but jerk ed the letter from Roger ’ s hands. “What on
earth are they doing in Fort T iconderoga?”
“I don’ t know , b ut if ye’ll settle for a moment, we’ll maybe
find out.”
She didn’ t reply but came round the desk and leaned over ,
her chin propped on his shoulde r , her hair brushing his cheek
as she focused anxiously on the page.
“It’ s okay ,” he said, turning to kiss her cheek. “It’ s your
mum, and she’ s in an especially parenthetical mood. She
doesn’ t normally do that unless she’ s feeling happy .”
“W ell, yes,” Bree murmured, frowning at the page, “but…
Fort T iconderoga?”Dear Br ee, et al—
As you’ ve doubtless gather ed fr om the heading of
this letter , we ar e not (yet) in Scotland. W e had a certain
amount of difficulty on our voyage, involving a) the Royal
navy , in the person of one Captain Stebbings, who
attempted to pr ess your father and your cousin Ian (it
didn’ t work); b) an American  privateer (though her
captain, one—and one of him is mor e than enough—Asa
Hickman insists upon the mor e dignified “letter of
mar que” as the designation of his ship’ s mission, which is
essentially piracy but executed under the authority of the
Continental Congr ess); c) Rollo; and d) the gentleman I
mentioned to you earlier , named (I thought) John Smith,
but who turns out to be a dese rter fr om the Royal navy
named Bill (aka “Jonah,” and I begin to think they ar e
right) Marsden .
W ithout going into the details of the whole blood-
soaked far ce, I will mer ely r eport that Jamie, Ian, the
damned dog, and I ar e all fine. So far . I’m hoping this
state of affairs c ontinues for the next forty-two days, that
being when your father ’ s short-term militia contract
expir es. (Don’ t ask. Essential ly , he was saving Mr .
Marsden’ s neck,  as well as pr oviding for the welfar e of a
couple of dozen seamen inadver tently for ced into piracy .)
Once it does, w e pr opose to leave pr omptly on whatever
transport might be headed in the general dir ection of
Eur ope, pr ovided only that said transport is not captained
by A sa Hickman. W e may hav e to travel overland to
Boston in or der to do this, bu t so be it. (I suppose it
would b e inter esting to see what Boston looks like these
days. Th e Back Bay still being water and all, I mean. At
least the  Comm on will still be  ther e, if sporting rather
mor e cows than we wer e used to.)
The fort is under  the command of one General Anthony
W ayne, and I ha ve the uncomfortable feeling that I have
hear d Roger mention this man, using the nickname “Mad
Anthony .” I’m hoping this designation  either does or willr efer to his conduct in battle, rather than in
administration. So far he seems rational, if harried .
Being harried  is rational, as he i s expecting the mor e
or less imminent arrival of the British army . Meanwhile,
his chief engineer , a Mr . Jeduthan Baldwin (you’d like
him, I think. V ery ener getic fellow!), is building a Gr eat
Bridge, to connect the fort with  the hill they call Mount
Independence. Y our father is commanding a cr ew of
labor ers at work on this bridge; I can see him just now ,
fr om my  per ch on one of the for t’ s demilune batteries. He
stands out, rather , being not onl y twice the size of most of
the m en but one  of the few wearing a shirt. Most of them
in fact work nak ed, or wearing only a clout, because of
the heat and wet. Given the mosquitoes, I think this is a
mistake, but no one asked me .
No one asked my opinion of the hygienic pr otocols
involved in maintaining a pr oper sick bay and prisoner
accommodations, either (we br ought several British
prisoners with us, including the afor ementioned Captain
Stebbings who should by all rights be dead, but somehow
isn’ t), but I told them anyway . I am thus  pers ona non gra ta
with Lieutenant Stactoe, who thinks he is a sur geon but
isn’ t, and ther efor e am pr evented fr om tr eating the men
under his car e, most of whom  will be dead within a
month. Fortuna tely , no one car es if I tr eat the women,
childr en, or prisoners, and so I am usefully occupied,
ther e being a lot of them .
I ha ve a distinct notion that T iconder oga changed
hands at some p oint, pr obably mor e than once, but have
no i dea who took it fr om whom, or when. This last point
rather weighs upon my mind .
General W ayne has almost no r egular tr oops. Jamie
says the fort is seriously undermanned—and even I can
see this; half the barracks ar e vacant—and while the
occasional militia company comes in fr om New
Hampshir e or Connecticut, thes e normally enr oll for only
two or thr ee months, as we did . Even so, the men often
don’ t stay their full term; ther e is a constant meltingaway , and General W ayne com plains—publicly—that he
is r educed to (and I quote) “Negr oes, Indians, and
women.” I told him that he could do worse .
Jamie says also that the fort lacks half its guns, these
having been abstracted by a fat bookseller named Henry
Fox, who took th em two years ago and managed by some
feat of persistence and enginee ring to get them all the
way to Boston (Mr . Fox himself having to be conveyed in
a ca rt along wi th them, he weighing in excess of thr ee
hundr ed pounds. One of the officers her e, who
accompanied th at expedition, described it, to general
hilarity), wher e they pr oved very useful indeed in getting
rid of the British .
What’ s somewha t mor e worrying than these points is
the existence of a small hill, d ir ectly acr oss the water
fr om us, and no gr eat distance away . The Americans
named it Mount Defiance whe n they took T iconder oga
away fr o m the British in ‘75 (yo u r emember Ethan Allen?
“Surr ender in the name of the  Gr eat Jehovah and the
Continental  Congr ess!” I hear that poor Mr . Allen is
pr esently in England, being tried for tr eason, he having
rather overr eached himself by trying to take Montr eal on
the same terms), and that’ s rather apt—or would be, if the
fort was capable of putting men and artillery on top of it.
They ar en’ t, and I think the fa ct that Mount Defiance
commands the fort and is within cannon-shot of it
pr obably will not be lost on the British army , if and when
they get her e .
On the good side, it is almost summer . The fish ar e
jumping, and if ther e was any cotton, it would pr obably
r each m y waist. It rains fr equent ly , and I’ve never seen so
much ve getation in one place. (The air is so rich with
oxygen, I occasionally think I will pass out, and am
obliged to nip into the barracks  for a r estorative whiff of
dirty laundry and chamber pots (though the local usage is
“thunder -mug,” and for good r eason). Y our cousin Ian
takes fo raging parties out every few days, Jamie and anumber of the other men ar e accomplished fishermen,
and we eat extr emely well in consequence .
I wo n’ t g o on at gr eat length her e, as I’m not sur e when
or wher e I’ll be able to dispatch this letter via one or
mor e of Jamie’ s several r outes (we copy each letter , if
ther e’ s time, and send multiple copies, since even normal
corr espondence is chancy these days). W ith luck, it will
go with us to Edinbur gh. In the meantime, we send you
all o ur love. Jam ie dr eams now and then of the childr en;
I wish I did .
Mama
 
Roger sa t in silence for a mome nt, to be sure Bree had had
time to finish re ading the letter—though in fact she read much
faster th an he did; he thought she must be reading it twice.
After a moment, she sighed th rough her nose in a troubled
fashion and straightened up. He  put up a hand and rested it on
her w aist, and sh e covered it with her own. Not mechanically;
she gripped his fingers tightly—but absently . She was looking
across at the bookshelves.
“Those are new , aren’ t they?” s he asked quietly , lifting her
chin toward the right-hand bay .
“Y eah. I  sent to Boston for them . They came in a couple of
days ago.” The spines were new and shiny . History texts,
dealing with the American Revolution. Encyclopedia of the
American Revolution , by Mar k M. Boatner III. A Narrative of
a Revolutionary Soldier , by Joseph Plumb Martin.
“Do you want t o know?” he asked. He nodded at the open
box on the table before them, where a thick sheaf of letters still
remained unopened, on top of the books. He hadn’ t yet
brought himself to admit to Bree that he’d looked at the books.
“I mean —we know they probably made it out of T iconderoga
all right. There are a lot more letters.”
“W e know one o f them probably did,” Bree said, eyeing the
letters. “Unless… Ian knows, I mean. He could have…”Roger pulled his hand back and reached with determination
into the box. Bree drew in her breath, but he ignored it, taking
a handful of letters from the box and flipping through them.
“Claire, Claire, Claire, Jamie, C laire, Jamie, Jamie, Claire,
Jamie”—he stopped, blinking at a letter addressed in an
unfamiliar hand—”maybe you’re right about Ian; do you know
what his handwriting looks like?”
She shook her head.
“I don’ t  think I ever saw him write anything—though I
suppose he can  write,” she added, dubious.
“W ell …” Roger put down th e folded sheet, and looked
from the scatter of letters to the  bookshelf and thence to her .
She was slightly flushed. “What do you want to do?”
She considered, her eyes flicking to and from the
bookshelves and the wooden box.
“The books,” she said, decided , and strode across to the
shelves. “Which  one of these will tell us when T iconderoga
fell?”
 
Geor ge III, Rex Britannia
 to Lor d Geor ge Germain
… Bur go yne may command the corps to be sent fr om
Canada to Albany…
As s ickness and other contingencies must be expected,
I s hould think n ot above 7,000 effectives can be spar ed
over Lak e Champlain, for it would be highly imprudent to
run any risk in Canada… Indians must be employed .
  TICONDEROGA
 June 12, 1777
 Fort T iconderoga
 
I  FO UND JAMIE ASLEEP , lying naked on the pallet in
the tiny chambe r that had been allotted to us. It was at the top
of o ne of the stone-built barracks buildings, and thus hot as
Hades by mid-afternoon. Still, we were rarely in it during the
day , Jam ie being  out on the lake with the bridge builders, and I
being in the hos pital building or the family quarters— all of
those being equally hot, of course.
By t he same tok en, though, the stones held enough heat to
keep us warm in the cool eveni ngs—there was no fireplace—
and it did have a small window . There was a good breeze of f
the water toward sunset, and for a few hours between, say , ten
p.m. and two a.m., it was very pleasant. It was about eight now
—still l ight out and still toasty  in; sweat shone on Jamie’ s
shoulders and darkened the hair at his temples to a deep
bronze.
On the good side, our tiny attic w as the only room at the top
of the building and thus had som e modicum of privacy . On the
other ha nd, there were forty-eight stone steps up to our aerie,
and water must be carried up and slops carried down them. I’d
just hauled up a  lar ge bucket of water , and the half of it that
hadn’ t s pilled do wn the front of  my dress weighed a ton. I put
it do wn with a clunk that brought Jamie upright in an instant,
blinking in the gloom.
“Oh, sorry ,” I said. “I didn’ t mean to wake you.”
“No matter , Sassenach,” he sai d, and yawned immensely .
He sat up, stretched, then scr ubbed his hands through his
damp, loose hair . “Have ye had supper?”
“Y es, I ate with  the women. Have you?” He normally ate
with his crew of laborers when they stopped work, but
sometimes was summoned to dine with General St. Clair orthe othe r militia of ficers, and these quasi-formal occasions
took place much later .
“Mmm-hmm.” He lay back on the pallet and watched as I
poured w ater int o a tin washing  bowl and dug out a tiny lump
of ly e soap. I stripped to my shift and began meticulously
scrubbing, though the strong soap stung my already raw skin
and the fumes of it were enough to make my eyes water .
I rinsed my hands and arms, tossed the water out the
window—pausing briefly to sho ut, “Gardy-loo!” before doing
so—and started over .
“Why are ye doing that?” Jamie asked curiously .
“Mrs. W ellman’ s little boy has what I’m almost sure is the
mumps. Or ought that to be ar e  the mumps? I’ve never been
sure whether it’ s plural or not . In any case, I’m taking no
chance on transmitting it to you.”
“Is it a terrible thing, mumps? I thought only weans got it.”
“W ell, normally it is  a child’ s disease,” I said, wincing at the
touch of  the soap. “But when an adult gets it—particularly an
adult ma le—it’ s a more serious matter . It tends to settle in the
testicles. And unless you want  to hav e balls the size of
muskmelons—”
“Are ye sure ye have enough soap there, Sassenach? I could
go and find more.” He grinned at me, then sat up again and
reached for the limp strip of lin en that served us as a towel.
“Here, a nighean , let me dry your hands.”
“In a minute.” I wriggled out of my stays, dropped my shift,
and hun g it on t he hook by the  door , then pulled my “home”
shift over my head. It wasn’ t  quite as sanitary as having
sur gical scrubs to wear to work, but the fort absolutely crawled
with diseases, and I’d do whate ver I could to avoid bringing
them back to Jamie. He’d run into enough of them in the open.
I spl ashed the la st of the water over my face and arms, then
sat down on the pallet beside Jamie, giving a small cry as my
knee cracked painfully .“God, your poor hands,” he murmured, gently patting them
with the towel, then swabbing my face. “And your nose is
sunburnt, too, the wee thing.”
“What about yours?” Callused as they normally were, his
hands w ere still  a mass of nicks, scraped knuckles, splinters,
and blis ters, but he dismissed that with a brief flick of one
hand and lay back down again with a luxurious groan.
“Does y our knee  still hurt, Sasse nach?” he asked, seeing me
rub it. It hadn’ t ever quite recovered from being strained
during our adventures on the Pitt , and climbing stairs
provoked it.
“Oh, just part of  the general decline,” I said, trying to make
a j oke of it. I flexed my right arm, gingerly , feeling a twinge in
the elbo w . “Thin gs don’ t bend q uite so easily as they used to.
And other things hurt. Sometimes I think I’m falling apart.”
Jamie closed one eye and regarded me.
“I’ve felt like that since I was about twenty ,” he observed.
“Y e get used to it.” He stretche d, making his spine give of f a
series of  muf fle d pops, and held  out a hand. “Come to bed, a
nighean . Nothing hurts when ye love me.”
He was right; nothing did.
 
I FELL BRIEFL Y ASLEEP , but woke by instinct a
couple o f hours later to go and check the few patients who
needed an eye kept on them. These included Captain
Stebbings, who had—to my surprise—stoutly refused either to
die o r to  be doctored by anyone but me. That hadn’ t gone over
well with Lieutenant Stactoe or the other sur geons, but as
Captain Stebbi ngs’ s demand was backed up by the
intimidating pre sence of Guinea Dick—pointed teeth, tattoos,
and all—I remained his personal sur geon.
I found the captain mildly feverish and wheezing audibly ,
but asleep. Guinea Dick rose from his own pallet at the soundof my step, looking like a particularly fearsome manifestation
of someone’ s nightmare.
“Has he  eaten?” I asked softly ,  laying my hand lightly on
Stebbings’ s wri st. The captain’ s tubby form had shrunk
considerably; ev en in the gloom , I could easily see the ribs I’d
once had to grope for .
“Him has little soup, ma’am,” the African whispered, and
moved a  hand toward a bowl on the floor , covered with a
handkerchief to  keep out the roaches. “Like you say . I give
him more when he wake to piss.”
“Good.” Stebbings’ s pulse was a little fast, but not alarming,
and when I lean ed over him and  inhaled deeply , I detected no
scent of gangren e. I’d been able  to withdraw the tube from his
chest two days b efore, and while there was a slight exudation
of pus from the site, I thought it a local infection that would
likely clear without assistance. I t would have to; I had nothing
to assist it.
There was almost no light in th e hospital barracks, only a
rush-dip near the door and wha t little illumination came from
the f ires in the courtyard. I couldn’ t judge of Stebbings’ s color ,
but I saw the flash of white as he half-opened his eyes. He
grunted when he saw me, and closed them again.
“Good,” I said again, and left him in the tender char ge of
Mr . Dick.
The Guinea man had been of fered the chance to enlist in the
Continental army but had refused, choosing to become a
prisoner of war with Captain Stebbings, the wounded Mr .
Ormiston, and a few other seamen from the Pitt .
“I a m English, free man,” he had said simply . “Prisoner
maybe for a little, but free man. Seaman, but free man.
American, maybe not free man.”
Maybe not.
I le ft the hosp ital barracks, called in at the W ellmans’
quarters to check on my case of mumps—uncomfortable, but
not dangerous—and then strolled slowly across the courtyardunder a rising m oon. The evening breeze had died down, but
the n ight air had  some coolness in it, and moved by impulse, I
climbed to the demilune battery that looked across the narrow
end of Lake Champlain to Mount Defiance.
There were two guards, but both were fast asleep, reeking of
liquor . It wasn’ t unusual. Moral e at the fort was not high, and
alcohol was easily available.
I stood by the wall, a hand on one of the guns, its metal still
faintly warm from the day’ s heat. W ould we get away , I
wondered, before it was hot from  being fired? Thirty-two days
to go , an d they couldn’ t go fast enough to suit me. Aside from
the m enace of the British, the fort festered and stank; it was
like living in a cesspool, and I could only hope that Jamie, Ian,
and I would leave it without having contracted some vile
disease or having been assaulted by some drunken idiot.
I hea rd a  faint step behind me an d turned to see Ian himself,
tall and slender in the glow of the fires below .
“Can I speak to ye, Auntie?”
“Of course,” I said, wondering at this unaccustomed
formality . I stood aside a little,  and he came to stand beside
me, looking down.
“Cousin Brianna would have a thing or two to say about
that,” he said, with a nod through the half-built bridge below .
“So has Uncle Jamie.”
“I kn ow .” Jamie had been saying  it for the last two weeks—
to the fort’ s new commander , Arthur St. Clair , to the other
militia c olonels, to the engineers, to anyone who would listen,
and not a few who wouldn’ t. The folly of expending vast
amounts of labor and material i n building a bridge that could
be easily  destroyed by artillery on Mount Defiance was clear
to everyone except those in command.
I sig hed. It wasn ’ t the first time I’d seen military blindness,
and I was very much afraid it wouldn’ t be the last.
“W ell, le aving that aside… what did you want to speak to
me about, Ian?”He t ook a deep breath and turned toward the moonlit vista
over the lake.
“D’ye k en the Huron who came to the fort a wee while
past?”
I did . T wo weeks before, a party of Huron had visited the
fort, and Ian had spent an evening smoking with them,
listening to their stories. Some of these concerned the English
General Bur goy ne, whose hospitality they had previously
enjoyed.
Bur goyne was actively soliciting the Indians of the Iroquois
League, they said, spending a gr eat deal of time and money in
wooing them.
“He says his Indians are his secret weapon,” one of the
Huron had said, laughing. “He  will unleash them upon the
Americans, to burn like lightning, and strike them all dead.”
Knowing what I did of Indians in general, I thought
Bur goyne might  be a trifle overoptimistic. Still, I preferred not
to think  what might happen if he did  succeed in persuading
any number of Indians to fight for him.
Ian w as still star ing at the distant hump of Mount Defiance,
lost in thought.
“Be tha t as it may ,” I said, calling the meeting to order .
“Why are you telling me this, Ian? Y ou should tell Jamie and
St. Clair .”
“I di d.” The cry of a loon came across the lake, surprisingly
loud and eerie. They sounded like yodeling ghosts, particularly
when more than one of them was at it.
“Y es? W ell, then,” I said, slightly impatient. “What did you
want to talk to me about?”
“Babies,” he said abruptly , straightening up and turning to
face me.
“What?” I said, startled. He’d been quiet and moody ever
since the Hurons’ visit, and I a ssumed that something they’dtold him had c aused it—but I couldn’ t imagine what they
might have said to him regarding babies.
“How they’re made,” he said do ggedly , though his eyes slid
away fro m mine . Had there been  more light, I was sure I could
have seen him blushing.
“Ian,” I said, after a brief pause. “I decline to believe that
you don’ t know how babies a re made. What do you r eally
want to know?”
He s ighed, but a t last he looked at me. His lips compressed
for a moment, then he blurted, “I want to know why I canna
make one.”
I r ubbed a knuc kle across my lips, disconcerted. I knew—
Bree had told me—that he had had a stillborn daughter with
his M ohawk wife, Emily , and t hat she had then miscarried at
least tw ice. Also  that it was this failure that had led to Ian’ s
leaving the Mohawk at Snaketown and returning to us.
“Why do  you think it might be you?” I asked bluntly . “Most
men blame the woman when a child is stillborn or miscarried.
So do most women, for that matter .”
I had blamed both myself and Jamie.
He made a small Scottish noise in his throat, impatient.
“The Mohawk don’ t. They sa y when a man lies wi’ a
woman, his spirit does battle w ith hers. If he overcomes her ,
then the child is planted; if not, it doesna happen.”
“Hmm,” I said. “W ell, that’ s one way of putting it. And I
wouldn’ t say they’re wrong, either . It can  be something to do
with either the man or the woman—or it may be something
about them together .”
“A ye.” I heard h im swallow before he went on. “One of the
women wi’ the Huron was Kah nyen’kehaka—a woman from
Snaketown, and she kent me, from when I was there. And she
said to me that Emily has a child. A live child.”
He had been moving restlessly from foot to foot as he
talked, cracking his knuckles. Now he stilled. The moon waswell up and shone on his face, making hollows of his eyes.
“I’ve been thinking, Auntie,” he said softly . “I’ve been
thinking for a verra long tim e. About her . Emily . About
Y eksa’a. The—my wee bairn.” He stopped, big knuckles
pressed hard into his thighs, but he gathered himself again and
went on, more steadily .
“And ju st lately  I have been thinking something else. If —
when ,” he corrected, with a glance over one shoulder , as
though e xpecting Jamie to pop u p through a trap, glaring, “we
go to  Sc otland, I dinna ken how things might be. But if I—if I
was to wed again, maybe, either there or here…” He looked up
at me suddenly , his face old wi th sorrow but heartbreakingly
young with hope and doubt.
“I couldna take a lass to wife i f I kent that I should never
give her live bairns.”
He swallowed again, looking down.
“Could ye maybe … look at my parts, Auntie? T o see if
maybe there’ s aught amiss?” His  hand went to his breechclout,
and I stopped him with a hasty gesture.
“Perhaps that can wait a bit, Ian . Let me take a history first;
then we’ll see if I need to do an examination.”
“Are ye sure?” He sounded surp rised. “Uncle Jamie told me
about th e sperm ye showed him . I thought maybe mine might
not be quite right in some way .”
“W ell, I’ d need a microscope to see, in any case. And while
there ar e  such things as abnormal sperm, usually when that’ s
the case , conception doesn’ t take place at all. And as I
understand it, that wasn’ t the d if ficulty . T ell me—” I didn’ t
want to ask, but there was no way round it. “Y our daughter .
Did you see her?”
The nuns had given me my stillborn daughter . ” It’ s better if
you see,”  they had said, gently insistent.
He shook his head.“Not to say so. I mean—I saw t he wee bundle they’d made
of her , wrapped in rabbit skin. They put it up high in the fork
of a red cedar . I  went there at night, for some time, just to …
well. I did think of taking the bundle down, of unwrapping her ,
just to see her face. But it would ha’ troubled Emily , so I
didn’ t.”
“I’m sure you’re right. But did… oh, hell, Ian, I’m so sorry
—but did your wife or any of the other women ever say that
there was anything visibly wrong with the child? W as she…
deformed in any way?”
He glanced at m e, eyes wide wit h shock, and his lips moved
soundlessly for a moment.
“No,” h e said at last, and there was both pain and relief in
his voice. “No. I asked. Emily didna want to talk about her ,
about Iseabail—that’ s what I would ha’ named her , Iseabail
—” he explained , “but I asked and wouldna stop until she told
me what the baby looked like.
“She w as perfect,” he said softly , looking down at the
bridge, where a chain of lant erns glowed, reflected in the
water . “Perfect.”
So had Faith been. Perfect.
I put a hand on his forearm, ropy with hard muscle.
“That’ s good,” I said quietly . “V ery good. T ell me as much
as you can, then , about what happened during the pregnancy .
Did you r wife have any bleedin g between the time you knew
she was pregnant and when she gave birth?”
Slowly I led him  through the hope and fear , the desolation
of each loss, suc h symptoms as he could remember , and what
he knew  of Emily’ s family; had there been stillbirths among
her relations? Miscarriages?
The moon passed overhead and started down the sky . At last
I stretched and shook myself.
“I can’ t be positive,” I said. “But I think it’ s at least possible
that the trouble was what we call an Rh problem.”“A what ?” He was leaning against one of the big guns, and
lifted his head at this.
There was no point in trying  to explain blood groups,
antigens, and antibodies. And it wasn’ t actually all that
dif ferent from the Mohawk explanation of the problem, I
thought.
“If a woman’ s blood is Rh-negative, and her husband’ s
blood is Rh-positive,” I explain ed, “then the child will be Rh-
positive, becau se that’ s dominant—never mind what that
means, but the c hild will be positive like the father . Sometimes
the first  pregnancy is all right, and you don’ t see a problem
until the next time—sometimes it happens with the first.
Essentially , the mother ’ s body produces a substance that kills
the child. But , if an Rh-negative woman should have a child by
an R h-negative man, then the fe tus is always Rh-negative, too,
and there’ s no p roblem. Since you say Emily has had a live
birth, th en it’ s possible that her new husband is Rh-negative,
too.” I knew absolutely nothing about the prevalence of
Rhesus-negative blood type in  Native Americans, but the
theory did fit the evidence.
“And if that’ s so ,” I finished, “t hen you shouldn’ t have that
problem with another woman—most European women are Rh-
positive, though not all.”
He s tared at me for so long that  I wondered whether he had
understood what I’d said.
“Call it fate,” I s aid gently , “or call it bad luck. But it wasn’ t
your fault. Or hers.” Not mine. Nor Jamie’ s.
He nodd ed, slowly , and leaning forward, laid his head on
my shoulder for a moment.
“Thank ye, Auntie,” he whispered, and lifting his head,
kissed my cheek.
The next day , he was gone. THE GREA T DISMAL
 June 21, 1777
 
W ILLIAM MAR VELED A T THE road. T rue, there
were only a few miles of it, bu t the miracle of being able to
ride straight into the Great Dismal, through a place where he
vividly recalled having had to swim his horse on a previous
visit, all the while dodging snapping turtles and venomous
snakes—the convenience of it was astonishing. The horse
seemed of similar mind, picking up its feet in a lighthearted
way , outpacing the clouds of tiny yellow horseflies that tried to
swarm them, the insects’ eyes glinting like tiny rainbows when
they drew close.
“Enjoy it while you can,” W illia m advised the gelding, with
a brief scratch of the mane. “Muddy going up ahead.”
The road  itself, while clear of the sweet gum saplings and
straggling pines  that crowded its edge, was muddy enough, in
all truth. Nothing like the treacherous bogs and unexpected
pools th at lurked beyond the scrim of trees, though. He rose a
little in the stirrups, peering ahead.
How far? he wo ndered. Dismal T own stood on the shore of
Lake Dr ummond, which lay in the middle of the swamp. He
had nev er come  so far into the Great Dismal as he was now ,
though, and had no notion of its actual size.
The road didn’ t go so far as the lake, he knew that. But
surely there was a trace to follo w; those inhabitants of Dismal
T own must come and go on occasion.
“W ashington,” h e repeated under his breath. “W ashington,
Cartwright, Har rington, Carver . ” Those were the names he’d
been given by Captain Richardson, of the Loyalist gentlemen
from Dismal T own; he’d committed them to memory and
punctiliously bu rned the sheet of paper containing them.
Having done so, though, he was  seized by irrational panic lest
he for get the nam es, and had bee n repeating them to himself at
intervals throughout the morning.It was well pas t noon now , and the wispy clouds of the
morning had been knitting themselves up into a low sky the
color of  dirty wool. He breathe d in slowly , but the air didn’ t
have th at pric kling scent of impending downpour—yet.
Besides the ripe reek of the swamp, rich with mud and rotting
plants, h e could smell his ow n skin, salty and rank. He’d
washed his hands and head as he  could but hadn’ t changed nor
washed his clothes in two week s, and the rough hunting shirt
and homespun breeches were beginning to itch considerably .
Though perhaps  it wasn’ t just  dried sweat and dirt. He
clawed viciously at a certain crawling sensation in his
breeches. He’d swear he’d picked up a louse in the last tavern.
The louse, if th ere was one, wisely desisted, and the itch
died. Relieved, W illiam breathed deep and noticed that the
swamp’ s scents had grown mor e pungent, the sap of resinous
trees ris ing in answer to the oncoming rain. The air had
suddenly assumed a muf fled quality that deadened sound. No
birds san g now;  it was as though he and the horse rode alone
through a world wrapped in cotton wool.
W illiam didn’ t mind being alone. He’d grown up essentially
alone, without brothers or sister s, and was content in his own
company . Besides, solitude, he told himself, was good for
thinking.
“W ashington, Cartwright, Harrington, and Carver ,” he
chanted softly . But beyond the names, there was little to think
of with regard to his present erra nd, and he found his thoughts
turn in a more familiar direction.
What he thought of most fre quently on the road was
women, and he touched the pocket under the tail of his coat,
reflective. The pocket would ho ld one small book; it had been
a choice on this journey between the New T estament his
grandmother had given him or his treasured copy of Harris’ s
List of Covent Gar den Ladies . No great contest.
When W illiam was sixteen, his father had caught him and a
friend engrossed  in the pages of his friend’ s father ’ s copy of
Mr . Harris’ s notorious guide to the splendors of London’ swomen of pleasure. Lord John  had raised an eyebrow and
flipped slowly through the book, pausing now and then to raise
the other eyebrow . He had then closed the book, taken a deep
breath, administered a brief lecture on the necessary respect
due to the female sex, then told the boys to fetch their hats.
At a  discreet and  elegant house at the end of Brydges Street,
they too k tea with a beautifully  gowned Scottish lady , a Mrs.
McNab, who appeared to be on  the friendliest of terms with
his father . At th e conclusion of the refreshment, Mrs. McNab
had rung a small brass bell, and…
W illiam shifted in his saddle, s ighing. Her name had been
Mar gery , and he had written a perfervid panegyric to her . Had
been madly in love with her .
He’d gone back, after a fever ed week of reckoning his
accounts, with the fixed intent of proposing marriage. Mrs.
McNab had greeted him kindly , listened to his stumbling
professions with the most sympathetic attention, then told him
that Ma r gery would, she was s ure, be pleased with his good
opinion but was, alas, occupied just this minute. However ,
there was a swe et young lass named Peggy , just come from
Devonshire, who seemed lonely and would doubtless be so
pleased to have a bit of convers ation whilst he was waiting to
speak with Mar gery…
The realization that Mar gery was just that minute doing
with someone else what she’d  done with him  wa s such a
staggering blow that he’d sat staring openmouthed at Mrs.
McNab, rousing only when Peggy came in, fresh-faced, blond,
and smiling, and with the most remarkable—
“Ah!” W illiam slapped at the back of his neck, stung by a
horsefly , and swore.
The hors e had slowed without h is noticing, and now that he
did  notice…
He swore again, louder . The road had disappeared.
“How t he bloody hell did that  hap pen?” He’d spoken
loudly , b ut his voice seemed small, muted by the staggeredtrees. T he flies had followed him; one bit the horse, who
snorted and shook his head violently .
“Come on, then,” W illiam said, more quietly . “Can’ t be far
of f, can it? W e’ll find it.”
He reine d the horse’ s head arou nd, riding slowly in what he
hoped w as a wide semicircle that might cut the road. The
ground was damp here, rumpled  with tussocks of long, tangled
grass, but not boggy . The horse’ s feet left deep curves where
they stru ck in the mud, and thick flecks of matted mud and
grass fle w up, sticking to the horse’ s hocks and sides and
W illiam’ s boots.
He had been heading north-northwest…. He glanced
instinctively at the sky , but no help to be found there. The
uniform soft gray was altering, here and there a heavy-bellied
cloud bulging through the muf fling layer , sullen and
murmurous. A faint rumble of thunder reached him, and he
swore again.
His watch chimed softly , the sound strangely reassuring. He
reined u p for a m oment, not wanting to risk dropping it in the
mud, and fumbled it out of his watch pocket. Three o’clock.
“Not so bad,” h e said to the horse, encouraged. “Plenty of
daylight left.” Of course, this w as a mere technicality , given
the atmo spheric conditions. It might as well have been the far
side of twilight.
He looked up at  the gathering clouds, calculating. No doubt
about it:  it was going to rain, and soon. W ell, it wouldn’ t be
the first time he and the horse had gotten wet. He sighed,
dismounted, and unrolled his canvas bed-sack, part of his army
equipment. He got up again and , with the canvas draped round
his shoulders, his hat unlaced and pulled well down, resumed a
dogged search for the road.
The first drops came pattering down, and a remarkable
smell ro se from  the swamp in response. Earthy , rich, green,
and … fecund, somehow , as though the swamp stretched itself,
opening its body in lazy pleasure to the sky , releasing its scentlike the perfume that wafts from an expensive whore’ s
tumbling hair .
W illiam reache d by reflex for the book in his pocket,
meaning to write down that poetic thought in the mar gins, but
then shook his head, muttering, “Idiot,” to himself.
He wasn’ t really worried. He had, as he’d told Captain
Richardson, been in and out of the Great Dismal many times.
Granted, he’d not been here by himself; he and his father had
come no w and then with a hun ting party or with some of his
father ’ s Indian friends. And some years before. But—
“Shit!” he said. He’d pressed th e horse through what he’d
hoped w as the thicket edging the road, only to find more
thicket—dark clumps of hairy-barked juniper , aromatic as a
glass of Holland gin in the rain. No room to turn. Muttering,
he kneed the horse and pulled back, clicking his tongue.
Uneasily , he saw that the imprints of the horse’ s hooves
were filling slowly with water . Not from the rain; the ground
was wet. V ery w et. He heard th e sucking noise as the horse’ s
back ho oves struck bog, and by reflex he leaned forward,
ur gently kneeing the horse in the ribs.
Caught wrong-footed, the horse stumbled, caught himself—
and then the horse’ s hind legs gave way suddenly , slipping in
the mud, and h e flung up his head, whinnying in surprise.
W illiam, taken equally unaware, bounced over his rolled bed-
sack and fell of f, landing with a splash.
He rose  up like a scalded cat, panicked at the thought of
being sucked down into one of the quaking bogs that lurked in
the Great Dismal. He’d seen the skeleton of a deer caught in
one once, nothing still visible sa ve the antlered skull, half sunk
and twisted to one side, its long yellow teeth showing in what
he’d imagined to be a scream.
He s plashed hastily toward a t ussock, sprang atop it, and
crouched there like the toad-king, heart hammering. His horse
—was it trapped, had the bog got it?The geld ing was  down, thrashing in the mud, whinnying in
panic, muddy water flying in sheets from its struggles.
“Jesus.” He clutched handsful of the rough grass, balanced
precariously . W as it bog? Or only a slough?
Gritting his teeth, he stretched one long leg out, gingerly
setting foot on t he agitated surface. His boot pressed down…
down… He pulled it hastily back, but it came readily , with a
ploop!  of mud  and water . Again… yes, there was a bottom!
All right , now the other… He stood up, arms waving storklike
for balance, and…
“All right!” he said, breathless. A slough—no more, thank
God!
He splas hed toward the horse and snatched up the canvas
bedsack, loosene d in the fall. Flinging it over the horse’ s head,
he w rapped it hastily round the animal’ s eyes. It was what you
did for a horse too panicked to leave a burning barn; his father
had show n him how when the b arn at Mount Josiah had been
struck by lightning one year .
Rather to his astonishment, it seemed to help. The horse was
shaking its head to and fro but had quit churning its legs. He
seized the bridle and blew into the horse’ s nostrils, talking
calming nonsense.
The horse snorted, spraying him with droplets, but seemed
to collec t itself.  He pulled its head up, and it rolled onto its
chest wi th a great swash of muddy water , and in almost the
same m otion, sur ged heavily to its feet. It shook itself from
head to tail, the canvas flappi ng loose and mud showering
everything within ten feet of the animal.
W illiam was much too happy to care. He seized the end of
the canvas and pulled it of f, then took hold of the bridle.
“Right,” he said, breathless. “Let’ s get out of this.”
The horse was not paying attention; its dish-faced head
lifted suddenly , turned to the side.
“What—”The hug e nostrils flared red, and with an explosive grunt,
the hors e char ged past him, jer king the reins from his hands
and knocking him flat in the water—again.
“Y ou frigging bastar d!  What the devil—” W illiam stopped
short, crouched in the mud. Something long, drab, and
extremely fast passed less than two paces from him.
Something big.
His hea d jerked round, but it was already gone, silent in
pursuit of the blundering horse, whose panicked flight he
could he ar receding in the distance, punctuated by the crashing
of broken brush and the occasional clang of shed equipment.
He swallowed. They hunted now and then together , he’d
heard. Catamounts. In pairs.
The back of his neck prickled, and he turned his head as far
as he could manage, afraid to m ove more for fear of drawing
the attention of anything that might be lurking in the dark
tangle of gum t rees and underbrush behind him. No sound,
save the increasing patter of raindrops on the swamp.
An egre t burst white from the trees on the far side of the
slough, nearly stopping his heart. He froze, breath held until he
thought he’d suf focate in the  ef fort to hear , but nothing
happened, and at last he breathed and rose to his feet, the skirts
of his coat plastered to his thighs, dripping.
He was standing  in a peat bog; t here was spongy vegetation
under his feet, b ut the water rose  up over the tops of his boots.
He wasn ’ t sinkin g, but he could n’ t pull the boots out with his
feet still  in them and was oblige d to draw his feet out one at a
time, th en wren ch the boots fr ee and squelch toward higher
ground in his stockings, boots in his hands.
The sanctuary of a rotted log reached, he sat down to empty
the w ater out of his boots, grimly reckoning his situation as he
put them on again.
He was  lost. In a swamp known to have devoured any
number of people, both Indian and white. On foot, without
food, fire, or any shelter beyond  the flimsy protection of feredby t he canvas bedsack—this the standard army issue, a literal
sack made of ca nvas with a slit in it, meant to be stuf fed with
straw o r dry grass—both the se substances conspicuously
lacking in his present circu mstances. All he possessed
otherwise was the contents of h is pockets, this consisting of a
clasp knife, a lead pencil, a very soggy bit of bread and cheese,
a fil thy handkerchief, a few co ins, his watch, and his book,
also doubtless soaked. He reached to check, discovered that
the watch had stopped and the  book was gone, and swore,
loudly .
That see med to help a bit, so h e did it again. The rain was
falling h eavily now , not that it mattered in the slightest, given
his state. The louse in his breeches, evidently waking to
discover its habitat flooded, set of f on a determined march to
discover drier quarters.
Muttering blasphemies, he stood up, draped the empty
canvas over his head, and limped of f in the direction in which
his horse had departed, scratching.
 
HE NEVER FOUND THE hor se. Either the catamount
had killed it, so mewhere out of sight, or it had escaped to
wander alone through the swamp. He did find two items shed
from its saddle: a small waxed p acket containing tobacco, and
a f rying pan. Ne ither of these seemed immediately useful, but
he was loath to part with any remnant of civilization.
Soaked to the skin and shivering  under the scanty shelter of
his canvas, he c rouched among the roots of a sweet gum tree,
watching lightning split the night sky . Each blue-white flash
was blin ding, ev en through closed eyelids, each jolt of thunder
shaking air gone sharp as a k nife with the acrid smell of
lightning and burnt things.
He had grown a lmost accustomed to the cannonade when a
tremendous blast knocked him flat and swept him skidding
sideways through mud and rotted leaves. Choking and
gasping, he sat up, swiping mu d of f his face. What the devilhad happened? A sharp pain in his arm penetrated his
confusion, and,  looking down, he saw by the light of the
lightning’ s flash  that a splinter  of wood, perhaps six inches
long, was embedded in the flesh of his right forearm.
Glaring wildly round, he saw th at the swamp near him was
suddenly studded with splinters and chunks of fresh wood, and
the smell of sap and heart-wood rose, piercing amid the hot,
dancing scent of electricity .
There. A nother flash, and he sa w it. A hundred feet away ,
he had noted a huge bald cypress, thinking to use it as a
landmark come dawn; it was by far the tallest tree within sight.
No longer: the lightning showed him empty air where the
towering trunk had been, anoth er flash, the ragged spike of
what was left.
Quivering and half deafened by the thunder , he pulled the
splinter out of h is arm and press ed the fabric of his shirt to the
wound t o stop it bleeding. It wa sn’ t deep, but the shock of the
explosion made  his hand shake. He pulled his canvas tight
round his shoulders against th e driving rain, and curled up
again among the sweet gum’ s roots.
Sometime in the night, the stor m moved of f, and with the
cessation of the noise, he lapse d into an uneasy doze, from
which he woke to find him self staring into the white
nothingness of fog.
A coldn ess beyond the bone chill of dawn went through
him. His childhood had been spent in the Lake District of
England, and he’d known from  his earliest memories that the
coming of fog on the fells was a danger . Sheep were often lost
in the fog, falli ng to their deaths, parted from the flock and
killed by  dogs or foxes, freezing, or simply disappearing. Men
were sometimes lost in the fog, as well.
The dead came down with the f og, Nanny Elspeth said. He
could se e her , a spare old woman, straight-backed and fearless,
standing at the nursery window , looking out at the drifting
white. S he’d said it quietly , as  though to herself; he didn’ t
think she’d realized he was there. When she did, she drew thecurtain with a brisk snap and came to make his tea, saying
nothing more.
He c ould do wi th a cup of hot tea, he thought, preferably
with a great deal of whisky in it. Hot tea, hot buttered toast,
jam sandwiches, and cake…
The tho ught of nursery teas recalled his wodge of soggy
bread and cheese, and he drew this carefully out of his pocket,
immeasurably heartened by its presence. He ate it slowly ,
savoring the tasteless mass as th ough it were a brandied peach,
and felt very much better , despite the clammy touch of the fog
on his face, the dripping of water from the ends of his hair , and
the fact that he was still wet to the skin; his muscles ached
from shivering all night.
He had  had  the presence of mind to set the frying pan out in
the rain the nig ht before, and thus had fresh water to drink,
tasting deliciously of bacon fat.
“Not so bad,” he said aloud, wiping his mouth. “Y et.”
His voice sounded strange. V oices always did, in a fog.
He’d be en lost in fog twice befo re, and he had no desire to
repeat that experience, though r epeat it he did, now and then,
in night mares. S tumbling blind  through a white so thick he
couldn’ t see his own feet, hearing the voices of the dead.
He closed his eyes, preferring momentary darkness to the
swirl of white, but could still feel its fingers, cold on his face.
He’d heard the voices then. He tried not to listen now .
He g ot t o his feet, determined. He had to move. At the same
time, to go wand ering blind through bogs and clinging growth
would be madness.
He tied the fry ing pan to his belt and, slinging the wet
canvas over his shoulder , put out a hand and began to grope.
Juniper wouldn’ t do; the wood s hredded under a knife, and the
trees grew in such fashion that no branch ran straight for more
than a few inches. Sweet gum or tupelo was better , but an
alder would be best.He foun d a small stand of alder saplings after an age of
sidling cautiousl y through the mist, planting one foot at a time
and waiting to see the ef fect, pausing whenever he hit a tree to
press its leaves to his mouth and nose by way of identification.
Feeling about among the slend er trunks, he picked one an
inch or so in di ameter and, planting his feet solidly , grasped
the sapli ng with both hands and wrenched it up. It came, with
a gro an of yielding earth and a s hower of leaves—and a heavy
body slithered suddenly across his boot. He let out a cry and
smashed the root end of his sapling down, but the snake had
long since fled.
Sweating despite  the chill, he undid the frying pan and used
it to  prod gingerly at the unseen ground. Eliciting no
movement, and finding the surface relatively firm, he turned
the pan over and sat upon it.
By bringing the wood close to his face, he could make out
the mov ements of his hands su f ficiently as to avoid cutting
himself and, with a good deal of labor , managed to strip the
sapling and trim it to a handy six-foot length. He then set
about whittling the end to a sharpened point.
The Gre at Dismal was dangerous, but it teemed with game.
That wa s the lure that drew hunters into its mysterious depths.
W illiam wasn’ t about to try to kill a bear , or even a deer , with
a homemade spear . He was, however , reasonably adept at
gigging frogs, or had been. A groom on his grandfather ’ s
estate had taught him long ago , he’d done it often with his
father in V ir ginia, and while it wasn’ t a skill he’d found
occasion to practice in the last few years in London, he felt
sure that he hadn’ t for gotten.
He could hear the frogs all round him, cheerfully
unimpressed by the fog.
“Brek-ek-ek-ex, co-ax, co-ax,” he murmured. “Brek-ek-ek-
ex co-a x!” The frogs seemed likewise unimpressed with
quotations from Aristophanes.“Right, you. Just wait,” he said  to them, testing his point
with a thumb. Adequate. A gigging spear ideally would be
trident-shaped…. W ell, why not? He had time.
Biting his tongue with concentration, he set about to carve
two additional sharpened twigs  and notch them to join the
main spe ar . He briefly considered twisting bits of juniper bark
to m ake a bin ding, but rejected that notion in favor of
unraveling a length of thread from the fringe of his shirt.
The swamp was sodden in the wake of the storm. He’d lost
his tind erbox, but he doubted that even one of Jehovah’ s
thunderbolts, such as he’d witnessed the night before, would
ignite a fire here. On the other h and, by the time the sun came
out and  he eventually succeeded in catching a frog, he’d
probably be desperate enough to eat it raw .
He p aradoxically found this thought comforting. He wasn’ t
going to  starve, then, nor would he die of thirst—being in this
swamp was like living in a sponge.
He had nothing so definite as a plan. Only the knowledge
that the swamp was lar ge but fin ite. That being so, once he had
the s un t o guide  him and could be assured of not wandering in
circles, h e propo sed to make his  way in a straight line until he
reached solid ground or the lake. If he found the lake … well,
Dismal T own was built on its edge. He had only to walk round
the circumference, and eventually he would find it.
So, provided that he took care with the quaking bogs, didn’ t
fall prey to som e lar ge animal, wasn’ t bitten by a venomous
snake, a nd didn’ t take a feve r from putrid water or the
swamp’ s miasma, everything would be all right.
He t ested the bin ding, jabbing the spear gently into the mud,
and foun d it secure. Nothing to do but wait, then, for the fog to
lift.
The fog  showed no disposition to lift. If anything, it was
thicker; he could barely make  out his fingers, held a few
inches from his eyes. Sighing, he gathered his damp coat
round hi m, settl ed the gig by his side, and wriggled his spineinto a precarious rest against the remaining alders. He put his
arms rou nd his knees to hoard what little heat his body still
held, and closed his eyes to block the whiteness.
The frogs were still at it. Now without distraction, though,
he began to hear the other noises of the swamp. Most of the
birds we re silen t, waiting out th e fog as he was, but now and
then the deep, s tartling boom of a bittern echoed through the
fog. There were scurrying noise s and splashings now and then
—muskrat? he wondered.
A loud plunk!  betokened a turtle dropping of f a log into
water . He preferred those sounds, because he knew what they
were. M ore unne rving were the faint rustlings, which might be
the rubbing of b ranches—though the air was too still, surely ,
for wind?—or the movement of something hunting. The shrill
cry of something small, cut of f abruptly . And the creakings
and groanings of the swamp itself.
He’d heard the rocks talking to  themselves on the fells at
Helwater . The Lake District, his maternal grandparents’ home.
In the fog. He hadn’ t told anyone that.
He moved a lit tle and felt something just below his jaw .
Clapping a hand to the spot, h e discovered a leech that had
attached itself to his neck. Rev olted, he ripped it loose and
flung it as hard as he could into the fog. Patting himself all
over with trembling hands, he settled back into his crouch,
trying to  repel the memories th at came flooding in with the
swirling mist. He’d heard his mother—his real mother—
whisper to him, too. That was  why he’d gone into the fog.
They’d been picnicking on the fells, his grandparents and
Mama Isobel and some friends, with a few servants. When the
fog came down, sudden as it sometimes did, there was a
general s curry to pack up the luncheon things, and he had been
left by himself, watching the inexorable white wall roll silently
toward him.
And he’ d swear he’d heard a woman’ s whisper , too low to
make out words but holding somehow a sense of longing, and
he had known she spoke to him.And he’d walked into the fog. F or a few moments, he was
fascinated by the movement of the water vapor near the
ground, the way it flickered and  shimmered and seemed alive.
But then the fog  grew thicker , and in moments he’d known he
was lost.
He’d ca lled out.  First to the woman he thought must be his
mother . The dea d come down in the fog . T hat was nearl y all he
knew ab out his mother—that she was dead. She’d been no
older than he was now when she died. He’d seen three
paintings of her . They said he had her hair and her hand with a
horse.
She’d answered him, he’d swear she’d answered him—but
in a voice with no words. He’d felt the caress of cool fingers
on his face, and he’d wandered on, entranced.
Then he fell, bad ly , tumbling over rocks into a small hollow ,
bruising himself and knocking out all his wind. The fog had
billowed over him, marching past, ur gent in its hurry to engulf
things, as he lay stunned and breathless in the bottom of his
small de clivity . Then he began to hear the rocks murmur all
around h im, and he’d crawled, then run, as fast as he could,
screaming. Fell again, got up and went on running.
Fell down, finally unable to go f urther , and huddled terrified
and blind on th e rough grass, surrounded by vast emptiness.
Then he heard t hem calling out for him, voices he knew , and
he tried to cry out in reply , but his throat was raw from
screaming, and he made no more than desperate rasping
noises, r unning toward where he thought the voices were. But
sound m oves in  a fog, and nothing is as it seems: not sound,
not time nor place.
Again an d again  and again, he ran toward the voices but fell
over something, tripped and rolled down a slope, stumbled
into rocky outcrops, found him self clinging to the edge of a
scarp, the voices now behind him, fading into the fog, leaving
him.
Mac had found h im. A big hand had suddenly reached down
and grab bed him, and the next minute he was lifted up, bruisedand scraped and bleeding but clutched tight against the
Scottish groom’ s rough shirt, strong arms holding him as
though they’d never let him go.
He swallowed. When he had the nightmare, sometimes he
woke with Mac holding him. Sometimes he didn’ t and woke in
a co ld sweat, un able to go back to sleep for fear of the waiting
fog and the voices.
He froze now , hearing footsteps. Breathed cautiously—and
smelled the unmistakable ripe smell of pig shit. He didn’ t
move; wild pigs were dangerous if you startled them.
Snuf fling noises, more footsteps, the rustle and shower of
water drops as heavy bodies brushed the leaves of holly and
yaupon bushes. Several of them, moving slowly but moving
nonetheless. He  sat up sharp, turning his head to and fro,
trying to locate the sound exac tly . Nothing could move with
purpose in this fog—unless they were following a path.
The swa mp was crisscrossed with game paths, made by the
deer and used by everything f rom possums to black bears.
These paths wound aimlessly , only two things certain about
them: one, that t hey did lead to drinkable water , and two, that
they did  not lead into a quaking bog. Which, under the
circumstances, was enough for W illiam.
They’d said one other thing about his mother . “Reckless,”
his grandmother had said sadly , shaking her head. “She was
always so r eckless, so impulsive.” And  her eyes had rested
then on him, apprehensive. And you’r e just like her , said those
anxious eyes. God help us all .
“Maybe I am,” he said out loud, and, gripping his frog
spear , stood up, defiant. “But I’m  not dead. Not yet.”
He k new that m uch. And that to  stand still when lost was a
good idea only if someone was looking for you. PURGA T OR Y
 
A T MIDDA Y ON THE third day , he found the lake.
He’d come to it through a cathedral of towering bald
cypress, their great buttressed trunks rising like pillars from
the flooded ground. Half starved, light-headed from a rising
fever , he walked slowly through calf-deep water .
The air was still; so was the water . The only movement was
the s low drag of his feet and th e buzzing insects that plagued
him. His eyes w ere swollen from the bites of mosquitoes, and
the l ouse had co mpany in the form of chiggers and sand fleas.
The darn ing nee dles that darted to and fro didn’ t bite like the
hundreds of swarming tiny flie s, but had their own form of
torment—they made him glance at them, sunlight glinting gold
and blue and re d from their gauzy wings and shining bodies,
dizzying in the light.
The smo oth surf ace of the water  reflected the trees standing
in it  so perfectl y that he could  not be sure quite where he
himself was, balanced precariously between two looking-glass
worlds. He kept losing his sense of up and down, the dizzying
sight thr ough the branches of the towering cypress above the
same as that below . The trees loomed more than eighty feet
over him , and the sight of drifting clouds seeming to sail
straight through the gently stirring branches below gave him
the cons tant queer sense that he was about to fall—up or
down, he couldn’ t tell.
He’d pulled the cypress splinter  from his arm and done his
best to bleed th e wound, but there were smaller slivers of
wood left behind, trapped under the skin, and his arm was hot
and thro bbing. So was his h ead. The chill and fog had
disappeared as though they had never existed, and he walked
slowly t hrough a world of heat and stillness that shimmered
round the edges. The backs of his eyes burned.If he  kep t his eyes fixed on the purling of water away from
his boots, the V -shaped waves broke the disturbing reflection
and kept him upright. But watching the dragonflies… That
made him sway and lose his bearings, as they seemed not
fixed in either air or water , but part of both.
A st range depression appeared in the water , a few inches
from his  right calf. He blinked,  then saw the shadow , sensed
the weig ht of the heavy body undulating through the water . An
evil, pointed, triangular head.
He gulp ed air and stopped dead. The moccasin, by great
good fortune, did not.
He watc hed it swim away , and wondered whether it might
be f it to eat. No matter; he’d broken his frog spear , though
he’d cau ght three frogs before the fragile binding gave way .
Small ones. They hadn’ t tasted badly , despite the rubbery feel
of the raw fles h. His stomach clenched, gnawing, and he
fought th e insane impulse to dive after the snake, seize it, and
rip the flesh from its bones with his teeth.
Maybe he could catch a fish.
He stood  still for several minutes, to be sure the snake had
left. Then swallowed and took another step. And walked on,
eyes fixe d on the small waves his moving feet made, breaking
the looking-glass water into fragments around him.
A short time later , though, the surface began to move,
hundreds of tiny wavelets lap ping against the gray-brown
wood of the cypress trees, shimmering so that the dizzy swirl
of tr ees and clou ds disappeared. He lifted his head and saw the
lake before him.
It was vast. Mu ch bigger than he had thought it would be.
Giant b ald cypresses stood in the water , the stumps and
carcasses of earlier progenitors bleaching in the sun among
them. T he far shore was dark,  thick with tupelo, alder , and
hobblebush. An d the water itse lf seemed to stretch for miles
before h im, brown as tea with the infusions of the trees that
grew in it.Licking his lips, he bent and s cooped up a handful of the
brown w ater and drank, then drank again. It was fresh, a little
bitter .
He wiped a wet hand across his face; the cool wetness made
him shiver with a sudden chill.
“Right, then,” he said, feeling breathless. He pushed ahead,
the g round sloping away gradually beneath him, until he stood
in the open water , the dense gro wth of the swamp behind him.
Chills still swept him, but he ignored them.
Lake Drummon d had been named for an early governor of
North Carolina. A hunting party , including Governor W illiam
Drummond, had gone into the swamp. A week later ,
Drummond, the sole survivor , had staggered out, half dead
from hunger and fever but with  news of a huge, unsuspected
lake in the midst of the Great Dismal.
W illiam drew a long, shuddering breath. W ell, nothing had
eaten him yet. And he’d reach ed the lake. Which way was
Dismal T own?
He scanned the shore slowly , looking for any trace of
chimney smoke, any break in the dense growth that might
betoken a settlement. Nothing.
W ith a sigh, he reached into his pocket and found a
sixpence. He flipped it into the air and nearly missed catching
it, fu mbling wildly as it bounce d of f his slow fingers. Got it,
got it!  T ails. Left, then. He turned resolutely and set of f.
His leg knocked against some thing in the water , and he
glanced down, just in time to  see the white flash of the
moccasin’ s mouth as it rose up in the water and struck at his
leg. Ref lex alone jerked his fo ot up, and the snake’ s fangs
stuck briefly in the leather of his boot top.
He y elled and sh ook his leg viol ently , dislodging the reptile,
which fl ew of f and landed with a splash. Nothing daunted, the
thing turned round upon itself almost instantly and arrowed
toward him through the water .W illiam ripped the frying pan from his belt and swung it
with all his stre ngth, scooping the snake from the water and
lofting it into the air . He didn’ t w ait to see where it landed, but
turned and ran, splashing wildly toward the shore.
He rushed up into the growth  of gum and juniper and
paused, gasping for breath, relieved. The relief was short-
lived. He did turn then, to look, and saw the snake, its brown
skin gleaming like copper , slither its way up onto the bank in
his wake and come undulating determinedly after him across
the matted ground.
He let out a yelp and fled.
He r an blindly , feet squelching a t every step, ricocheting of f
trees and through slapping branches, his legs seized by
hobblebush and holly , through which he fought his way in a
shower of leaves and torn-of f tw igs. He didn’ t look back, but
wasn’ t really looking forward, either , and thus ran without
warning slap into a man standing in his path.
The ma n let out a cry and we nt over backward, W illiam
atop him. He pushed himself u p and found himself looking
down in to the face of an astonished Indian. Before he could
apologize, some one else grabbed him by the arm and pulled
him roughly upright.
It was another Indian, who said something to him, angry
and interrogative.
He groped for any stray bit of trade talk, found nothing, and,
pointing in the direction of the lake, gasped, “Snake!” The
Indians evidently understood the word, though, for their faces
changed at once to wariness, a nd they looked where he was
pointing. In support of his story , the annoyed moccasin shot
into sight, wriggling through the roots of a sweet gum.
The Ind ians both let out exclamations, and one of them
seized a club from a sling at his  back and struck at the snake.
He m issed, and the snake writhed up at once into a tight coil
and struck at him. The snake missed, too, but not by much,
and the Indian jerked back, dropping his club.The othe r Indian said something in disgust. T aking his own
club in hand, h e began warily to circle the moccasin. The
snake, further enraged by this p ersecution, spun upon its own
contortious coils with a loud hiss and launched itself,
spearlike, at the second Indian’ s foot. He let out a cry and leapt
back, though he did keep hold of his club.
W illiam, meanw hile, delighted not to be the focus of the
snake’ s annoyan ce, had backed out of the way . Seeing the
snake momentarily of f balance, though—if snakes could be
said to have any in the first place—he gripped his frying pan,
swung it high, and brought it down, edge-on, with all his force.
Brought it down again, and again and again, his strength
driven by panic. At last he  stopped, breathing like a
blacksmith’ s bellows, sweat pouring down his face and body .
Swallowing, he lifted the frying pan gingerly , expecting to find
the snake a bloody mince on the riven ground.
Nothing. He could smell the rep tile—a low stench, like that
of rotten cucumbers—but could see nothing. He squinted,
trying to make sense of the ma ss of cut-up mud and leaves,
then looked up at the Indians.
One of them shrugged. The other pointed of f toward the
lake and said something. Evidently , the snake had prudently
decided that it was outnumbered and returned to its own
pursuits.
W illiam stood up awkwardly , fr ying pan in hand. The men
all exchanged nervous smiles.
He was comfortable with Indians, generally; many of them
crossed his land, and his father  always made them welcome,
smoking with them on the veranda, taking supper with them.
He couldn’ t tell which people these two claimed—the faces
had the look o f some one of the Algonkian tribes, high-
cheeked and bold, but surely this was far south of their usual
hunting grounds?
The Ind ians were examining him in turn, and exchanged a
glance that set something tingling at the base of his spine. Oneof th em said som ething to the other , watching him sidelong to
see whether he understood. The  other smiled broadly at him,
showing brown-stained teeth.
“T obacco?” the  Indian asked, extending a hand, palm
upward.
W illiam nodded, trying to slow his breathing, and reached
slowly i nto his coat, right-handed, so as not to have to set
down the frying pan in his left.
Likely th ese two  knew the way out of the swamp; he should
establish friendly relations, and then … He was trying to think
logically , but his lower faculties were interfering. His lower
faculties thought he should get the devil away from here, and
now .
Coming out with the waxed parc el of tobacco, he threw it as
hard as he cou ld at the foremost Indian, who had started
toward him, and ran.
A startle d exclamation behind him, and then the sound of
grunts and thumping feet. His lower faculties, thoroughly
justified in their apprehensions, spurred him on, but he knew
he c ouldn’ t keep it up for long; being chased by the snake had
consumed most of what strength  he had—and being obliged to
run with an iron frying pan in one hand wasn’ t helping.
His best chance lay in outdistan cing them suf ficiently as to
find a hiding place. W ith this thought in mind, he drove
himself to greater exertions, dashing over open ground beneath
a gro wth of gum  trees, then swerving into a thicket of juniper ,
popping out again almost imme diately onto a game trail. He
hesitated for an instant—hide in the thicket?—but the ur ge to
run was overwhelming, and he p ounded down the narrow trail,
vines and branches snatching at his clothes.
He heard the pigs in time, thank God. Startled snorts and
grunts, and a great rustling of brush and sucking sounds, as a
number of heavy bodies scrambled to their feet. He smelled
warm mud and the reek of pig flesh; there must be a wallow
round the curve of the path.“Shit,” he said u nder his breath, and leapt into the brush of f
the path . Jupiter , now what? Cl imb a tree? He was breathing
hard, sweat running in his eyes.
All t he trees nea rby were juniper , some very lar ge but dense
and twis ted, impossible to climb. He dodged round one and
crouched behind it, trying to still his breathing.
His heart was hammering in his ears; he’d never hear
pursuit. Something touched his hand, and he swung the frying
pan by reflex, leaping to his feet.
The dog let out a surprised yelp as the pan glanced of f its
shoulder , then bared its teeth and growled at him.
“What the devil are you doing here?” W illiam hissed at it.
Bloody hell, the thing was the size of a small horse!
The dog ’ s hackles rose, making it look exactly like a wolf—
Jesus, it couldn’ t be  a wolf, surely?—and it began to bark.
“Shut up, for God’ s sake!” But it was too late; he could hear
Indian voices, excited and quite near . “Stay ,” he whispered,
putting out a palm toward the  dog as he edged backward.
“Stay . Good dog.”
The dog did not  stay , but followed him, continuing to growl
and bark. The s ound of this further disturbed the pigs; there
was a thunder of hooves along the path and a surprised whoop
from one of the Indians.
W illiam caught a flicker of movement from the corner of his
eye and whirled, weapon at t he ready . A very tall Indian
blinked at him. Hell, more of them.
“Leave of f, dog,” said the Indian mildly , in a distinct Scots
accent. W illiam blinked in turn.
The dog did ce ase barking, though it continued to circle
him, unnervingly close and growling all the time.
“Who—” W illiam began, but was interrupted by the two
original Indians, who at this point appeared suddenly out of
the under growth . They came to  an abrupt halt at sight of the
newcomer—and cast a wary eye at the dog, who turned itsattention on them, wrinkling back its muzzle and displaying an
impressive array of gleaming teeth.
One of the original Indians said something sharp to the
newcomer—thank God, they we ren’ t together . The tall Indian
replied, in a dis tinctly unfriend ly tone. W illiam had no idea
what he ’d said, but it didn’ t sit well with the other two. Their
faces darkened, and one put a hand impulsively to his club.
The dog made a sort of gur gling noise in its throat, and the
hand fell at once.
The orig inal Indians seemed disposed to ar gue, but the tall
Indian cut them of f, saying something peremptory and flipped
a hand in an u nmistakable “B e of f with you” gesture. The
other tw o excha nged glances, and W illiam, straightening up,
moved t o stand by the side of the tall Indian and glowered at
them. O ne of them gave him ba ck the evil look, but his friend
looked thoughtfully from the tall Indian to the dog and shook
his head, the movement almost imperceptible. W ithout a
further word, the two turned and left.
W illiam’ s legs were shaking, waves of fever heat passing
over him . Despite a disinclination to get any closer to the
dog’ s le vel than necessary , he sat down on the ground. His
fingers h ad gone stif f, he’d clu tched the handle of the frying
pan so hard. W i th some dif ficulty , he unbent them and set the
thing down beside him.
“Thank you,” he said, and w iped a sleeve across his
sweating jaw . “Y ou—speak English?”
“I’ve me t Englishmen who’d say no, but I think ye’ll maybe
understand me, at least.” The Indian sat down beside him,
looking at him curiously .
“Christ,” W illiam said, “you aren’ t an Indian.” That
certainly wasn’ t an Algonkian face. Seen clearly now , the man
was much younger than he’d thought, perhaps only a little
older tha n himself, and plainly w hite, though his skin was sun-
browned and he bore facial tatt oos, a double line of dots that
looped across his cheekbones. He was dressed in leather shirtand leg gings, and wore a most incongruous red-and-black
Scotchman’ s plaid over one shoulder .
“A ye, I  am,” the man said dryly . He raised his chin,
indicating the direction taken by the departing Indians. “Where
did ye meet wi’ that lot?”
“By the  lake. They asked for tobacco, and I—gave it to
them. But then they chased me; I don’ t know why .”
The man shrugged.
“They thought to take ye west and sell ye as a slave in the
Shawnee lands.” He smiled briefly . “They of fered me half
your price.”
W illiam took a deep breath.
“I thank  you, then. That is—I suppose you haven’ t any
intention of doing the same thing?”
The man didn’ t laugh aloud, but  gave of f a distinct sense of
amusement.
“No. I’m no going west.”
W illiam began to feel a little easier , though the heat of his
endeavors was beginning to give way to chills again. He
wrapped his arms about his knees. His right arm was
beginning to hurt again.
“Y ou don’ t—do you suppose they might come back?”
“No,” the man s aid, casually indif ferent. “I told them to be
gone.”
W illiam stared at him.
“And why do you think they’ll do as you say?”
“Because they’re Mingo,” the man replied patiently , “and
I’m Kahnyen’kehaka—a Mohawk. They’re afraid of me.”
W illiam gave him a narrow l ook, but the man was not
practicing upon him. He was nearly as tall as W illiam himself,
but thin as a coach whip, his dark-brown hair slicked backwith bear grease. He looked co mpetent, but not a person to
inspire fear .
The ma n was studying him w ith an interest equal to his
own. W illiam coughed and cleared his throat, then extended a
hand. “Y our servant, sir . I’m W illiam Ransom.”
“Oh, I ken ye well enough,” the man said, a rather odd note
in his voice. He  put out his own hand and shook W illiam’ s
firmly . “Ian Murray . W e’ve met.” His eyes traveled over
W illiam’ s torn, disheveled clothes, his scratched, sweating
face, and his mud-caked boots. “Y e look a bit better than the
last time I saw ye—but not much.”
 
MURRA Y LIFTED THE CAMP kettle of f the fire and
set it on the ground. He laid the knife in the embers for a
moment, then dipped the hot b lade into the frying pan, now
filled with water . The hot metal hissed and gave of f clouds of
steam.
“Ready?” he said.
“Y es.”
W illiam knelt down by a big poplar log and laid his injured
arm flat on the wood. It was visibly swollen, the bulge of a
lar ge rem nant splinter dark under his skin, the skin around it
stretched and transparent with pus, painfully inflamed.
The Mohawk—he couldn’ t yet think of him as anything
else, des pite the name and accent—glanced at him across the
log, eyebrows raised quizzically .
“W as that you I heard? Screamin’, earlier?” He took hold of
W illiam’ s wrist.
“I shouted, yes,” W illiam said stif fly . “A snake struck at
me.”
“Oh.” Murray’ s mouth twitched  a little. “Y e scream like a
lassie,” he said, eyes returning t o his work. The knife pressed
down.W illiam made a deeply visceral noise.
“A ye, better ,” said Murray . He smiled briefly , as though to
himself, and with a firm grip on W illiam’ s wrist sliced cleanly
through the skin beside the sp linter , laying it open for six
inches or so. T urning back the skin with the point of the knife,
he flicke d out the lar ge splinter , then picked delicately at the
smaller slivers the cypress shard had left behind.
Having removed  as much as he could, he then wrapped a
fold of his ragg ed plaid round the handle of the camp kettle,
picked it up, and poured the steaming water into the open
wound.
W illiam made a much more visceral sound, this one
accompanied by words.
Murray shook his head, and clicked his tongue in reproof.
“A ye, well. I suppose I’ll have to keep ye from dying,
because if ye do  die, ye’re boun d to go to hell, usin’ language
like that.”
“I don’ t propose to die,” W illiam said shortly . He was
breathing hard, and mopped hi s brow with his free arm. He
lifted the other gingerly and shook blood-tinged water from his
fingertips, though the resultin g sensation made him light-
headed. He sat down on the log, rather suddenly .
“Put your heid atween your knees, if ye’re giddy ,” Murray
suggested.
“I am not giddy .”
There was no response to this save the sound of chewing.
While waiting for the kettle to boil, Murray had waded into the
water an d pulled several handsful of some strong-smelling
herb that grew on the ver ge. He was in process now of
chewing the leaves, spitting th e resultant green wads into a
square of cloth. Extracting a ra ther shriveled onion from the
haversack he carried, he cut a generous slice from this and
eyed it critically , but seemed to  think it would pass without
mastication. He added it to his packet, folding the cloth neatly
over the contents.This he placed over the wound and wrapped it in place with
strips of cloth torn from W illiam’ s shirttail.
Murray glanced up at him thoughtfully .
“I suppose ye’re verra stubborn?”
W illiam stared at the Scot, put out at this remark, though in
fact he had been told repeated ly , by friends, relatives, and
military superiors, that his intransigence would one day kill
him. Surely it didn’ t show on his face!
“What the devil do you mean by that?”
“It w asna meant as an insult,” M urray said mildly , and bent
to ti ghten the kn ot of the impromptu bandage with his teeth.
He t urned away and spat out a few threads. “I hope ye are—
because it’ll be a good distance to find ye help, and if you’re
suf ficiently stub born as not to die on me, that would be good, I
think.”
“I sa id I don’ t propose to die,” W illiam assured him. “And I
don’ t need help. Where—are  we anywhere near Dismal
T own?”
Murray pursed his lips.
“No,” he said, and raised one brow . “W ere ye bound there?”
W illiam considered for an instant, but nodded. No harm in
telling him that, surely .
Murray raised an eyebrow .
“Why?”
“I—have business with some gentlemen there.” As he said
this, W il liam’ s heart gave a lurc h. Christ, the book! He’d been
so confo unded by his various trials and adventures that the
true importance of his loss had not even struck him.
Beyond its general entertainment value and its usefulness as
palimpsest for his own meditations, the book was vital to his
mission. It contained several carefully marked passages whose
code gav e him the names and lo cations of those men he was to
visit—and, more importantly , what he was to tell them. Hecould re call a good many of the  names, he thought, but for the
rest…
His dism ay was so great that it overshadowed the throbbing
in his arm, and h e stood up abruptly , seized by the ur ge to rush
back into  the Great Dismal and begin combing it, inch by inch,
until he should recover the book.
“Are ye all righ t, man?” Murray had risen, too, and was
looking at him with a combination of curiosity and concern.
“I—yes. Just—I thought of something, that’ s all.”
“W ell, think about it sitting down, aye? Y e’re about to fall
into the fire.”
In fa ct, W illiam’ s vision had gon e bright, and pulsating dots
of dark and ligh t obscured most of Murray’ s face, though the
look of alarm was still visible.
“I—yes, I will.” He sat down even more abruptly than he’d
risen, a heavy cold sweat sudden on his face. A hand on his
good arm  ur ged him to lie down , and he did, feeling dimly that
it was preferable to fainting.
Murray made a Scottish noise of consternation and muttered
something incomprehensible. W illiam could feel the other man
hovering over him, uncertain.
“I’m fine,” he said—without opening his eyes. “I just…
need to rest a bit.”
“Mmphm.”
W illiam couldn’ t tell whether this particular noise was
meant as acceptance or dismay , but Murray went away ,
coming back a moment later with a blanket, with which he
covered W illiam without comment. W illiam made a feeble
gesture of thanks, unable to spe ak, as his teeth had begun to
chatter with a sudden chill.
His lim bs had been aching fo r some time, but he had
ignored it in the  need to push on. Now the burden of it fell full
on him, a bone- deep ache that made him want to moan aloud.T o keep from it, he waited until the chill relaxed enough to let
him speak, then called to Murray .
“Y ou are familiar with Dismal T own yourself, sir? Y ou’ve
been there?”
“Now and again, aye.” He could see Murray , a dark
silhouette crouch ed by the fire, and hear the chink of metal on
stone. “It’ s verra aptly named.”
“Ha,” W illiam said weakly . “I daresay . And h-h-have you
met a Mr . W ashington, by chance?”
“Five or six o f them. The general’ s got a good many
cousins, aye?”
“The g-g—”
“General W ashi ngton. Y e’ve heard of him, maybe?” There
was a distinct hint of amusement in the Scottish Mohawk’ s
voice.
“I have, yes. But—surely that…” This made no sense. His
voice trailed of f, and he rallied , forcing his drifting thoughts
back into coherence. “It is a Mr . Henry W ashington. He is kin
to the general, too?”
“So far as I ke n, anyone named W ashington within three
hundred miles is kin to the general.” Murray stooped to his
bag, coming out with a lar ge furry mass, a long, naked tail
dangling from it. “Why?”
“I—nothing.” T he chill had eased, and he drew a grateful
breath, the knotted muscles of his belly relaxing. But the faint
threads of wariness were making themselves felt through
puzzlement and the gathering fo g of fever . “Someone told me
that Mr . Henry W ashington was a prominent Loyalist.”
Murray turned toward him in astonishment.
“Who in Bride’ s name would tell ye that?”
“Plainly someon e grossly mistaken.” W illiam pressed the
heels of  his hands against his eyes. His wounded arm hurt.
“What is that thing? Possum?”“Muskrat. Dinna fash; it’ s fresh. I killed it just before I met
ye.”
“Oh. Good.” He felt obscurely comforted and couldn’ t think
why . No t the muskrat; he’d eaten muskrat often enough and
found it tasty , though the fever had stolen his appetite. He felt
weak wi th hung er , but had no desire to eat. Oh. No, it was the
“dinna fash.” Spoken with just that kindly , matter -of-fact
intonation—Mac the groom had used to say that to him, often,
whether the trouble was being thrown from his pony or not
being a llowed to ride into the town with his grandfather .
“Dinna fash; it will be all right.”
The ripping sound of skin parting from the underlying
muscle made him momentarily dizzy and he closed his eyes.
“Y e’ve got a red beard.”
Murray’ s voice came to him, filled with surprise.
“Y ou’ve only just now noticed that?” W illiam said crossly ,
and ope ned his eyes. The c olor of his beard was an
embarrassment to him; while the hair on his head, chest, and
limbs w as a decent sort of dark  chestnut, that on his chin and
privates was an unexpectedly vivid shade that mortified him.
He s haved fastidiously , even on shipboard or on the road—but
his razor , of course, had departed with the horse.
“W ell, a ye,” Mu rray said mildly . “I expect I was distracted
earlier .” He fell silent, concentrating on his work, and W illiam
tried to relax his  mind, hoping to sleep for a time. He was tired
enough. Repeated images of the swamp played themselves out
before his closed eyes, though, w earying him with visions that
he could neither ignore nor dismiss.
Roots like the lo ops of snares, mud, rank brown dollops of
cold pig shit, the turds uneasily humanlike… churned dead
leaves…
Dead leaves floating on water like brown glass, reflections
shattering around his shins… words in the water , the pages of
his book, faint, mocking as they sank away…Looking up, the sky as vertigin ous as the lake, feeling that
he migh t fall up as easily as down and drown in the water -
clogged air… drowning in his s weat… a young woman licked
the swea t from his cheek, tickl ing, her body heavy , hot, and
cloying, so that he turned and twisted, but could not escape her
oppressive attentions…
… sweat collecting behind his ears, thick and greasy in his
hair… growing like fat slow pea rls in the stubble of his vulgar
beard… chilling  on his skin, his clothes a dripping shroud…
the woman was still there, dead now , dead weight on his chest,
pinning him to the icy ground…
Fog and the cre eping cold… white fingers prying into his
eyes, his ears. He must keep his mouth shut or it would reach
inside him … All white.
He curled into a ball, shaking.
W illiam did at la st fall deeper in to a fitful sleep, from which
he ro used some time later , to the  rich smell of roasted muskrat,
and found the enormous dog lying pressed against him,
snoring.
“Jesus,” he said, with disconcerting recollections of the
young woman in his dreams. He pushed feebly at the dog.
“Where did that  come from?”
“That’ s Rollo,” Murray said reprovingly . “I made him lie
wi’ ye for a bit of heat; ye’ve got a shaking ague, if ye hadn’ t
noticed.”
“I had noticed that, yes.” W illiam struggled upright and
made hi mself ea t but was happ y to lie down again, at a safe
distance from the dog, who was  now lying on his back, paws
drooping, looking like nothing so much as a giant hairy dead
insect. W illiam passed a hand downward over his clammy
face, trying to remove that  d isturb ing image from his mi nd
before it made its way into his fever dreams.
Night had come well on, and the  sky opened overhead, clear
and empty and vast, moonless but brilliant with distant stars.
He t hought of h is father ’ s father , dead long before his ownbirth, bu t a noted amateur astronomer . His father had often
taken hi m—and sometimes his mother—to lie on the lawns at
Helwater , to look up at the stars and name the constellations. It
was a cold sight, that blue-bla ck emptiness, and made his
fevered blood tremble, but the stars were a comfort,
nonetheless.
Murray was looking upward too, a look of distance on his
tattooed face.
W illiam lay back, half-propped against the log, trying to
think. W hat was  he to do next? He was still trying to absorb
the news  that Henry W ashington and thus, presumably , the rest
of h is Dismal T own contacts were rebels. W as this odd
Scottish Mohawk right in what he’d said? Or did he seek to
mislead him, for some purpose of his own?
What w ould tha t be, though? M urray could have no notion
who W i lliam was, beyond his name and his father ’ s name.
And Lord John had been a private citizen when they had met
years before, on Fraser ’ s Ridge.  Murray could not tell, surely ,
that W il liam was a soldier , let alone an intelligencer , and could
not possibly know his mission.
And if he did not wish to mislead him and was correct in
what he said… W illiam swallowed, his mouth sticky and dry .
Then he had had  a narrow escape. What might have happened,
had he walked into a nest of reb els, in such a remote place as
Dismal T own, and blithely revealed himself and his purpose?
They’d hang you fr om the near est tr ee , his brain said coldly ,
and toss your body into the swamp. What else?
Which led to an even more uncomfortable thought: how
could Captain Richardson have been so mistaken in his
information?
He s hook his head violently , tr ying to shake his thoughts
into ord er , but the only result was to make him dizzy again.
Murray’ s attention had been attracted by the motion, though;
he looked in W illiam’ s direction, and W illiam spoke, on
impulse.“Y ou are a Mohawk, you said.”
“I am.”
Seeing that tattooed face, the eyes dark in their sockets,
W illiam didn’ t doubt it.
“How di d that come to be?” he asked hurriedly , lest Murray
think he was casting aspersions on the other ’ s truthfulness.
Murray hesitated visibly , but did answer .
“I married a wo man of the Kahnyen’kehaka. I was adopted
into the W olf clan of the people of Snaketown.”
“Ah. Y our… wife is…?”
“I am no longe r wed.” It wasn’ t said with any tone of
hostility , but with a sort of blea k finality that put paid to any
further conversation.
“I’m sorry ,” W illiam said formally , and fell silent. The chills
were coming back, and despite  his reluctance, he slid down,
drawing the blanket up around his ears, and huddled against
the d og, who sig hed deeply and released a burst of flatulence
but didn’ t stir .
When th e ague finally eased again, he lapsed back into
dreams, these now violent and dreadful. His mind had taken
hold som ehow of Indians, and h e was pursued by savages who
turned into snakes, snakes who became tree roots that writhed
through the crevices of his brain, bursting his skull, liberating
further nests of snakes who coiled themselves into nooses…
He w oke again, drenched in sw eat and aching to the bones.
He t ried to rise but found his arms would not support him.
Someone knelt by him—it was the Scot, the Mohawk…
Murray . He located the name w ith something like relief, and
with ev en more relief, realized that Murray was holding a
canteen to his lips.
It was water fro m the lake; he  recognized its odd, fresh-
tasting bitterness, and drank thirstily .
“Thank you,” he said hoarsely , and gave back the empty
canteen. The water had given h im strength enough to sit up.His head still swam with fever , but the dreams had retreated, at
least fo r the moment. He imagined that they lurked just
beyond the small ring of light cast by the fire, waiting, and
determined that he would not sleep again—not at once.
The pain in his arm was worse: a hot, stretched feeling, and
a throbbing that ran from fingertips to the middle of his upper
arm. Anxious to keep both the pain and the night at bay , he
had another try at conversation.
“I h ave heard th at the Mohawk think it unmanly to show
fear—that if captured and tortured by an enemy , they will not
show any sign of distress. Is that true?”
“Y e try not to be in that positi on,” Murray said, very dry .
“Should it happen, though… ye must show your courage,
that’ s all. Y e sing your death song and hope to die well. Is it
dif ferent for a B ritish soldier , then? Y e dinna want to die as a
coward, do ye?”
W illiam watched the flickering  patterns behind his closed
eyelids, hot and ever -changing, shifting with the fire.
“No,” he  admitte d. “And it’ s not  so dif ferent—the hoping to
die well  if you have to, I mean . But it’ s more likely to be a
matter o f just being shot or kn ocked on the head, isn’ t it, if
you’re a soldier—rather than being tortured to death by inches.
Save you run af oul of a savage, I suppose. What—have you
ever seen someone die like that?” he asked curiously , opening
his eyes.
Murray reached out one long arm to turn the spit, not
answering at once. The firelight showed his face, unreadable.
“A ye, I have,” he said quietly , at last.
“What did they d o to him?” He wasn’ t sure why he’d asked;
perhaps only for distraction from the throbbing in his arm.
“Y e din na want to know .” This was said very definitely;
Murray was not by any means teasing him into further inquiry .
Nonetheless, it had the same ef fect; W illiam’ s vague interest
sharpened at once.“Y es, I do.”
Murray’ s lips tightened, but W illiam knew a few things
about ex tracting information by this time and was wise enough
to pr eserve silence, merely keep ing his eyes fixed on the other
man.
“Skinned him,” Murray said at  last, and poked at the fire
with a stick. “O ne of them. In bitty pieces. Thrust burning
slivers of pitch p ine into the raw  places. Cut away his privates.
Then built up the fire about his feet, to burn him before he
could die of the shock. It… took some time.”
“I d aresay .” W illiam tried to conjure a picture of the
proceedings—and succeeded much too well, turning away his
eyes from the blackened muskrat carcass, stripped to bones.
He shut his eyes . His arm contin ued to throb with each beat
of his heart, and he tried not  to imagine the sensation of
burning slivers being forced into his flesh.
Murray was silent; W illiam couldn’ t even hear his
breathing. But he knew , as su rely as if he were inside the
other ’ s head, that he, too, was imagining the scene—though in
his case, imagination was not necessary . He would be reliving
it.
W illiam shifted a little, sending a hot blaze of pain through
his arm, and clenched his teeth, not to make any noise.
“Do the men—d id you , I shoul d say— think how you w ould
do, yourself?” he asked quietly . “If you could stand it?”
“Every man thinks that.” Murra y got up abruptly and went
to the far edge o f the clearing. W illiam heard him make water ,
but it was some minutes longer before he came back.
The dog wakened suddenly , head lifting, and wagged its
huge tail slowly to and fro at sight of its master . Murray
laughed softly and said something in an odd tongue—
Mohawk? Erse? —to the dog, then bent and ripped a haunch
from the muskrat’ s remains, toss ing it to the beast. The animal
rose like lightning, its teeth snap ping shut on the carcass, thentrotted h appily t o the far side of the fire and lay down, licking
its prize.
Bereft of his bed companion, W illiam lay down gingerly ,
head pillowed on his good arm, and watched as Murray
cleaned his knife, scrubbing b lood and grease from it with
handfuls of grass.
“Y ou sa id you sing your death song. What sort of song is
that?”
Murray looked nonplused at that.
“I mean,” W illiam fumbled for clearer meaning, “what sort
of thing would you—would one—say in a death song?”
“Oh.” T he Scotsman looked down at his hands, the long
knobbed fingers  rubbing slowly down the length of the blade.
“I’ve on ly heard  the one, mind.  The other two I saw die that
way—they were white men and didna have death songs, as
such. The Indian—he was an Onondaga—he… well, there was
a good deal in the beginning about who he was: a warrior of
what people, I mean, and his clan, his family . Then quite a bit
about how much he despised u —the folk who were about to
kill him.” Murray cleared his throat.
“A b it about what he’d done: his victories, valiant warriors
he’d killed, and how they’d w elcome him in death. Then…
how he propose d to cross the …” He groped for a word. “…
the—it—the way between here and what lies after death. The
divide, I  suppos e ye’d say , thou gh the word means something
more like a chasm.”
He was quiet for a moment, but not as though he had
finished—more as though tryin g to recall something exactly .
He straig htened himself suddenly , took a deep breath, and with
his eyes closed, began to recit e something in what W illiam
supposed to be the Mohawk tongue. It was fascinating—a
tattoo of “n”s and “r”s and “t”s, steady as a drumbeat.
“Then there was a bit where h e went on about the nasty
creatures he’d encounter on his way to paradise,” Murray said,
breaking of f abruptly . “Things like flying heads, wi’ teeth.”“Ew ,” said W illiam, and Murray laughed, taken by surprise.
“A ye. I wouldna like to see one, myself.”
W illiam considered this for a moment.
“Do you  compose your own death song ahead of time—in
case of need, I mean? Or just trust to the, um, inspiration of
the moment?”
Murray looked a little taken ba ck by that. He blinked and
looked aside.
“I… we ll… it’ s no usually talked about, ken? But aye—I
did have a frien d or two who told me a bit about what they’d
thought of, should there ever be need.”
“Hmm.” W illiam turned on his b ack, looking up at the stars.
“Do you  sing a death song only if you’re being tortured to
death? What if you’re only ill but think you might die?”
Murray stopped what he was doing and peered toward him,
suspicious.
“Y e’re no dying, are ye?”
“No, just wondering,” W illiam assured him. He didn’ t think
he was dying.
“Mmphm,” the Scot said dubiou sly . “A ye, well. No, ye sing
your death song if ye’re sure ye’re about to die; it doesna
matter why .”
“The more credit to you, though,” W illiam suggested, “if
you do it whilst having burning splinters stuck into you?”
The Scot laughed out loud, and  suddenly looked much less
like an Indian. He rubbed his knuckles across his mouth.
“T o be honest… the Onondaga… I didna think he did it so
verra we ll,” Murray blurted. “It doesna seem right to criticize,
though. I mean, I canna say I’d do better—in the
circumstances.”
W illiam laughed , too, but both men fell silent then. W illiam
supposed that Murray was, as he was, imagining himself insuch case, tied to a stake, about to suf fer appalling torture. He
gazed up into t he void above, tentatively composing a few
lines: I am W illiam Clar ence Henry Geor ge Ransom, Earl of…
No, he’d never liked his string of names. I am W illiam …  he
thought muzzily . W illiam… James…  James was his secret
name; he hadn’ t thought of it in years. Better than Clarence,
though. I am W illiam . What else was there to say? Not much,
as yet. No, he’d better not die, not until he’d done something
worth a proper death song.
Murray was silent, the fire ref lected in his somber eyes.
W atching him, W illiam thought the Scottish Mohawk had had
his o wn death song ready for some time. Shortly he fell asleep
to t he crackle of fire and th e quiet crunching of bones,
burning, but brave.
 
HE W AS W ANDERING thro ugh a haze of tortured
dreams involving being chased by black serpents across an
endless wobbling bridge over a bottomless chasm. Flying
yellow heads with rainbow eyes  attacked him in swarms, their
tiny teeth, sharp as a mouse’ s, p iercing his flesh. He waved an
arm to beat them  of f, and the pain that shot through the arm at
the motion roused him.
It was still dark,  though the cool, live feel of the air told him
the d awn was not far of f. The to uch of it on his face made him
shiver , prompting another chill.
Someone said something that he didn’ t understand, and still
entangled in the miasma of fever dreams, he thought it must be
one of the serp ents he’d been talking to earlier , before they
started chasing him.
A hand touched his forehead, and a lar ge thumb pried up
one of his eyelid s. An Indian’ s face floated in his sleep-bleared
vision, looking quizzical.
He made an irritable noise and jerked his head away ,
blinking. The Indian said something, questioning, and afamiliar voice replied. Who … Murray . The name seemed to
have be en floating by his elbo w , and he recalled dimly that
Murray himself had accompanied him in his dream, rebuking
the serpents in a stern Scotch burr .
He wasn’ t speaking English now , though, nor even the
peculiar Scotch tongue from the Highlands. W illiam forced his
head to turn, though his body was still convulsed with chill.
A number of Indians were crouched round the fire,
squatting to keep their backsides  from the dew-wet grass. One,
two, thr ee… six of them. Murray was sitting on the log with
one of them, engaged in conversation.
No, seven. Another man, the one who had touched him,
leaned over him, peering into his face.
“Think you’re going to die?” the  man asked, with a faint air
of curiosity .
“No,” W illiam said between clenched teeth. “Who the devil
are you?”
The Ind ian seemed to think this an amusing question and
called to his fellows, apparently repeating it. They all laughed,
and Murray glanced in his dir ection, rising as he saw that
W illiam was awake.
“Kahnyen’kehaka,” the man lo oming over him said, and
grinned. “Who the devil are you ?”
“My kin sman,” Murray said shortly , before W illiam could
reply . He nudged the Indian aside and squatted beside W illiam.
“Still alive, then?”
“Evidently .” He scowled up at Murray . “Care to introduce
me to your… friends?”
The first Indian went of f into gales of laughter at this and
apparently translated it to the two or three others who had
come to peer interestedly at him. They thought it funny , too.
Murray seemed substantially less amused.“My kin smen,” he said dryly . “Some of them. D’ye need
water?”
“Y ou have a lot of kinsmen… cousin. Y es, if you please.”
He struggled upright, one-arm ed, reluctant to leave the
clammy comfort  of his dew-wet  blanket but obeying an innate
ur ge tha t told him he wanted to be on his feet. Murray seemed
to know these Indians well, but kin or not, there was a certain
tenseness to Murray’ s mouth and shoulders. And it was plain
enough that Murray had told them that W illiam was his
kinsman because if he hadn’ t…
“Kahnyen’kehaka.”  T hat’ s what the  Indian had sa id when
asked who he was. It wasn’ t his name, W illiam realized
suddenly . It was what he was. Murray had used the word
yesterday , when he’d sent away the two Mingos.
“I’m Kahnyen’kehaka,”  he’ d said. “A Mohawk. They’r e
afraid of me.”  H e’d said it as a simple statement of fact, and
W illiam had not chosen to mak e an issue of it, circumstances
being as they w ere. Seeing a number of what were plainly
Mohawk togethe r , he could appreciate the Mingos’ prudence.
The Moh awk gave of f an air of genial ferocity , this overlying a
casual confidence entirely proper to men who were prepared to
sing—however badly—whilst being emasculated and burnt
alive.
Murray handed him a canteen, and he drank thirstily , then
splashed a little water over his  face. Feeling a bit better , he
went for a piss, then walked to the fire and squatted between
two of the braves, who eyed him with open curiosity .
Only the man who had pried his eyelid open seemed to
speak English, but the rest n odded to him, reserved but
friendly enough. W illiam glanced across the fire and started
back, nearly losing his balance. A long, tawny shape lay in the
grass beyond the fire, the light gleaming on its flanks.
“It’ s dead,” Murray said dryly , seeing his startlement. The
Mohawk all laughed.“Gathered that,”  he replied, jus t as dryly , though his heart
was still pounding from the sho ck. “Serve it right, if it’ s the
one that took m y horse.” Now he came to look, he perceived
other shapes beyond the fire. A small deer , a pig, a spotted cat,
and two or three  egrets, small white mounds in the dark grass.
W ell, that explained the Mohawks’ presence in the swamp:
they’d come for the hunting, like everyone else.
Dawn w as coming; the faint wi nd stirred the damp hair on
his n eck and bro ught him the tan g of blood and musk from the
animals. Both his mind and his tongue felt thick and slow , but
he m anaged a few words of praise for the success of the
hunters; he knew how to be poli te. Murray , translating for him,
looked surprised, though pleased, to discover that W illiam had
manners. W illiam didn’ t feel well enough to take of fense.
Conversation be came general then, accomplished for the
most part in Mohawk. The Indians showed no particular
interest in W illiam, though the man beside him handed him a
chunk o f cold meat in a companionable fashion. He nodded
thanks and made himself eat it, though he would as soon have
forced down one of his shoe sole s. He felt unwell and clammy ,
and whe n he had finished the meat, nodded politely to the
Indian n ext him and went to  lie down again, hoping he
wouldn’ t vomit.
Seeing this, Murray lifted his chin in W illiam’ s direction
and said something to his friends in Mohawk, ending with a
question of some kind.
The English-speaker , a short, thickset fellow in a checked
wool sh irt and buckskin trouser s, shrugged in reply , then got
up and came to bend over him again.
“Show me this arm,” he said, and without waiting for
W illiam to comply , picked up  his wrist and pulled up the
sleeve of his shirt. W illiam nearly passed out.
When th e black spots stopped w hirling in front of his eyes,
he sa w t hat Mur ray and two mor e Indians had come to join the
first. All of the m were looking at his exposed arm in open
consternation. He didn’ t want to look, but risked a glance. Hisforearm was grotesquely swollen, nearly twice its normal size,
and dark  reddish streaks ran from under the tightly bandaged
poultice, down his arm toward the wrist.
The En glish-speaker—what had Murray called him?
Glutton , he thought, but why?—drew his knife and cut the
bandage. Only with the removal  of its constriction did W illiam
realize how uncomfortable the binding had been. He repressed
the ur ge to rub  his arm, feeling the pins and needles of
returning circula tion. Pins and needles, bloody hell. It felt as
though his arm were engulfed by a mass of fire ants, all
stinging.
“Shit,” h e said, through his teet h. All the Indians knew that
word, evidently , for they all laughed, save Glutton and Murray ,
who were squinting at his arm.
Glutton—he didn’ t look fat, why was he called that?—
poked gingerly at the arm, shoo k his head, and said something
to Murray , then pointed of f toward the west.
Murray rubbed a hand over his  face, then shook his head
violently , in the manner of a man shaking of f fatigue or worry .
Then he  shrugged and asked so mething of the group at lar ge.
Nods an d shrugs , and several of  the men got up and went into
the wood.
A n umber of questions revolved slowly through W illiam’ s
brain, round and bright like the metal globes of his
grandfather ’ s or rery in the library of the London house at
Jermyn Street.
What ar e they doing?
What’ s happening?
Am I dying?
Am I dying like a British soldier?
Why did he… British soldier…  His mind caught the tail of
that one as it passed, pulling it down to look at more carefully .
“British soldier “—who had said that? The answ er spun slowlyinto view . Murray . When they’d  talked in the night… what had
Murray said?
“Is it differ ent for a British soldier , then? Y e dinna want to
die as a cowar d, do ye?”
“Not going to die at all,” he muttered, but his mind ignored
him, intent on t racking this small mystery . What had Murray
meant b y that? Had he been speaking theoretically? Or had he
in fact recognized W illiam as  a British soldier?
Not possible, surely .
And wh at the devil had he said in reply? The sun was
coming up, the dawning light b right enough to hurt his eyes,
soft as it was. He squinted, concentrating.
“It’ s not so diffe r ent—the hoping  to die well if you have to,”
he’d said. So he’d answered as though he was  a British soldier ,
damn him.
At the moment, he didn’ t really care whether he died well or
like a dog…. W here was the—oh, there. Rollo snif fed at his
arm, making a s mall whining noise in the back of his throat,
then nosed at the wound and began to lick it. It felt most
peculiar: painful , but weirdly so othing, and he made no move
to drive the dog away .
What… oh, yes. He had simply  replied, not noticing what
Murray had said. But what if M urray did  know who—or what
—he was? A sm all stab of alarm pierced the muddle of his
slowing thoughts. Had Murray been following him, before he
came in to the swamp? Seen him speaking to the man at the
wilderness farm near the edge of the swamp, perhaps, and
followed, ready to intercept him when the opportunity should
of fer? But if that were true …
What Murray had said about Henry W ashington, about
Dismal T own—was it a lie?
The stocky Indian knelt down b eside him, nudging the dog
away . W illiam couldn’ t ask any of the questions clogging his
brain.“Why do they c all you Glutton?” he asked instead, through
the haze of hot pain.
The man grinned and pulled op en the neck of his shirt, to
display a mass of welted scars that covered neck and chest.
“Killed one,” he said. “W ith my hands. My spirit animal
now . Y ou have one?”
“No.”
The Indian looked reproving at this.
“Y ou need one, you going to live through this. Pick one.
Pick a strong one.”
Muzzily obedien t, W illiam groped through random images
of animals: pig… snake… deer… catamount… no, too rank,
foul-smelling.
“Bear ,” he said, settling on tha t with a sense of certainty .
Didn’ t get any stronger than a bear , did it?
“Bear ,” the Indian repeated, nodding. “Y es, that’ s good.” He
slit W illiam’ s sleeve with his kn ife; the fabric would no longer
fit easily  over the swollen arm. Sunlight washed suddenly over
him, glanced silver from the blade of his knife. He looked at
W illiam then and laughed.
“Y ou got one red beard, Bear Cub, you know that?”
“I know  that,” W illiam said, an d shut his eyes against the
spears of morning’ s light.
 
GLUTT ON W A NTED THE CA T AMOUNT’S skin, but
Murray , alarmed by W illiam’ s condition, refused to wait for
him to skin it. The upshot of the resulting ar gument was that
W illiam found himself occupyin g a hastily constructed travois,
cheek by jowl with the dead cat, being dragged over rough
terrain behind Murray’ s horse. Their destination, he was given
to under stand, was a small settlement some ten miles distant,
which boasted a doctor .Glutton and two of the other Mohawk came with them in
order to show the way , leavin g their other companions to
continue hunting.
The catamount had been gutted, which W illiam supposed
might be better than not—the d ay was warm, and getting hot
—but th e scent of blood drew m asses of flies, which feasted at
their leisure, as the horse, burde ned with the travois, could not
go fast enough t o outpace them. The flies hummed and buzzed
and shrilled about his ears, setting his nerves on edge, and
while m ost were  interested in th e cat, enough of them cared to
try W illiam for taste as suf ficed to keep his mind of f his arm.
When the Indians paused for urination and water , they
hauled W illiam to his feet—a r elief, even wobbly as he was.
Murray glanced at his fly-bitten, sunburned features, and
reaching into a skin bag slung at his waist, pulled out a
battered tin, which turned out to contain a highly malodorous
ointment, with which he anointed W illiam liberally .
“It’ s no but ano ther five or six miles,” he assured W illiam,
who hadn’ t asked.
“Oh, good,” W illiam said, with what vigor he could muster .
“It’ s not hell after all, then—only pur gatory . What’ s another
thousand years?”
That made Murray laugh, though Glutton regarded him in
puzzlement.
“Y e’ll do,” Murray said, clapping him on the shoulder .
“W ant to walk for a bit?”
“God, yes.”
His head  swam, his feet refuse d to point forward, and his
knees seemed to bend in unwonted directions, but anything
was better than another hour of communing with the flies that
blanketed the catamount’ s glazed eyes and drying tongue.
Provided with a stout stick c ut from an oak sapling, he
plodded doggedly behind the horse, alternately drenched with
sweat and shaking with clammy  chills, but determined to stay
upright until and unless he actually fell down.The ointment did keep the flies at bay—all the Indians were
likewise smeared with it—and when not fighting the shaking,
he lapsed into a sort of trance, concerned only with putting one
foot before the other .
The Indians and Murray kept an eye on him for a time, but
then, satisfied that he could rem ain upright, returned to their
own conversations. He could not understand the two Mohawk-
speakers, but Glutton appeared to be catechizing Murray
closely concerning the nature of pur gatory .
Murray was having some dif ficulty in explaining the
concept, apparently owing to the Mohawk having no notion of
sin, or of a God concerned with the wickedness of man.
“Y ou’re lucky you became Kah nyen’kehaka,” Glutton said
at last, shaking his head. “A spirit not satisfied with an evil
man bei ng dead but that wants t o torture him after death? And
Christians think we’re cruel!”
“A ye, well,” Murray replied, “ but think. Say a man is a
coward and hasna died well. Pu r gatory gives him a chance to
prove hi s courag e after all, no? And once he is proved a proper
man, the n the bridge is open to  him, and he can pass through
the clouds of terrible things unhindered to paradise.”
“Hmm!” Glutton said, though he seemed still dubious. “I
suppose if a man can stand to be tortured for hundreds of
years… but how does he do this, if no body?”
“D’ye think a m an needs a body to be tortured?” Murray
asked this with a certain dryness, and Glutton grunted in what
might be either agreement or amusement and dropped the
subject.
They all walked in silence for  some time, surrounded by
birdcalls and the loud buzzing of flies. Preoccupied with the
ef fort of remaining upright, W il liam had fixed his attention on
the back  of Murray’ s head as a  means of not veering of f the
trail and thus n oticed when the Scot, who was leading the
horse, slowed his pace a little.He thou ght at first that this was on his account and was
about to protest that he could k eep up—for a little while, at
least—but then saw Murray glance swiftly at the other
Mohawk, who had drawn ahead, then turn to Glutton and ask
something, in a voice too low for W illiam to make out the
words.
Glutton hunched his shoulders in reluctance, then let them
fall, resigned. “Oh, I see,” he said. “She’ s your pur gatory , eh?”
Murray made a sound of reluctant amusement. “Does it
matter? I asked if she’ s well.”
Glutton sighed, shrugging one shoulder .
“Y es, well. She has a son. A daughter , too, I think. Her
husband…”
“A ye?” Murray’ s voice had hardened in some fashion.
“Y ou know Thayendanegea?”
“I do.” Now Murray sounded curious. W illiam was curious
himself, in a vag ue, unfocused sort of way , and waited to hear
who Thayendan egea might be and what he had to do with the
woman who was—who had been—Murray’ s paramour? Oh,
no.
“I am no longer wed.”  Hi s  wife, then. W illiam felt a faint
pang of sympathy , thinking of M ar gery . He had thought of her
only casually , if at all, in the past four years, but suddenly her
betrayal seemed tragedy . Images of her swam about him,
fractured by a s ense of grief. He felt moisture running down
his face, didn’ t know if it was sweat or tears. The thought
came to him, slowly , as from a great distance, that he must be
of f his head, but he had no notion what to do about it.
The flie s weren’ t biting but we re still buzzing in his ears.
He listened to the hum with great concentration, convinced
that the flies we re trying to tell  him something important. He
listened with great attention, but could make out only
nonsense syllables. “Shosha.” “Nik.” “Osonni.” No, that was a
word, he knew that one! White  man, it meant white man—
were they talking about him?He paw ed clumsily at his ear ,  brushing at the flies, and
caught that word again: “pur gatory .”
For a time, he could not place the meaning of the word; it
hung in front of  him, covered w ith flies. Dimly , he perceived
the hors e’ s hindquarters, gleaming in the sun, the twin lines
made in the dus t by the—what was it? A thing made of—bed
—no, ca nvas; he shook his head . It was his bedsack, wrapped
about two trailing saplings, trai ling … “travois,” that was the
word—yes. And  the cat, there was a cat there, looking at him
with eye s like rough amber , its head turned over its shoulder ,
openmouthed, its fangs showing.
Now the cat was talking to him, too.
“Y ou mad, you know that?”
“I know that,” he murmured. He didn’ t catch the cat’ s reply ,
growled in a Scottish accent.
He l eaned closer , to hear . Felt as though he floated down,
through air thick as water , toward that open mouth. Suddenly
all s ense of ef fort ceased; he was no longer moving but was
supported someh ow . Couldn’ t see the cat… oh. He was lying
facedown on the ground, grass and dirt beneath his cheek.
The cat’ s voice floated back to him, angry but resigned.
“This pur gatory  of yours? Y o u think you can get out
walking backward?”
W ell, no, W illiam thought, feeling peaceful. That made no
sense at all. PLAIN SPEECH
 
T HE YO UNG WOMAN SNICKED the blades of her
scissors in thoughtful fashion.
“Thee is  sure?” she asked. “It seems shame, Friend W illiam.
Such a striking color!”
“I should think you’d consider it unseemly , Miss Hunter ,”
W illiam said, smiling. “I had always heard that Quakers think
bright colors to be worldly .” The only color in her own dress
was a small bronzy-colored brooch that held her kerchief
together . Everything else was shades of cream and butternut—
though he thought these suited her .
She looked reprovingly at him.
“Immodest ornament in dress is hardly the same as grateful
acceptance of the gifts God hath  given. Do bluebirds pluck out
their feathers, or roses fling away their petals?”
“I doubt  that roses itch,” he said , scratching at his chin. The
notion of his b eard as a gift of God was novel, but not
suf ficiently persuasive as to convince him to go about as a
whiskeranto. Beyond its unfortunate color , it grew with vigor ,
but spars ely . He looked disapprovingly at the modest square of
looking glass in his hand. He  could do nothing about the
peeling sunburn that patched his nose and cheeks, or the
scabbed scrapes and scratches left by his adventures in the
swamp—but the hideous copper curls that sprouted jauntily
from his chin and plastered them selves like a disfiguring moss
along his jaw—that, at least, could be amended at once.
“If you please?”
Her lips twitched, and she knelt down beside his stool,
turning his head with a hand ben eath his chin so as to take best
advantage of the light from the window .“W ell, then,” she said, and laid the scissors cool against his
face. “I’ ll ask Denny to come a nd shave thee. I daresay I can
cut thy beard without wounding thee, but”—her eyes narrowed
and she leaned closer , snipping  delicately round the curve of
his c hin—”I’ve not shaved anything more lively than a dead
pig, myself.”
“Barber , barber ,” he murmured, trying not to move his lips,
“shave a pig. How ma—”
Her fing ers pressed up under his chin, firmly shutting his
mouth, b ut she made the small snorting sound that passed with
her f or l aughter . Snip, snip, snip . The blades tickled pleasantly
against h is face,  and the wiry hairs brushed his hands as they
fell into the worn linen towel she’d placed across his lap.
He’d ha d no opportunity to st udy her face at such close
range and took full advantage of the brief opportunity . Her
eyes were almost brown and not quite green. He wished
suddenly to kiss the end of her nose. He shut his eyes, instead,
and breathed. She’d been milking a goat, he could tell.
“I c an shave myself,” he sai d, when she lowered the
scissors.
She rais ed her brows and glanc ed downward at his arm. “I
should be surprised if thee ca n feed thyself yet, let alone
shave.”
In all truth, he could barely lift his right arm, and she had
been fee ding him for the last two days. That being so, he
thought better of telling her that he was in fact left-handed.
“It’ s hea ling well,” he said, ins tead, and turned his arm so
the light shone upon it. Dr . Hunter had removed the dressing
only that morning, expressing gratification at the results. The
wound was still red and puckered, the skin around it
unpleasantly white and moist. It was, however , undoubtedly
healing; the arm was no longer swollen, and the ominous red
streaks had disappeared.
“W ell,” she said consideringly , “it’ s a fine scar , I think. W ell
knit, and rather pretty .”“Pretty?” W illiam echoed, looking skeptically at his arm.
He’d he ard men  now and then describe a scar as “pretty ,” but
most commonly they meant one that had healed straight and
clean an d did not disfigure the bearer by passing through some
significant feature. This one was jagged and sprawling, with a
long tai l leading toward his wrist. He had—he was told
sometime after the fact—narrowly escaped loss of the arm: Dr .
Hunter had grasped it and pla ced his amputation saw just
above th e wound, only to have  the abscess that had formed
below it  burst in his hand. Seeing this, the doctor had hastily
drained the wound, packed it with garlic and comfrey , and
prayed—to good ef fect.
“It looks like an enormous star ,” Rachel Hunter said
approvingly . “One of significance. A great comet, perhaps. Or
the Star of Beth lehem, which led the W ise Men to the manger
of Christ.”
W illiam turned his arm, considering. He thought it looked
rather more like a bursting m ortar shell, himself, but said
merely , “Hmm!” in an encouraging manner . He wished to
continue the conversation—she seldom lingered when she fed
him, having much other work t o do—and so lifted his newly
shorn chin and gestured at the brooch she wore.
“That’ s pretty ,” he said. “Not too worldly?”
“No,” s he said tartly , putting a  hand to the brooch. “It’ s
made of my mother ’ s hair . She died when I was born.”
“Ah. I’m  sorry , ” he said, and with a moment’ s hesitation
added, “So did mine.”
She stopped then and looked at him, and for a moment, he
saw a flicker of something in her eyes that was more than the
matter -of-fact attention she wou ld give to a cow in calf or a
dog that had eaten something that disagreed with it.
“I’m sor ry , too,” she said softly , then turned with decision.
“I’ll fetch my brother .”
Her foot steps went down the narrow stair , quick and light.
He picked up the ends of the towel and shook it out thewindow , scatteri ng the ruddy ha ir clippings to the four winds,
and good riddance. He migh t have grown a beard as a
rudimentary disg uise, had it bee n a decently sober brown. As
it w as, a full beard of that garis h color would rivet the eye of
everyone who saw him.
What to do now ? he wondered. Surely he would be fit to
leave by tomorrow .
His clothes were still wearable , if worse for wear; Miss
Hunter had patched the tears in  his breeches and coat. But he
had no horse, no money save two sixpences that had been in
his p ocket, and had lost the boo k with the list of his contacts
and thei r messag es. He might re call a few of their names, but
without the proper code words and signs…
He thought quite suddenly of Henry W ashington, and that
hazy half-remem bered conversa tion with Ian Murray by the
fire, before they had begun  to speak of death songs.
W ashington, Ca rtwright, Harrin gton, and Carver . The chanted
list retur ned to him, together with Murray’ s puzzled reply to
his mention of W ashington and Dismal T own.
He c ould not th ink of any reason why Murray should seek
to m islead him on the matter .  But if he was correct—was
Captain Richard son grossly mistaken in his intelligence? That
was possible, certainly . Even in as short a time as he had been
in the Colonies , he had learned just how quickly loyalties
could shift, with changing news of threat or opportunity .
But…  said the small,  cold voice of reason, and he felt its
chilly touch on his neck. If Captain Richar dson was not
mistaken… the n he meant to send you to death or
imprisonment .
The sheer enormity of the ide a dried his mouth, and he
reached for the cup of herbal tea that Miss Hunter had brought
him earl ier . It tasted foul, but he scarcely noticed, clutching it
as t hough it m ight be a talisman against the prospect he
imagined.No, he assured himself. It wasn ’ t possible. His father knew
Richardson. Sur ely if the captain were a traitor—what was he
thinking? He gulped the tea, grimacing as he swallowed.
“No,” he said aloud, “not possible. Or not likely ,” he added
fairly . “Occam’ s razor .”
The thought calmed him a little . He had learned the basic
principles of logic at an early age and had found W illiam of
Occam a  sound guide before. W as it more likely that Captain
Richardson was a hidden traitor who had deliberately sent
W illiam into danger—or that the captain had been
misinformed or had simply made a mistake?
Come to that—what would be the point of it? W illiam was
under no delusions concerning his own importance in the
scheme of things. Where would be the benefit to Richardson—
or anyone else—in destroying a junior of ficer engaged in
minor intelligencing?
W ell, then. He relaxed a bit, and taking an unwary mouthful
of the ghastly tea, choked on it and coughed, spraying tea
everywhere. He was still wiping  up the residue with his towel
when Dr . Hunter came trotting  briskly up the stair . Denzell
Hunter was perhaps ten years hi s sister ’ s senior , somewhere in
his late twenties, small-boned a nd cheerful as a cock sparrow .
He beamed at sight of W illiam , plainly so delighted at his
patient’ s recovery that W illiam smiled warmly back.
“Sissy tells me thee requires to shave,” the doctor said,
setting down the shaving mug  and brush he had brought.
“Plainly , thee must be feeling well enough to contemplate a
return to society—for the first t hing any man does when free
of so cial constraint is to let his beard grow . Has thee moved
thy bowels as yet?”
“No, bu t I propose to do so almost at once,” W illiam
assured him. “I am not, however , of a mind to venture out in
public lo oking like a bandit—not even to the privy . I shouldn’ t
wish to scandalize your neighbors.”Dr . Hunter laughed, and withdrawing a razor from one
pocket and his silver -rimmed spectacles from another , set the
latter firmly on his nose and picked up the shaving brush.
“Oh, Sissy and I are already a hissing and a byword,” he
assured W illiam, leaning close to apply the lather . “Seeing
banditti emer ging from our privy would merely confirm the
neighbors in their opinions.”
“Really?” W illiam spoke carefully , twisting his mouth so as
to avoid having it inadvertently  filled with soap. “Why?” He
was surprised to hear this; once regaining his senses, he had
asked w here he was and learned that Oak Grove was a small
Quaker settleme nt. He had thought Quakers in general to be
most un ited in their religious sentiments—but then, he did not
really know any Quakers.
Hunter heaved a deep sigh, an d laying down the shaving
brush, took up the razor in its stead.
“Oh, pol itics,” he said, in an of fhand tone, as of one wishing
to d ismiss a tiresome but triv ial subject. “T ell me, Friend
Ransom, is there someone to wh om I might send, to tell them
of th y mishap a nd delivery?” He paused in the shaving, to
allow W illiam to reply .
“No, I thank you, sir—I shall tell them myself,” W illiam
said, sm iling. “I  am sure I will b e able to leave by tomorrow—
though I assure you that I will  not for get your kindness and
hospitality when I reach my… friends.”
Denzell Hunter ’ s brow furrowed a little, and his mouth
compressed as he resumed the shaving, but he made no
ar gument.
“I trust thee will  for give my inq uisitiveness,” he said after a
moment, “but where does thee intend to go from here?”
W illiam hesitate d, not sure what  to reply . He had in fact not
decided exactly where to go, giv en the lamentable state of his
finances. The best notion that had occurred to him was that he
might head for M ount Josiah, his own plantation. He was not
positive but thought he must be within forty or fifty miles of it—if the Hunters might give him  a little food, he thought he
could re ach it within a few day s, a week at most. And once
there, he could reequip himself  with clothes, a decent horse,
arms, and money , and thus resume his journey .
It wa s a temptin g prospect. T o do that, though, was to reveal
his prese nce in V ir ginia—and to  cause considerable comment,
as ev eryone in th e county not on ly knew him but knew that he
was a soldier . T o turn up in the neighborhood dressed as he
was…
“There are a few Catholics at Rosemount,” Dr . Hunter
observed with dif fidence, wiping the razor on the much-
abused towel. W illiam glanced at him in surprise.
“Oh?” he said warily . Why the devil was Hunter telling him
about Catholics?
“I beg pardon, Friend,” the doctor apologized, seeing his
reaction. “Thee had mentioned thy friends—I thought…”
“Y ou tho ught I was—” Puzzlement was succeeded by a jolt
of re alization, and W illiam slapp ed a hand in reflex against his
chest, na turally finding nothing but the much-worn nightshirt
he was wearing.
“Here it  is.” The doctor bent sw iftly to open the blanket box
at the foot of the bed and stood up, the wooden rosary
swinging from one hand. “W e had to remove it, of course,
when we  undres sed thee, but Sis sy put it safe away to keep for
thee.”
“W e?” W illiam said, seizing on this as a means of delaying
inquiry . “Y ou—and Miss Hunter—undressed me?”
“W ell, there was no one else,” the doctor said
apologetically . “ W e were obliged to lay thee naked in the
creek, in hopes of quelling thy fever—thee does not recall?”
He did —vaguely—but had assumed the memory of
overwhelming c old and a sen se of drowning to be more
remnants of his fever dreams. Miss Hunter ’ s presence had
fortunately—or perhaps unfortunately—not formed part of
those memories.“I c ould not carry thee alone,”  the doctor was explaining
earnestly . “And the neighbors— I did provide a towel for the
preservation of thy modesty ,” he assured W illiam hastily .
“What quarrel do your neighbors have with you?” W illiam
inquired curiously , reaching out to take the rosary from
Hunter ’ s hand.  “I am not a Papist myself,” he added
of fhandedly . “It is a… memento, given me by a friend.”
“Oh.” The doctor rubbed a fin ger across his lip, plainly
disconcerted. “I see. I had thought—”
“The neighbors… ?” W illiam asked, and suppressing his
embarrassment, hung the rosary once more around his neck.
Perhaps the mistake over his religion was the basis of the
neighbors’ animus?
“W ell, I daresay they would hav e helped to carry thee,” Dr .
Hunter admitte d, “had there been time to go and fetch
someone. The matter was ur gent, though, and the nearest
house is a goodly distance.”
This left  the question of the neighbors’ attitude toward the
Hunters unansw ered, but it seemed unmannerly to press
further . W illiam merely nodded and stood up.
The floor tilted abruptly under h im and white light flickered
at th e ed ge of his vision. He gra bbed at the windowsill to keep
from falling and came to his sen ses a moment later , bathed in
sweat, w ith Dr . Hunter ’ s surpri singly strong grip of his arm
preventing his tumbling headfirst into the yard below .
“Not quite so fa st, Friend Ransom,” the doctor said gently ,
and, hauling him in, turned him back toward the bed. “Another
day , perhaps, before thee stands alone. Thee has more phlegm
than is useful to thee, I fear .”
Mildly n auseated, W illiam sat on the bed and allowed Dr .
Hunter t o wipe his face with the  towel. Evidently he had a bit
more time in which to decide where to go.
“How long, do you think, before I can walk a full day?”
Denzell Hunter gave him a considering look.“Five da ys, perhaps—four , at the least,” he said. “Thee is
robust and full-blooded, else I would say a week.”
W illiam, feeling  puny and pallid, nodded and lay down. The
doctor stood frowning at him fo r a moment, though it did not
seem tha t the frown was directed at him; it seemed rather an
expression of some inner concern.
“How… far will thy travels tak e thee?” the doctor asked,
choosing his words with apparent care.
“Quite some distance,” W illiam replied, with equal
wariness. “I am headed… toward Canada,” he said, suddenly
realizing that to say more might  imply more than he wished to
give awa y regarding his reasons for travel. T rue, a man might
have business in Canada without necessarily having dealings
with the British army who occu pied Quebec, but as the doctor
had mentioned politics … best to be politic about the matter .
And certainly he would not mention Mount Josiah. Whatever
the Hunters’ strained relations  with their neighbors, news
concerning their visitor might easily spread.
“Canada,” the doctor repeated, as though to himself. Then
his gaze returned to W illiam. “Y es, that is some considerable
distance. Luckily , I have killed a goat this morning; we will
have meat. That will help to res tore thy strength. I will bleed
thee tom orrow , to restore some balance to thy humors, and
then we shall se e. For the moment…” He smiled and extended
a hand. “Come. I’ll see thee safe to the privy .” A MA TTER OF CONSCIENCE
 
T HERE W AS A ST ORM coming; W illiam could feel it
in the shifting of  the air , see it in the racing cloud shadows that
scudded across the worn floorboards. The heat and damp
oppression of the summer day h ad lifted, and the restlessness
of the air seemed to stir him, as well. Though still weak, he
could no t remain abed, and managed to get up, clinging to the
washstand until the initial giddiness left him.
Left to himself, he then passed some time in walking from
one side  of the room to the othe r—a distance of ten feet or so
—one hand pressed against the wall for balance. The ef fort
drained and dizzied him, and now and then he was obliged to
sit down on the floor , head hung between his knees, until the
spots ceased to dance before his eyes.
It w as on one of these occasions, while seated beneath the
window , that he heard voices  from the yard below . Miss
Rachel Hunter ’ s  voice, surprised and questioning—a man’ s
reply , low-voiced and husky . A familiar voice—Ian Murray!
He shot  to his feet and just as quickly subsided back onto
the floo r , vision black and head swimming. He clenched his
fists and panted, trying to will the blood to return to his head.
“He will  live, then?” The voices  were distant, half buried in
the murm ur of the chestnut trees near the house, but he caught
that. He struggled up onto his knees and caught hold of the
sill, blinking into the cloud-shattered brightness of the day .
Murray’ s tall figure was visible at the edge of the dooryard,
gaunt in buckskins, the huge dog at his side. There was no sign
of G lutton or th e other Indians, but two horses were cropping
grass in the lane  behind Murray , reins dangling. Rachel Hunter
was gesturing to the house, plainly inviting Murray to come in,
but he shook his  head. He reached into the bag at his waist andwithdrew a small package of so me sort, which he handed to
the girl.
“Hoy!” W illiam shouted—or tried to shout; he hadn’ t much
breath—and waved his arms. The wind was rising with a
shivering rush through the chestnut leaves, but the motion
must have caught Murray’ s eye,  for he glanced up, and seeing
W illiam in the window , smiled and lifted his own hand in
greeting.
He made no move to enter the house, though. Instead, he
picked u p the reins of one horse and put them into Rachel
Hunter ’ s hand. Then, with a wave of farewell toward
W illiam’ s window , he swung himself up onto the other horse
with an economical grace and rode away .
W illiam’ s hand s tightened on the sill, disappointment
sur ging through him at seeing Murray vanish into the trees.
W ait, though—Murray had left a horse. Rachel Hunter was
leading it around the house, her  apron and petticoats aswirl in
the rising wind, one hand on her cap to keep it in place.
It must be for h im, surely! Did Murray mean to come back
for h im, then? Or was he to fo llow? Heart thumping in his
ears, W illiam pulled on his patched breeches and the new
stockings Rache l had knitted for him, and after a short struggle
got h is water -stif fened boots on  over them. The ef fort left him
trembling, but he stubbornly made his way downstairs,
lurching, sweati ng, and slipping but arriving in the kitchen at
the bottom in one piece.
The back door opened with a blast of wind and light, then
slammed abruptly , jerked out of Rachel’ s hand. She turned,
saw him, and yelped in startlement.
“Lord save us! What is thee d oing down here?” She was
panting with exertion and fright, and glared at him, tucking
wisps of dark hair back under her cap.
“Didn’ t mean to startle you,” W illiam said in apology . “I
wanted—I saw Mr . Murray lea ving. I thought I might catch
him up. Did he say where I was to meet him?”“He did not. Sit, for heaven’ s sake, before thee falls down.”
He didn ’ t want to. The desi re to be out, to go, was
overwhelming. B ut his knees were shaking, and if he didn’ t sit
down shortly… Reluctantly , he sat.
“What did he sa y?” he asked, and realizing suddenly that he
was sitting in a lady’ s presence, gestured at the other stool.
“Sit, please. T ell me what he said.”
Rachel eyed him but sat, smoothing her windblown clothing
back int o place. The storm was rising; cloud shadows raced
across th e floor ,  across her face , and the air seemed to waver ,
as though the room were underwater .
“He asked after thy health, and when I told him thee was
mending, he gave me the horse , saying it was for thee.” She
hesitated for an instant, and W illiam pushed.
“He gave you something else, did he not? I saw him give
you a package of some kind.”
Her lips pressed together for an instant, but she nodded, and
reaching into her pocket, handed him a small bundle, loosely
wrapped in cloth.
He w as eager to  see what the packet contained—but not so
eager th at he did not notice the  marks in the cloth, deep lines
where s tring had once been t ied round it. And tied very
recently . He glanced up at Rachel Hunter , who looked away ,
chin high, but with color rising  in her cheeks. He cocked an
eyebrow at her , then bent his attention to the packet.
Opened, it contained a small sheaf of paper continentals; a
worn pouch containing the sum  of one guinea, three shillings,
and tuppence in coin; a much-folded—and refolded, if he was
any judge—letter; and another , smaller , bundle, this one still
tied. Setting aside this and the money , he opened the letter .
Cousin,I hope to find you in better health than when last
seen. If so, I will leave a horse and some funds to assist
your travels. If not, I will leave  the money , to pay either
for medicine or your burial. The other thing is  a gift fr om
a fri end whom the Indians call Bear -Killer . He hopes that
you will  wear it in good health . I wish you luck in your
ventur es .
Y our ob’ t. serv .,
 Ian Murray
 
“Hmm!” W illiam was baf fled by this. Evidently Murray had
business of his own and could not or did not wish to stay until
W illiam was able to travel. Though somewhat disappointed—
he w ould have liked to talk further with Murray , now that his
mind wa s clear again—he could  see that it might be better that
Murray did not mean them to travel together .
It dawne d upon him that his immediate problem was solved;
he n ow h ad the means to resume his mission—or as much of it
as he could. He could at l east reach General Howe’ s
headquarters, make a report, and get new instructions.
It was remarkably generous of Murray; the horse had looked
sound, and the money was m ore than enough to see him
comfortably fed  and lodged all the way to New Y ork. He
wondered where  on earth Murra y had got it; by his looks, the
man hadn’ t a p ot to piss in—though he had a good rifle,
W illiam remind ed himself—and he was plainly educated, for
he m ade a decent fist of writing. What could have caused the
odd Scottish Indian to take such interest in him, though?
Bemused, he reached for the smaller bundle and untied the
string. U nwrapped, the content s proved to be the claw of a
lar ge bear , pierced and strung on a leather thong. It was old;
the e dges were w orn, and the knot in the leather had hardened
so far that it would plainly never be untied again.
He strok ed the claw with a thumb, tested the point. W ell, the
bear spi rit had stood him in good stead so far . Smiling to
himself, he put the thong over his head, leaving the claw tohang outside his shirt. Rachel Hunter stared at it, her face
unreadable.
“Y ou read my letter , Miss Hunter ,” W illiam said
reprovingly . “V ery naughty of you!”
The flush rose higher in her cheeks, but she met his eye with
a directness he was unaccustom ed to find in a woman—with
the marked exception of his paternal grandmother .
“Thy sp eech is far superior to th y clothes, Friend W illiam—
even were they new . And while thee has been in thy right mind
for some days n ow , thee has no t chosen to say what brought
thee to the Great Dismal. It is not a place frequented by
gentlemen.”
“Oh, indeed it is, Miss Hunter . Many gentlemen of my
acquaintance go there for the hunting, which is unexcelled.
But naturally , one does not hunt wild boar or catamounts in
one’ s best linen.”
“Neither does one go hunting ar med only with a frying pan,
Friend W illiam,” she riposted. “And if thee is a gentleman in
truth—where is thy home, pray?”
He fumb led for an instant, unable to recall at once his alter
ego’ s pa rticulars, and seized instead on the first city to come to
his mind.
“Ah—Savannah. In the Carolinas,” he added helpfully .
“I know where it is,” she snapped. “And have heard men
speak who come from there. Thee doesn’ t.”
“Are you calling me a liar?” he said, amazed.
“I am.”
“Oh.” T hey sat gazing at each o ther in the half light of the
gathering storm, each calculating. For an instant, he had the
illusion that he was playing chess with his grandmother
Benedicta.
“I am sorry for r eading thy letter ,” she said abruptly . “It was
not vulgar curiosity , I assure thee.”“What, t hen?” He smiled a little, to indicate that he bore no
animus for her trespass. She di dn’ t smile back, but looked at
him narr owly—not in suspicion , but as though gauging him in
some way . At last she sighed, though, and her shoulders
slumped.
“I wished to know a little of thee, and of thy character . The
companions who  brought thee to us seem dangerous men. And
thy cous in? If thee is one like them, then—” Her teeth fixed
briefly i n her upper lip, but she  shook her head, as though to
herself, and continued more firmly .
“W e mu st leave  here within a few days—my brother and
myself. Thee told Denny that thee travels north; I wish that we
may travel with thee, at least for a time.”
Whatever he’d been expecting, it wasn’ t that. He blinked
and said the first thing that came to his mind.
“Leave here? Why? The… er… the neighbors?”
She looked surprised at that.
“What?”
“I beg your pard on, ma’am. Y our brother seemed to indicate
that rela tions between your family and those who dwell nearby
were… somewhat strained?”
“Oh.” One corner of her mouth  tucked back; he could not
tell if this bet okened distress  or amusement—but rather
thought it was the latter .
“I se e,” she said , and drummed her fingers thoughtfully on
the t able. “Y es, t hat’ s true, though it was not what I—well, and
yet it has to do with the matter . I see I must tell thee
everything, then. What does thee know about the Society of
Friends?”
He knew only one family of Quakers, the Unwins. Mr .
Unwin w as a wealthy merchant who knew his father , and he
had met the tw o daughters at a musicale once, but the
conversation had not touched upon philosophy or religion.“They—er , you— dislike confli ct, I believe?” he answered
cautiously .
That surprisingl y made her laugh, and he felt pleasure at
having removed the tiny furrow between her brows, if only
temporarily .
“V iolence,” she corrected. “W e thrive upon conflict, if it be
verbal. And given the form of our worship—Denny says thee
is not a Papist after all, yet I venture to suppose that thee have
never attended a Quaker meeting?”
“The opportunity has not so far occurred, no.”
“I thought not. W ell, then.” She eyed him consideringly .
“W e have preachers who will c ome to speak at meeting—but
anyone may speak at meeting, upon any subject, if the spirit
moves him or her to do so.”
“Her? W omen speak in public, too?”
She gave him a withering look.
“I have a tongue, just as thee does.”
“I’d noticed,” he said, and smiled at her . “Continue, please.”
She lean ed forward a little to do so but was interrupted by
the crash of a shutter swinging back against the house, this
followed by a spatter of rain, dashed hard across the window .
Rachel sprang to her feet with a brief exclamation.
“I must get the chickens in! Close the shutters,” she ordered
him, and dashed out.
T aken a back but amused, he did so, moving slowly . Going
upstairs to fasten the upper shutt ers made him dizzy again, and
he paused on the threshold of the bedroom, holding the
doorjamb until his balance returned. There were two rooms
upstairs: the bedroom at the front of the house, where they had
put him , and a smaller room in the rear . The Hunters now
shared t his room ; there was a truckle bed, a washstand with a
silver ca ndlestick upon it, and little else, save a row of pegs
upon which hung the doctor ’ s  spare shirt and breeches, awoolen shawl, and what must be Rachel Hunter ’ s go-to-
meeting gown, a sober -looking garment dyed with indigo.
W ith rai n and wind muf fled by  the shutters, the dim room
seemed still now , and peaceful, a harbor from the storm. His
heart had slowed from the exertion of climbing the stair , and
he stood  for a moment, enjoyi ng the slightly illicit sense of
trespass. No sound from below;  Rachel must be still in pursuit
of the chickens.
There was something faintly odd about the room, and it took
him only a mom ent to decide w hat it was. The shabbiness and
sparsity of the Hunters’ personal possessions ar gued poverty—
yet these contrasted with the sm all signs of prosperity evident
in th e furnishings: the candlestick was silver , not plate or
pewter , and the ewer and basin were not earthenware but good
china, painted with sprawling blue chrysanthemums.
He lifte d the skirt of the blue dress hanging on the peg,
examining it curiously . Modesty was one thing; threadbareness
was ano ther . The hem was worn  nearly white, the indigo faded
so th at the folds  of the skirt showed a fan-shaped pattern of
light and dark. The Misses Unwin had dressed quietly , but
their clothes were of the highest quality .
On sudden impulse, he brought the cloth to his face,
breathing in. It s melled faintly still of indigo, and of grass and
live things—and very perceptibly of a woman’ s body . The
musk of it ran through him like the pleasure of good wine.
The sound of th e door closing below made him drop the
dress as  though  it had burst into flame, and he made for the
stairs, heart hammering.
Rachel Hunter was shaking herself on the hearth, shedding
drops of  water from her apron,  her cap wilted and soggy on
her head . Not seeing him, she to ok this of f, wrung it out with a
mutter of impatience, and hung it on a nail hammered into the
chimney breast.
Her hair fell down her back, wet-tailed and shining, dark
against the pale cloth of her jacket.“The chickens are all safe, I tr ust?” He spoke, because to
watch her unawares with her hair down, the smell of her still
vivid in his nos e, seemed suddenly to be an unwarrantable
intimacy .
She turn ed round, eyes wary , but made no immediate move
to cover her hair .
“All but the on e my brother calls the Great Whore of
Babylon. No chicken possesses anything resembling
intelligence, but that one is perverse beyond the usual.”
“Perverse?” E vidently she perceived that he was
contemplating the possibilities inherent in this description and
finding them entertaining, for she snorted through her nose
and bent to open the blanket chest.
“The cre ature is  sitting twenty f eet up in a pine tree, in the
midst of a rains torm. Perverse.” She pulled out a linen towel
and began to dry her hair with it.
The sound of the rain altered suddenly , hail rattling like
tossed gravel against the shutters.
“Hmmph,” said Rachel, with a dark look at the window . “I
expect s he will be knocked sens eless by the hail and devoured
by the first passing fox, and serve her right.” She resumed
drying her hair . “No great matter . I shall be pleased never to
see any of those chickens again.”
Seeing him still standing, she sat down, gesturing him to
another stool.
“Y ou di d say that you and your brother proposed to leave
this place and tr avel north,” he reminded her , sitting down. “I
collect the chickens will not make the journey with you?”
“No, and the Lord be praised. They are already sold, along
with the  house.” Laying the crumpled towel aside, she groped
in he r pocket and withdrew a small comb carved from horn. “I
did say I would tell thee why .”
“I believe we had reached the point of learning that the
matter has something to do with your meeting?”She breathed deeply through her nose and nodded.
“I sa id t hat whe n a person is moved of the spirit, he speaks
in meeting? W ell, the spirit moved my brother . That is how we
came to leave Philadelphia.”
A meeting might be formed, she explained, wherever there
were suf ficient Friends of like mind. But in addition to these
small local meetings, there were lar ger bodies, the Quarterly
and Y early Meetings, at which weighty matters of principle
were discussed and actions af fecting Quakers in general were
decided upon.
“Philadelphia Y early Meeting is the lar gest and most
influential,” she said. “Thee is right: the Friends eschew
violence, and seek either to avo id it or to end it. And in this
question of rebellion, Philadelphia Y early Meeting thought and
prayed u pon the matter , and ad vised that the path of wisdom
and peace plainly lay in reconciliation with the mother
country .”
“Indeed.” W illiam was interested. “So all of the Quakers in
the Colonies are now Loyalists, do you mean?”
Her lips compressed for an instant.
“That is the advi ce of the Y early Meeting. As I said, though,
Friends are led of the spirit, and  one must do as one is led to
do.”
“And yo ur brother was led to speak in favor of rebellion?”
W illiam was amused, though wary; Dr . Hunter seemed an
unlikely firebrand.
She dipped her head, not quite a nod.
“In favor of independency ,” she corrected.
“Surely there is something la cking in the logic of that
distinction,” W illiam observed, raising one brow . “How might
independency be achieved without the exercise of violence?”
“If t hee thinks t he spirit of God is necessarily logical, thee
know H im bette r than I do.” She ran a hand through the damp
hair , flicking it over her shoulders with impatience.“Denny said that it was made  clear to him that liberty ,
whether that of the individual or of countries, is a gift of God,
and that it was laid upon him th at he must join in the fight to
gain and preserve it. So we w ere put out of meeting,” she
ended abruptly .
It was dark in the room, with the shutters closed, but he
could se e her face by the dim glow from the smothered hearth.
That last statement had moved her strongly; her mouth was
pinched, and there was a brightness to her eyes that suggested
she might weep, were she not determined not to.
“I co llect this is  a serious thing , to be put out of meeting?”
he asked cautiously .
She nodded, looking away . She picked up the discarded
damp towel, smoothed it slowly , and folded it, plainly
choosing her words.
“I to ld th ee that my mother died when I was born. My father
died three years later—drowned  in a flood. W e were left with
nothing, my brother and I. But t he local meeting saw to it that
we d id not starv e, that there was a roof—if one with holes—
over our heads. There was a question in meeting, how Denny
might be ‘prenticed. I know he feared that he must become a
drover or a cobb ler—he lacks somewhat to be a blacksmith,”
she added, smiling a little despi te her seriousness. “He would
have done it, though—to keep me fed.”
Luck ha d intervened, however . One of the Friends had taken
it upon himself to try to trace any relatives of the orphaned
Hunter c hildren, and after a number of letters to and fro, had
discovered a distant cousin, o riginally from Scotland but
presently in London.
“John H unter , bless his name. H e is a famous physician, he
and his elder brother , who is accoucheur  to the Queen
herself.” Despite her egalitarian principles, Miss Hunter
looked s omewhat awed, and W illiam nodded respectfully . “He
inquired as to Denny’ s abilities, and hearing good report, made
provision for Denny to remove to Philadelphia, to board there
with a Quaker f amily and to g o to the new medical college.And the n he went so far as to have Denny go to London, to
study there with himself!”
“V ery good luck, indeed,” W illiam observed. “But what
about you?”
“Oh. I— was tak en in by a woman in the village,” she said,
with a quick cas ualness that did not deceive him. “But Denzell
came back, and so of course I c ame to keep his house until he
might wed.”
She was pleating the towel between her fingers, looking
down into her l ap. There were small lights in her hair where
the fire caught it, a hint of bronze in the dark brown locks.
“The woman—s he was a goodly woman. She took care I
should learn to k eep a house, to cook, to sew . That I should …
know w hat is needful for a woman to know .” She glanced at
him with that odd directness, her face sober .
“I think thee cannot understand,” she said, “what it means to
be put out of meeting.”
“Something like being drummed out of one’ s regiment, I
expect. Disgraceful and distressing.”
Her eyes narrowed for a moment, but he had spoken
seriously , and she saw that.
“A F riends’ meeting is not only  a fellowship of worship. It
is … a community of mind, o f heart. A lar ger family , in a
way .”
And for a young woman bereft of her own family?
“And to be put out, then… yes, I see,” he said quietly .
There was a brief silence in the room then, broken only by
the sound of the rain. He thought he heard a rooster crow ,
somewhere far of f.
“Thy mother is dead, too, thee said.” Rachel looked at him,
dark eyes soft. “Does thy father live?”
He shook his head.“Y ou will think I am exceeding dramatic,” he said. “It is the
truth, though—my father also died upon the day of my birth.”
She blinked at that.
“T ruly . He was a  good fifty years my mother ’ s senior . When
he h eard that she was dead in ch —in childbirth, he suf fered an
apoplexy and died upon the spot .” He was annoyed; he seldom
stuttered anymore. She had not noticed, though.
“So thee is orp haned, too. I am  sorry for thee,” she said
quietly .
He shrugged, feeling awkward.
“W ell. I knew neither of my par ents. And in fact, I did have
parents. My mother ’ s sister became my mother , in all respects
—she’ s dead now , too—and her husband… I have always
thought of him a s my father , though he is not related to me by
blood.” It occurred to him that he was treading on dangerous
ground here, talking too much about himself. He cleared his
throat and endeavored to guide the conversation back to less
personal matters.
“Y our brother . How does he propose to … er… to
implement this revelation of his?”
She sighed.
“This house—it  belonged to a cousin of our mother ’ s. He
was a widower , and childless. He had willed the house to
Denzell, though when he heard about our being put out of
meeting, he wrote to say that h e meant to alter his will. By
happenstance, though, he caught a bad ague and died before he
could do so. But all his neighbors knew , of course—about
Denny—which is why…”
“I see.” It seemed to W illiam that while God might not be
logical, He seemed to be takin g a most particular interest in
Denzell Hunter . He thought it might not be mannerly to say so,
though, and inquired in a dif ferent direction.
“Y ou said the house was sold. So your brother—”“He has  gone in to the town, to the courthouse, to sign the
papers for the sale of the house and make arrangement for the
goats, pigs, and chickens. As soon as that is done, we will…
leave.” She swallowed visibly . “Denny means to join the
Continental army as a sur geon.”
“And you will go with him? As a camp follower?” W illiam
spoke w ith so me disapproval ; many soldiers’ wives—or
concubines—did “follow the d rum,” essentially joining the
army with their husbands. He had not seen much of camp
followers yet himself, as there  had been none on the Long
Island campaign—but he’d heard his father speak of such
women now and then, mostly with pity . It wasn’ t a life for a
woman of refinement.
She lifted her chin, hearing his disapproval.
“Certainly .”
A long wooden pin lay on the table; she must have taken it
from her  hair when she removed her cap. Now she twisted her
damp h air up into a knot and stabbed the pin decisively
through it.
“So,” sh e said. “W ill thee travel with us? Only so far as thee
may be comfortable in doing so,” she added quickly .
He h ad b een tur ning the notion over in the back of his mind
all the while th ey had talked. Plainly , such an arrangement
would have advantages for the Hunters—a lar ger group was
always safer , and it was apparent to W illiam that, his
revelation notwithstanding, the doctor was not a natural
warrior . It would, he thought, have some advantage to himself,
as well. The Hunters knew something of the immediate
countryside, wh ich he did not, and a man traveling in a group
—particularly a  group including a woman—was much less
noticeable, and much less suspicious, than one alone.
It dawned on hi m suddenly that if Hunter meant to join the
Continental arm y , there might be excellent opportunity of
getting close enough to W ashington’ s forces to gain valuableintelligence of them—something that would go a long way
toward compensating for the loss of his book of contacts.
“Y es, ce rtainly ,” he said, and s miled at Miss Hunter . “An
admirable suggestion!”
A flash of lightning stabbed su ddenly through the slits of
the shut ters, and a clap of thunder crashed overhead, almost
simultaneously . Both of them started violently at the noise.
W illiam swallowed, feeling his ears still ring. The sharp
scent of lightning burned the air .
“I do hope,” he said, “that that was a signal of approval.”
She didn’ t laugh. THE BLESSING OF BRIDE AND OF MICHAEL
 
T HE MO HA WK KNEW HIM as Thayendanegea—T wo
W agers. T o the English, he wa s Joseph Brant. Ian had heard
much of  the man when he dwelt among the Mohawk, by both
his nam es, and had wondered m ore than once just how well
Thayendanegea managed the tre acherous ground between two
worlds. W as it like the bridge? he thought suddenly . The
slender bridge that lay between this world and the next, the air
around it assailed by flying heads with rending teeth?
Sometime he would like to sit b y a fire with Joseph Brant and
ask him.
He was going to  Brant’ s house now—but not to speak with
Brant. Glutton had told him that Sun Elk had left Snaketown
to join Brant and that his wife had gone with him.
“They are in Unadilla,” Glutton had said. “Probably still
there. Thayendanegea fights with the English, you know . He’ s
talking t o the Loyalists up there, trying to get them to join him
and his men. He calls them ‘B rant’ s V olunteers.’” He spoke
casually; Glutton was not interested in politics, though he
would fight now and then, when the spirit moved him.
“Does he?” Ian said, just as casually . “W ell, then.”
He had no parti cular idea where Unadilla was, save that it
was in the col ony of New Y ork, but that was no great
dif ficulty . He set out next day at dawn, heading north.
He had no comp any save the dog and his thoughts, most of
the t ime. At one  point, though, he came to a summer camp of
Mohawk and was welcomed there.
He sat with the men, talking. A fter a time, a young woman
brought him a b owl of stew , and  he ate it, barely noticing what
was in it, though  his belly seem ed grateful for the warmth and
stopped clenching itself.He coul dn’ t say what drew his eye, but he looked up from
the m en’ s talk to see the young woman who had brought him
the stew  sitting in the shadow j ust outside the fire, looking at
him. She smiled, very slightly .
He chew ed more slowly , the ta ste of the stew suddenly a
savor in his mouth. Bear meat, rich with fat. Corn and beans,
spiced with onions and garlic. D elicious. She tilted her head to
one side; one d ark brow rose, elegant, then she rose, too, as
though lifted by her question.
Ian s et down his  bowl and belched politely , then got up and
went outside, paying no attentio n to the knowing looks of the
men with whom he’d been eating.
She was  waiting , a pale blur in the shadow of a birch. They
talked—he felt his mouth form words, felt the tickle of her
speech i n his ears, but was not really aware of what they said.
He held the glow of his anger lik e a live coal in the palm of his
hand, an  ember smoking in his h eart. He had no thought of her
as w ater to his scorching, nor did he think to kindle her . There
were fla mes behind his eyes, a nd he was mindless as fire is,
devouring where there was fuel, dying where there was not.
He kisse d her . She smelled of food, worked skins, and sun-
warmed earth. No hint of wood, no tinge of blood. She was
tall; he felt her breasts soft and pushing, dropped his hands to
the curve of her hips.
She moved against him, solid, willing. Drew back, letting
cool air touch his skin where sh e had been, and took him by
the hand to lea d him to her long-house. No one glanced at
them as  she took him into her bed and, in the half-dark
warmth, turned to him, naked.
He’d thought it would be better  if he couldn’ t see her face.
Anonymous, qu ick, some pleasure for her , perhaps. Surcease,
for him. For the few moments when he lost himself, at least.
But in the dark, she was Emily , and he fled from her bed in
shame and anger , leaving astonishment behind.
 
FOR TH E NEX T TWEL VE days he walked, the dog by
his side, and spoke to no one.
 
THA YENDANEGEA ’S HOUSE ST OOD by itself in
lar ge grounds, but near enough the village to be still part of it.
The village was much as any other , save that many of the
houses had two or three grindstones by the step; each woman
ground meal for her family , rather than take it to a mill.
There w ere dogs in the street,  dozing in the shadows of
wagons and walls. Every one sat up, startled, when Rollo came
within s centing distance. A few growled or barked, but none
of fered to fight.
The men were another matter . There were several men
leaning on a fence, watching an other with a horse in a field.
All of them cast glances at him, half curious, half wary . He
didn’ t know most of them. One  of them, though, was a man
named Eats T urtles, whom he had known in Snaketown.
Another was Sun Elk.
Sun Elk blinked at him, startled as any of the dogs, and then
stepped out into the road to face him.
“What are you doing here?”
He cons idered for a split second telling the truth—but it
wasn’ t a truth that could be told quickly , if at all, and certainly
not before strangers.
“None of your business,” he answered calmly .
Sun Elk  had spoken to him in M ohawk, and he’d answered
in th e same lang uage. He saw eyebrows rise, and T urtle made
to gr eet him, cle arly hoping to avert whatever storm was in the
of fing by making it clear that Ian was Kahnyen’kehaka
himself. He returned T urtle’ s greeting, and the others drew
back a little, puzzled—and interested—but not hostile.Sun Elk , on the other hand… W ell, Ian hadn’ t expected the
man to fall on his neck, after all. He’d hoped—insofar as he’d
thought about Sun Elk, which was very little—that he’d be
elsewhere, but here he was, and Ian smiled wryly to himself,
thinking of old Grannie W ilson , who had once described her
son-in-law , Hiram, as looking “like he wouldn’ t give the r oad
to a bear .”
It was an apt de scription, and Sun Elk’ s disposition was not
improved either by Ian’ s reply nor by the subsequent smile.
“What do you want?” Sun Elk demanded.
“Nothing that’ s yours,” Ian replied, as mildly as possible.
Sun Elk ’ s eyes narrowed, but before he could say anything
else, T ur tle intervened, inviting Ian to come into his house, to
eat, to drink.
He shou ld. It wasn’ t polite to refuse. And he could ask,
later , privately , where Emily was. But the need that had
brought him over three hundred miles of wilderness
acknowledged no requirements of civility . Neither would it
brook delay .
Besides, he reflected, readyin g himself, he’d known it
would come to this. No point in putting it of f.
“I wish to speak with her who was once my wife,” he said.
“Where is she?”
Several of the m en blinked at that, interested or taken back
—but he saw T u rtle’ s eyes flick toward the gates of the lar ge
house at the end of the road.
Sun Elk , to his credit, merely drew himself up and planted
himself more solidly in the road, ready to defy two  bears, if
necessary . Rollo didn’ t care for this and lifted his lip in a
growl th at made  one or two of t he men step back sharply . Sun
Elk, wh o had better reason tha n most of them to know just
what Rollo was capable of, didn’ t move an inch.
“Do you mean to set your demon on me?” he asked.“Of cou rse not. Sheas, a cu,”  he said  quietly to Rollo. The
dog stood his ground for a moment longer—just long enough
to indica te that it was his  i dea —and then turned aside and lay
down, though he kept up a low grumble, like distant thunder .
“I have not come to take her fro m you,” Ian said to Sun Elk.
He’d meant to b e conciliatory , but he hadn’ t really expected it
to work, and it didn’ t.
“Y ou think you could?”
“If I dinna want  to, does it matter?” Ian said testily , lapsing
into English.
“She wouldn’ t go with you, even if you killed me!”
“How m any tim es must I say that I dinna want to take her
away from ye?”
Sun Elk stared at him for a minute, his eyes quite black.
“Often enough for your face t o say the same thing,” he
whispered, and clenched his fists.
An inter ested m urmur rose from the other men, but there
was an intangible drawing away . They wouldn’ t interfere in a
fight ove r a woman. That was a blessing, Ian thought vaguely ,
watching Sun Elk’ s hands. The man was right-handed, he
remembered that. There was a knife on his belt, but his hand
wasn’ t hovering near it.
Ian spread his own hands peaceably .
“I wish only to talk with her .”
“Why?” Sun Elk barked. He w as close enough for Ian to
feel the spray of  spittle on his face, but he didn’ t wipe it away .
He didn’ t back away , either , and dropped his hands.
“That’ s between me and her ,” he said quietly . “I daresay
she’ll te ll ye later .” The thought of it gave him a pang. The
statement didn’ t seem to reassure Sun Elk, who without
warning hit him in the nose.
The crun ch echo ed through his upper teeth, and Sun Elk’ s
other fis t struck him a glancing  blow on the cheekbone. Heshook his head to clear it, saw the blur of movement through
watering eyes, and—more by good fortune than intent—
kicked Sun Elk solidly in the crotch.
He stood breathing heavily , dripping blood on the roadway .
Six pairs  of eyes went from him  to Sun Elk, curled in the dust
and mak ing small, ur gent noises. Rollo got up, walked over to
the falle n man, and smelled hi m with interest. All the eyes
came back to Ian.
He made a small motion of the hand that brought Rollo to
heel and walked up the road toward Brant’ s house, six pairs of
eyes fixed on his back.
 
WHEN THE DOOR OPENED, the young white woman
who stood there gaped at him,  eyes round as pennies. He’d
been in the act o f wiping his blo ody nose with his shirttail. He
completed this action and inclined his head civilly .
“W ill ye  be so good as to ask W akyo’ teyehsnonhsa if she
will be pleased to speak wi’ Ian Murray?”
The young woman blinked, twice. Then she nodded and
swung the door to—pausing wi th it halfway shut, in order to
look at him once  more and assure herself that she’d really seen
him.
Feeling strange, he stepped down into the garden. It was a
formal English garden, with rosebushes and lavender and
stone-flagged pa ths. The smell of it reminded him of Auntie
Claire, and he wondered briefly whether Thayendanegea had
brought back an English gardener from London.
There were two women at w ork in the garden, some
distance away; one was a white woman, by the color of the
hair beneath her cap, and in her middle years by the stoop of
her shou lders—perhaps Brant’ s wife? he wondered. W as the
young woman who had answered the door their daughter? The
other w oman was Indian, with her hair in a plait down herback but streaked with white. Neither one turned to look at
him.
When h e heard the click of the door latch behind him, he
waited a moment before turning around, steeling himself
against the disappointment of being told that she was not here
—or , worse, that she had refused to see him.
But she was there. Emily . Small and straight, with her
breasts showing  round in the neck of a blue calico gown, her
long hai r bound up behind but uncovered. And her face fearful
—but eager . Her eyes lit with joy at the sight of him, and she
took a step toward him.
He wou ld have crushed her to him had she come to him,
made an y gesture inviting it. And what then?  he wondered
dimly , b ut it didn’ t matter; after that first impulsive movement
toward h im, she stopped and sto od, her hands fluttering for an
instant as though they would sh ape the air between them, but
then folding tight before her , hidden in the folds of her skirt.
“W olf ’ s Brother ,” she said softly , in Mohawk. “My heart is
warm to see you.”
“Mine, too,” he said in the same language.
“Have you come to speak with Thayendanegea?” she asked,
tilting her head back toward the house.
“Perhaps later .” Neither of them mentioned his nose, though
from the  throbbing, it was like ly twice its normal size and
there was blood all down the front of his shirt. He glanced
around; there was a path that led  away from the house, and he
nodded at that. “W ill you walk with me?”
She hesi tated fo r a moment. Th e flame in her eyes had not
gone out, but it  burned lower now; there were other things
there—caution, mild distress, and what he thought was pride.
He w as surprised that he should see them so clearly . It was as
though she were made of glass.
“I—the children,” she blurted , half turning toward the
house.“It d oesna matter ,” he said. “I only—” A dribble of blood
from on e nostril stopped him, and he paused to wipe the back
of h is hand across his upper lip. He took the two steps
necessary to bring them within touching distance, though he
was careful not to touch her .
“I w ished to say  to you that I am  sorry ,” he said formally , in
Mohawk. “That I could not give you children. And that I am
glad you have them.”
A lo vely warm flush rose in h er cheeks, and he saw the
pride in her overcome the distress.
“May I see them ?” he asked, su rprising himself as much as
her .
She wavered for an instant, bu t then turned and went into
the h ouse. He sa t on a stone wall, waiting, and she returned a
few moments later with a small boy , maybe five years old, and
a girl of three or so in short pla its, who looked gravely at him
and sucked her fist.
Blood h ad run down the back o f his throat; it felt raw and
tasted of iron.
Now and then o n his journey , he’d gone carefully over the
explanation Auntie Claire had given him. Not with any notion
of telling it to Emily; it could mean nothing to her—he barely
understood it himself. Only , maybe, as some shield against this
moment, seeing her with the children he could not give her .
“Call it fate ,” C laire had said, looking at him with a hawk’ s
eye, the one that sees from far above, so far above, maybe, that
what see ms mer cilessness is truly compassion. “Or call it bad
luck. But it wasn’ t your fault. Or hers.”
“Come h ere,” he said in Mohawk, putting out a hand to the
little bo y . The boy glanced at his mother , but then came to
him, looking up in curiosity to his face.
“I see you in his face,” he said softly to her , speaking
English. “And in his hands,” he  added in Mohawk, taking the
child’ s hands—so amazingly small—in his own. It was true:
the b oy had her  hands, fine-boned and supple; they curled uplike sleeping mice in his palm s, then the fingers sprang out
like a spider ’ s legs and the boy giggled. He laughed, too,
closed his own hands swiftly on the boy’ s, like a bear gulping
a pair of trout, making the child shriek, then let go.
“Are you happy?” he asked her .
“Y es,” she said softly . She loo ked down, not meeting his
eyes, and he kn ew it was because she would answer honestly
but d id not wish to see if her answer hurt him. He put a hand
under her chin—her skin was s o soft!—and lifted her face to
him.
“Are yo u happy ?” he asked aga in, and smiled a little as he
said it.
“Y es,” she said again. But then  gave a small sigh, and her
own han d touch ed his face at last, light as a moth’ s wing. “But
sometimes I miss you, Ian.” There was nothing wrong with her
accent, b ut his Scots name sounded impossibly exotic on her
tongue—it always had.
He f elt a  lump in his throat, but kept the faint smile on his
face.
“I see you dinna ask me wheth er I’m  happy ,” he said, and
could have kicked himself.
She gave him a quick look, direct as a knife point.
“I have eyes,” she said, very simply .
There was a silence between t hem. He looked away but
could feel her there, breathing. Ripe. Soft. He felt her
softening further , opening. She had been wise not to go into
the garden with him. Here, wi th her son playing in the dirt
near her feet, it was safe. For her , at least.
“Do you  mean to stay?” she ask ed at last, and he shook his
head.
“I am going to Scotland,” he said.
“Y ou will take a  wife among your own people.” There was
relief in that, but regret, too.“Are yo ur people no longer m y own?” he asked, with a
flash of fiercene ss. “They washed the white blood from my
body in the river—you were there.”
“I was there.”
She look ed at him for a long time, searching his face. Likely
enough that she would never s ee him again; did she seek to
remember him,  or was she looking for something in his
features, he wondered?
The latt er . She turned abruptly , raising a hand to him to
wait, and disappeared into the house.
The little girl ran after her , not wanting to stay with the
stranger , but the little boy lingered, interested.
“Are you W olf ’ s Brother?”
“I am, aye. And you?”
“They c all me Digger .” It was a child’ s sort of name, used
for convenience until the person’ s real name should declare
itself in some way . Ian nodde d, and they remained a few
minutes, looking each other over with interest, but with no
sense of awkwardness between them.
“She who is mother ’ s mother to my mother ,” Digger said
quite suddenly . “She talked about you. T o me.”
“She did?” said Ian, startled. That would be T ewaktenyonh.
A great woman,  head of the W omen’ s Council at Snaketown—
and the person who had sent him away .
“Does T ewaktenyonh still live?” he asked, curious.
“Oh, yes. She’ s older than the  mountains,” the little boy
answered seriou sly . “She has only two teeth left, but she still
eats.”
Ian smiled at that.
“Good. What did she say to you of me?”
The boy screwed up his face, recollecting the words.“She sai d I was the child of you r spirit but I should not say
so to my father .”
Ian felt the blow of that, harder than any the child’ s father
had dealt him, and couldn’ t speak for a moment.
“A ye, I dinna th ink ye should say so, either ,” he said, when
words returned to him. He repea ted the sentiment in Mohawk,
in case the boy  might not have  understood English, and the
child nodded, tranquil.
“W ill I be with you, sometime?” he asked, only vaguely
interested in the answer . A lizard had come out onto the stone
wall to bask, and his eyes were fixed on it.
Ian forced his own words to be casual.
“If I live.”
The boy’ s eyes were narrowed, watching the lizard, and the
tiny right hand t witched, just a little. The distance was too far ,
though; he knew it, and glanced at Ian, who was closer . Ian cut
his eyes at the lizard without moving, then looked back at the
boy and  agreem ent sprang up between them. Don’ t move , his
eyes warned, and the boy seemed to cease breathing.
It didn’ t  do to think in such sit uations. W ithout pausing to
draw br eath, he snatched, and the lizard was in his hand,
astonished and thrashing.
The littl e boy chortled and hopped up and down, clapping
his hands with glee, then held them out for the lizard, which he
received with the greatest concentration, folding his hands
about it so that it might not escape.
“And what will ye do with him?” Ian asked, smiling.
The boy held the lizard up to his face, peering at it intently ,
and his brow furrowed in thought.
“I will name him,” he said at last. “Then he will be mine
and bles s me when I see him again.” He brought the lizard up,
eyeball to eyeball, and each stared unblinking at the other .“Y our name is B ob,” the boy de clared at last in English, and
with great ceremony set the lizard on the ground. Bob leapt
from his hands and disappeared under a log.
“A verra  good name,” Ian said gravely . His bruised ribs hurt
with the  need not to laugh, but  the ur ge vanished in the next
moment, as the distant door op ened and Emily came out, a
bundle in her arms.
She came up to him and presented him with a child,
swaddled and bound to a cradle board, in much the same way
he had presented the lizard to Digger .
“This is  my second daughter ,” she said, shyly proud. “W ill
you choose her name?”
He was moved, and touched Emily’ s hand, very lightly ,
before taking the cradleboard onto his knee and looking
searchingly into  the tiny face. She could not have given him
greater honor , this permanent m ark of the feeling she had once
held for him—still might hold for him.
But as he looke d at the little girl—she regarded him with
round, serious eyes, taking in this new manifestation of her
personal landscape—a conviction took root in him. He didn’ t
question it; it was simply there, and undeniable.
“Thank you,” he said, and sm iled at Emily with great
af fection. He laid his hand—huge, and rough with callus and
the nicks of livi ng—on the tiny , perfect, soft-haired head. “I
will bless all yo ur children wi’ the blessings of Bride and of
Michael.” He lifted his hand then, and reaching out, drew
Digger to him. “But this one is mine to name.”
Her face went quite blank with astonishment, and she
looked quickly from him to her  son and back. She swallowed
visibly , unsure—but it didn’ t matter; he  was sure.
“Y our name is Swiftest of Liza rds,” he said, in Mohawk.
The Swiftest of Lizards though t for a minute, then nodded,
pleased, and with a laugh of pure delight, darted away . SHEL TER FROM THE ST ORM
 
N OT FOR THE FIRST time, W illiam was startled to
realize the breadth of his father ’ s acquaintance. In casual
conversation as they rode, he had mentioned to Denzell Hunter
that his father had once known a Dr . John Hunter—in fact, the
association, involving an electric eel, an impromptu duel, and
the implications of body-snatching, was part of the situation
that had sent Lo rd John to Cana da and the Plains of Abraham.
Might th is John Hunter perhaps be the beneficent relative that
Miss Rachel had mentioned?
Denny Hunter had brightened at once.
“How remarkable! Y es, it must be the same. Particularly
since the e ment ions body-snatching in connection with him.”
He coughed, seeming a little embarrassed.
“It was a most… educational association,” Hunter said.
“Though a disturbing one, upon  occasion.” He glanced back at
his siste r , but Rachel was well behind them, her mule ambling
and Rachel herself half asleep in the saddle, her head nodding
like a sunflower ’ s.
“Thee u nderstands, Friend W ill iam,” Hunter said, lowering
his voic e, “that in order to become skilled in the arts of
sur gery , it is necessary to lea rn how the human body is
constructed and to understand it s workings. Only so much can
be le arned from texts—and the texts upon which most medical
men rely are … well, to be blunt about it, they are wrong.”
“Oh, yes?” W illiam was only half attending to the
conversation. Th e other half of  his mind was evenly divided
among his assessment of the road, a hope that they might
reach so mewhere habitable in time to procure supper , and an
appreciation of the slenderness o f Rachel Hunter ’ s neck on the
rare occasions when she rode i n front of him. He wanted toturn round and look at her again, but couldn’ t do it so soon, in
all decency . Another few minutes…
“… Galen and Aesculapius. Th e common conception is—
and has been for a very long time—that the ancient Greeks had
written down everything known regarding the human body;
there was no ne ed to doubt the se texts or to create mystery
where there was none.”
W illiam grunted. “Y ou should hear my uncle go on about
ancient military texts. He’ s all for Caesar , who he says was a
very decent general, but he takes  leave to doubt that Herodotus
ever saw a battlefield.”
Hunter glanced at him in surprised interest. “Exactly what
John Hunter said—in dif ferent  terms—regarding A vicenna!
‘The ma n’ s never seen a preg nant uterus in his life.’” He
smacked a fist upon his pomme l to emphasize the point, and
his horse jerked its head, startled.
“Whoa, whoa,” said Hunter , alarmed, sawing on the reins in
a way calculated to have the horse rearing and pawing in
moments. W illiam leaned over and neatly took the reins out of
Denzell’ s hands, giving them slack.
He was rather g lad of the brief distraction, as it kept Hunter
from dis coursing further about uteruses. W illiam was not at all
sure wh at a uterus was, but if it got pregnant, it must have to
do with a wom an’ s privates, and that was not something he
wished to discuss within the hearing of Miss Hunter .
“But you said y our association with Dr . John Hunter was
disturbing,” he said, handing Hunter back the reins and
hastening to change the subject before the doctor could think
of something more embarrassing to mention. “Why was that?”
“W ell… we—h is students—lea rned the mysteries of the
human body from … the human body .”
W illiam felt a slight clench of the belly .
“Dissection, you mean?”“Y es.” Hunter glanced at him, c oncerned. “It is a distasteful
prospect, I know—and yet, to see the marvelous fashion in
which G od has ordered things! T he intricacies of a kidney , the
amazing interior  of a lung—W illiam, I cannot tell thee what
revelation it is!”
“W ell… yes, I see it must be,” W illiam said guardedly . Now
he coul d reasonably glance back, and did so. Rachel had
straightened, stretching her back , head tilted so that her straw
hat fell back, the sun on her face, and he smiled. “Y ou… er…
where did you get the bodies to dissect?”
Dr . Hunter sighed.
“That was the disturbing aspect. Many were paupers from
the wor khouse or the street, and their deaths were most
pitiable. But many were the bod ies of executed criminals. And
while I must be pleased that som e good came of their deaths, I
could not but be appalled at those deaths.”
“Why?” W illiam asked, interested.
“Why?” Hunter blinked at him behind his spectacles, but
then shook his h ead, as though shaking of f flies. “But I for get
thee is not one  of us—your pardon. W e do not condone
violence, Friend W illiam, and surely not killing.”
“Not even criminals? Murderers?”
Denzell’ s lips compressed, an d he looked unhappy , but
shook his head.
“No. Le t them be imprisoned o r put to some useful labor .
But for the state to commit m urder in its turn is a dreadful
violation of God’ s commandmen t; it implicates all of us in the
commission of this sin. Does thee not see?”
“I see that the state, as you call it, has responsibility for its
subjects,” W illia m said, rather nettled. “Y ou expect constables
and judg es to see that you and your property are secure, don’ t
you? If the state has that responsibility , surely it must have the
means of carrying it out.”“I do  not contest that—imprison criminals, if necessary , as I
say . But the state has no right to kill people on my behalf!”
“Has it not?” W illiam said dryly . “Have you any idea of the
nature of some of the criminal s who are executed? Of their
crimes?”
“Has thee?” Hunter gave him a raised brow .
“I have , yes. The Governor of Newgate Prison is an
acquaintance—another acquaintance—of my father ’ s; I have
sat a t tab le with  him and heard stories that would take the curl
out of your wig, Dr . Hunter . If you wore one,” he added.
Hunter responded to the jest with a fleeting smile.
“Call m e by my name,” he said. “Thee knows we do not
hold by titles. A nd I admit the truth of what thee says. I have
heard—and seen—more terrible things than you have likely
heard at your fa ther ’ s table. But justice lies in God’ s hand. T o
do violence—to take a life—is to violate God’ s command and
do grievous sin.”
“And if you are attacked, injured, you may not fight back?”
W illiam demanded. “Y ou may not defend yourselves? Y our
families?”
“W e rel y upon the goodness and mercy of God,” Denzell
said firmly . “And if we are killed, then we die in the firm
expectation of God’ s life and resurrection.”
They ro de in silence for a moment before W illiam said
conversationally , “Or you rely upon the willingness of
someone else to commit violence for you.”
Denzell drew a deep, instinctive breath, but thought better
of w hatever he had meant to say . They rode in silence for
some time, and when they spoke again, it was of birds.
 
IT W AS RAINING WHEN they  woke next day . Not a quick
thunder -shower , here and gone, but a heavy , remorseless sort
of rain that looked set to pour steadily all day . There was nopoint in staying where they were; the rocky overhang under
which they had sheltered for the night lay directly exposed to
the wind, and t he rain had alr eady dampened the firewood
suf ficiently as to cause their bre akfast fire to yield much more
smoke than heat.
Still cou ghing intermittently , W i lliam and Denny loaded the
pack mule while Rachel bound up a bundle of the least-damp
sticks in  canvas. If they found shelter by nightfall, they might
at le ast be able to start a fire to cook their supper , even if the
rain continued.
There was little conversation. Even had they been so
inclined, the rain beat so heavi ly upon trees and ground and
upon their hats that anything said had to be half shouted to be
heard.
In a state of sodden but dogged determination, they rode
slowly north by northeast, Denny anxiously consulting his
compass when they reached a crossroad.
“What think thee, Friend W illiam?” Denny took of f his
spectacles and wiped them—to l ittle ef fect—on the skirt of his
coat. “Neither road runs preci sely as we might wish, and
Friend Lockett did not mention this crossroad in his
instruction. That  one”—he pointed at the road that crossed the
one they were se t upon—”appears to run north, while this one
is due east. At t he moment.” He glanced at W illiam, his face
oddly naked without his spectacles.
A fa rmer named Lockett and h is wife had been their last
contact with humanity , three da ys before. She had given them
supper , sold them bread, eggs, and cheese, and her husband
had set them on the road—toward Albany , he said; they should
run across an indication of the Continental army somewhere
between here and there. But he hadn’ t  mentioned a crossroad.
W illiam gave the muddy ground a glance, but the crossroad
itself lay in a low spot and was nothing more now than a small
lake. No  clues to traf fic—but t he road they were on seemed
substantially wider than the smaller one crossing it.“This on e,” he said firmly , and n udged his horse squelching
through the lake to the other side.
Now it was late afternoon, and he was beginning to be
worried about his decision. Had they been upon the right road,
they should—sa id Mr . Lockett—encounter a small hamlet
called Johnson’ s  Ford by the end of the day . Of course, the
rain had  slowed them, he told himself. And while the
countryside looked as vacant and writhingly verdant as ever ,
villages and farmsteads did pop  up as suddenly as mushrooms
after a heavy rain. In which  case, they might encounter
Johnson’ s Ford at any moment.
“Maybe the place has dissolved.” Rachel leaned out from
her sadd le to call to him. Rachel had nearly dissolved herself,
and he grinned, in spite of his worry . The rain had beaten the
brim of her stra w hat down, so  that it hung limp as a duster
around h er head ; she was obliged to lift the front of it in order
to peer out, like a suspicious toad under a harrow . Her clothes
were soaked through, as well, and as she was wearing three
layers of everything, she resem bled nothing so much as a
lar ge, untidy bale of wet laund ry , forked steaming from the
kettle.
Before he could reply to her , though, her brother sat up
straight in his s addle, showering water in all directions, and
pointed dramatically down the road.
“Look!”
W illiam jerked his head round, assuming that their
destination was in sight. It wasn ’ t, but the road was no longer
empty . A  man was walking briskly toward them through the
mud, a split burlap sack shielding his head and shoulders from
the rain. In the current state of desolation, anything human was
a sight to gladden the eyes, and W illiam spurred up a little to
hail the fellow .
“W ell met, young sir ,” said the man, peering up at W illiam
from his burlap refuge. “Where  ye bound, this dismal day?”
He lifted a lip in ingratiation, showing a broken dogtooth,
stained with tobacco.“Johnson’ s Ford. Are we headed aright?”
The man reared back, as though astonished.
“Johnson’ s Ford, you say?”
“I do, yes,” W ill iam said, with a  certain amount of testiness.
He s ympathized  with the lack of company in rural parts and
the s ubsequent impulse of the in habitants to detain travelers as
long as possible, but this was not the day for it. “Where is it?”
The man shook his head back and forth in slow dismay .
” ‘Fraid ye’ve m issed your turn, sir . Ought to’ve gone left at
the crossroads.”
Rachel made a small, pitiable s ound at this. The light was
already failing, shadow beginning to pool round the horses’
feet. It was sev eral hours’ ride back to the crossroad; they
could no t hope to reach it before  nightfall, let alone make their
way to Johnson’ s Ford.
The man plainly realized this, a s well. He smiled happily at
W illiam, revealing a wide expanse of brown gum.
“If so be as you gennelmen’ll help me cotch my cow and
drive ‘er home, the wife’d be pleased to of fer ye supper and a
bed.”
There being no reasonable alternative, W illiam accepted this
suggestion with what grace he could, and leaving Rachel
sheltering under a tree with the animals, he and Denny Hunter
went to assist with the cow-cotching.
The cow in que stion, a rawboned shaggy beast with a wild
eye, pro ved bo th elusive and obdurate, and it took the
combined talent s of all three men to capture it and drag it to
the road. Soaked to the skin and thickly plastered with mud,
the bedr aggled p arty then followed Mr . Antioch Johnson—for
so th eir host had introduced hi mself—through the gathering
shades of night to a small ramshackle farmhouse.
The rain  was still pelting down , though, and any roof was
welcome, leaky or not.Mrs. Johnson proved to be a r agged slattern of uncertain
age, wit h even fewer teeth th an her husband and a sullen
disposition. She  glared at the dripping guests and turned her
back rudely upon them, but did  produce wooden bowls of a
vile, con gealed stew—and there was fresh milk from the cow .
W illiam noticed that Rachel took but a single bite of the stew ,
turned p ale, removed something from her mouth, and set down
her spoon, after which she confined herself to the milk.
He h imself was much too hungr y either to taste the stew or
care what was in it—and, fortunately , it was too dark to
examine the contents of his bowl.
Denny w as making an ef fort to  be sociable, though he was
swaying with weariness, answering Mr . Johnson’ s unending
questions about their origins, journey , destination,
connections, news of the road, and opinions and news
regarding the war . Rachel attempted a smile now and then, but
her eyes kept passing uneasily around their surroundings,
returning again and again to their hostess, who sat in the
corner , her own eyes hooded, brooding over a fuming clay
pipe that hung from a slack lower lip.
Belly full and with dry stockings, W illiam felt the labors of
the d ay b egin to catch up to him . There was a decent fire in the
hearth, a nd the leaping flames lulled him into a sort of trance,
the voices of Denny and Mr . Johnson fading into a pleasant
murmur . He might have fallen a sleep right there, had the rustle
of Rach el rising  to her feet to visit the privy not broken the
trance, remindin g him that he should check the horses and
mules. H e’d rub bed them dry as  well as he could and paid Mr .
Johnson for hay , but there was no real barn to shelter them,
only a crude ro of of branches perched on spindly poles. He
didn’ t w ant them standing all n ight in mud should the shelter
be flooded.
It was still raini ng, but the air outside was clean and fresh,
filled with the n ight scent of trees, grasses, and rushing water .
After the fug indoors, W illiam felt nearly light-headed with the
fragrance. He ducked through th e rain to the shelter , doing hisbest to keep the small torch he had brought alight, enjoying
every breath.
The torch sputtered but kept bur ning, and he was glad to see
that the shelter had not flooded; the horses and mules—and the
wild-eyed cow—were all standing on damp straw , but not
hock-deep in mud. The privy door creaked, and he saw
Rachel’ s slende r dark shape em er ge. She saw the torch and
came to join him, drawing her shawl about her against the rain.
“Are the beasts all right?” Rain drops sparkled in her damp
hair , and he smiled at her .
“I expect their supper was better than ours.”
She shuddered in recollection.
“I sh ould much prefer to have e aten hay . Did thee see  what
was in—”
“No,” h e interrupted, “and I sh all be much happier if you
don’ t tell me.”
She snorted, but desisted. He ha d no desire to go back into
the fetid house at once, and Rachel seemed similarly
disinclined, moving to scratch her mule’ s drooping ears.
“I do  no t like the way that wom an looks at us,” Rachel said
after a moment, not looking at him. “She keeps staring at my
shoes. As though she wonders whether they would fit her .”
W illiam glanced at Rachel’ s feet himself; her shoes were
not in any way  fashionable but were sturdy and well made,
though also well worn and smeared with dried mud.
Rachel glanced uneasily at the house. “I will be pleased to
leave here, even if it should still be raining in the morning.”
“W e’ll leave,” he assured h er . “W ithout waiting for
breakfast, if you prefer .” He lea ned against one of the upright
poles that supported the shelter , feeling the mist of rain cool on
his n eck. The drowsiness had left him, though the tiredness
had not, and he realized that he shared her sense of unease.Mr . Johnson seemed amiable, if uncouth, but there was
something almo st too eager in his manner . He leaned forward
avidly in conversation, eyes agleam, and his dirty hands were
restless on his knees.
It might  be only the natural loneliness of a man who lacked
company—for surely the presence of the sullen Mrs. Johnson
would be little consolation—but W illiam’ s father had taught
him to pay attention to his instincts, and he therefore did not
try to ar gue him self out of them.  W ithout comment or apology ,
he rummaged in the saddlebag hanging from the post and
found the small dagger that he carried in his boot while riding.
Rachel’ s eyes followed it as he tucked it into the waist of his
breeches and pulled his shirt lo ose to cover it. Her chin was
puckered, but she didn’ t protest.
The torch was beginning to gutter , almost burned out. He
held out  his arm, and Rachel took it without protest, drawing
close to  him. He wanted to put his arm around her but
contented himself with drawing in his elbow , finding the
distant warmth of her body a comfort.
The bulk of th e farmhouse was darker than the night,
lacking either door or window at the back. They circled it in
silence, rain thumping on their skulls, feet squelching on the
sodden ground. Only a flicker  of light showed through the
shutters, the faintest indication of human tenancy . He heard
Rachel s wallow , and touched her hand lightly as he opened the
door for her .
“Sleep well,” he whispered to her . “The dawn will come
before you know it.”
 
IT W AS THE STEW that saved his life. He slept almost
at once, overcome by weariness , but found his sleep troubled
by obno xious dreams. He was w alking down a hallway with a
figured T urkey carpet, but realized after a time that what he
had taken for tw ining patterns in the rug were in fact snakes,which raised their heads, swaying, at his approach. The snakes
were slo w-moving, and he was able to skip over them but
lurched from side to side as a result, hitting the walls of the
corridor , which seemed to be cl osing in upon him, narrowing
the way .
Then he was e nclosed so tightly that he must proceed
sideways, the wall behind him scraping his back, the plaster
surface b efore h im so close that  he could not bend his head to
look down. He was worried abo ut the snakes in the carpet, but
couldn’ t see them, and kicked out to the side with his feet,
now and then hitting something heavy . Panicked, he felt one
twine ab out his  leg, then glide  upward, wrapping round his
body and burrowing its head through the front of his shirt,
prodding him hard and painfully in the abdomen, looking for
somewhere to bite.
He woke suddenly , panting and sweating, aware that the
pain in his guts was real. It bi t with a sharp cramp, and he
pulled u p his legs and rolled ont o his side an instant before the
ax struck the floorboards where his head had just been.
He let out a tremendous fart and rolled in blind panic toward
the dark figure struggling to fr ee the ax from the wood. He
struck Jo hnson’ s legs, grabbed them, and yanked. The man fell
on h im with a curse and grabbed him by the throat. W illiam
punched and thrashed at his op ponent, but the hands on his
throat clung like grim death, and his vision darkened and
flashed with colored lights.
There was screaming going on somewhere nearby . More by
instinct than plan, W illiam sudd enly lunged forward, striking
Johnson in the face with his forehead. It hurt, but the death
grip on his throat relaxed, and he wrenched loose and rolled
over , scrambling to his feet.
The fire  had died to embers, an d there was no more than a
faint glo w of light in the room.  A heaving mass of bodies in
the corn er was the source of the screaming, but nothing he
could do about that.Johnson had kicked the ax lo ose; W illiam saw the dull
gleam of its blad e in the split second before Johnson seized it
and swung it at his head. He du cked, rushed in, and managed
to gr ab Johnson’ s wrist, pulling  hard. The cheek of the falling
ax blade  struck his knee a paralyzing blow , and he crumpled,
pulling J ohnson down with him, but got the other knee up in
time to keep fr om being flattened beneath the other man’ s
body .
He jerke d to the side, felt sudd en heat at his back and the
ping of sparks; they had rolled i nto the edge of the hearth. He
reached back and seized a han dful of hot embers, which he
ground into Johnson’ s face, ignoring the searing pain in his
palm.
Johnson fell back, clutching his face and making short ah!
ah!  noises, as though he had not breath to scream. The ax was
dangling from one hand; he sen sed W illiam rise and swung it
blindly , one-handed.
W illiam grabbed the ax handle, jerked it from Johnson’ s
grasp, took a good two-handed hold upon the throat of the
handle, and brought the bit do wn on Johnson’ s head with a
choonk  like a kicked pumpkin. The impact vibrated through
his hands and arms; he let go and stumbled backward.
His mouth was full of bile; saliva overflowed and he wiped
a sle eve across his mouth. He was breathing like a bellows but
could not seem to get any air in his lungs.
Johnson reeled toward him, arms outstretched, the ax
sticking in his head. The handle quivered, turning to and fro
like an insect’ s  feeler . Slowly , horribly , Johnson’ s hands
reached up to take hold of it.
W illiam wanted to scream but didn’ t have the breath for it.
Backing away in panic, he brush ed a hand against his breeches
and felt wetness there. He glanced down, fearing the worst, but
saw instead the cloth dark with  blood, and at the same time
realized that there was a slight stinging sensation at the top of
his thigh.“Bloody… hell,” he muttered, fumbling at his waist. He’d
managed to stab himself with h is own dagger , but it was still
there, thank God. The feel of the hilt steadied him, and he
pulled it out, sti ll backing away as Johnson came toward him,
making a sort of yowling noise, yanking at the ax handle.
The ax came lo ose, releasing a gush of blood that rolled
down Johnson’ s face and splattered W illiam’ s face and arms
and ches t. Johns on swung the a x with a huf f of ef fort, but his
movements were slow and clumsy . W illiam ducked aside,
farting with the movement but regaining his nerve.
He t ightened his grip on the da gger and looked for a place
to stick it. Round the back, his mind suggested. Johnson was
dashing one forearm uselessly across his face, trying to clear
his eyes , the ax held in the othe r hand, sweeping to and fro in
wide, trembling swaths.
“W illiam!” Surprised by the voice, he glanced aside and
was nearly struck by the wavering blade.
“Shut up,” he said crossly . “I’m busy .”
“Y es, I see that,”  said Denny Hunter . “Let me help thee.” He
was whi te-faced and shaking nearly as much as Johnson, but
stepped forward  and, with a sudden lunge, seized the ax
handle and pulled the impleme nt out of Johnson’ s grasp. He
stepped back and dropped it on the floor with a thunk , looking
as though he might be sick at any moment.
“Thank you,” said W illiam. He stepped forward and drove
the dagger upward under Johnson’ s ribs, into his heart.
Johnson’ s eyes opened wide with the shock and stared directly
into W illiam’ s. They were gray-blue, with a scattering of gold
and yellow flecks near the dark iris. W illiam had never seen
anything more beautiful and stood transfixed for an instant,
until the feel of the pumping blood over his hand returned him
to himself.
He j erked the k nife free and stood back, letting the body
fall. He was tre mbling all over and about to shit himself. Heturned blindly and headed for the door , brushing past Denny ,
who said something that he didn’ t quite hear .
Shuddering and gasping in the p rivy , though, he thought the
doctor had said, “Thee did not have to do that.”
Y es , he thou ght, I did , and bowed his head upon his knees,
waiting for everything to abate.
 
WILLIAM EME RGED A T LAST from the privy , feeling
clammy and rubber -limbed but less internally volatile. Denny
Hunter rushed past him and in to the structure, from which
explosive noise s and loud gro ans were immediately heard.
Moving hastily away , he made his way through a spatter of
rain toward the house.
Dawn w as some  way of f, but the air had begun to stir , and
the farmhouse stood out again st the paling sky , black and
skeletal. He entered, feeling very uncertain, to find Rachel,
white as bone, standing guard with a broom over Mrs.
Johnson, who was wrapped tightly in a filthy sheet, thrashing a
bit and making peculiar hissing and spitting noises.
Her husband’ s remains lay facedown by the hearth in a pool
of conge aling blood. He didn’ t want to look at the body , but
felt i t wo uld be somehow wrong  not to, and went and stood by
it for a m oment, looking down. One of the Hunters had poked
up th e fi re and added wood; there was warmth in the room, but
he couldn’ t feel it.
“He’ s dead,” Rachel said, her voice colorless.
“Y es.” He didn’ t know how he was meant to feel in such a
situation and had no real idea how he did  feel. He turned away ,
though, with a slight sense of relief, and came to look at the
prisoner .
“Did she… ?”
“She tri ed to cut Denny’ s thro at, but she stepped on my
hand and woke me. I saw the knife and screamed, and heseized her , and…” She pulled a hand through her hair , and he
saw that she had lost her cap, and the hair was loose and
tangled.
“I sat on her ,” she said, “and Denny rolled her up in the
sheet. I don’ t t hink she can speak,” Rachel added, as he
stooped to look at the woman. “Her tongue is split.”
Mrs. Johnson, hearing this, thrust out her tongue in
vindictive fashion and waggled the two halves of it
independently a t him. W ith the  memory of the dream snakes
vivid in his min d, he flinched in instinctive revulsion, but saw
the look of satisfaction that crossed her face.
“If she can do that with her nasty tongue, she can talk,” he
said, and , reaching down, took hold of the woman’ s scrawny
throat. “T ell me why I shouldn’ t kill you, too.”
“Iss not my faul t!” she said prom ptly , in such a rasping hiss
that he nearly let go of her in shock. “He makess me help
him.”
W illiam glanced over his shoulder at the body on the hearth.
“Not anymore.”  He tightened his grip, feeling the beat of
her pulse against his thumb. “How many travelers have you
killed, the two of you?”
She didn’ t answer but stroked her upper lip lasciviously
with her  tongue, first one half and then the other . He let go her
throat and slapped her hard across the face. Rachel gasped.
“Thee must not—”
“Oh, yes , I must.” He rubbed his  hand against the side of his
breeches, trying  to get rid of th e feel of the woman’ s sweat,
her s lack skin, h er bony throat. His other hand was beginning
to th rob painfully . He wanted s uddenly to pick up the ax and
smash h er with it, over and over—crush her head, hack her to
bits. His  body trembled with the ur ge; she saw it in his eyes
and stared back at him, eyes black and glittering.
“Y ou don’ t want me to kill her?” he asked Rachel.“Thee must not,” she whispered. V ery slowly , she reached
for his burned hand, and, when he did not pull away , took it
into hers. There was a roaring in his ears, and he felt dizzy .
“Thee is hurt,” she said softly . “Come outside. I will wash
it.”
She led him out, half blind and s tumbling, and made him sit
on the chopping block while she brought a bucket of water
from the trough. It had stopp ed raining, though the world
dripped and the dawn air was moist and fresh in his chest.
Rachel bathed his hand in the cold water , and the burning
eased a little. Sh e touched his th igh, where the blood had dried
in a long  patch down his breeches, but let it go when he shook
his head.
“I’ll brin g thee whisky; there is  some in Denny’ s bag.” She
stood up, but he  grabbed her wri st with his good hand, holding
hard.
“Rachel.” His own voice sound ed odd to him, remote, as
though someone else was speaking. “I’ve never killed anyone
before. I don’ t—I don’ t quite know what to do about it.” He
looked up at he r , searching her face for understanding. “If it
had been—I expected it to be in  battle. That—I think I’d know
how . How to feel, I mean. If it had been like that.”
She met  his eyes, her face drawn in troubled thought. The
light touched her , a pink softer  than the sheen of pearls, and
after a long time she touched his face, very gently .
“No,” she said. “Thee wouldn’ t.”P AR T  F IVE T o the Precipice
 
  CROSSROAD
 
W ILLIAM P AR TED FROM the Hunters at a nameless
crossroad somewhere in New Jersey . It was not politic for him
to g o further; t heir inquiries regarding the position of the
Continental arm y were being greeted with increasing hostility ,
indicating that they were getting close. Neither rebel
sympathizers nor Loyalists who feared reprisal from an army
on their doorstep wished to say anything to mysterious
travelers who might be spies or worse.
The Qua kers would have an ea sier time of it without him.
They were so p lainly what they were and Denzell’ s intent to
enlist as  a sur geon both so simple and so admirable that, if
they were alone, people would help them, he thought. Or at
least re ceive t heir inquiries more kindly . W ith W illiam,
though…
Saying that he was a friend of the Hunters had been
suf ficient, earlie r in the journey . Folk were curious about the
little gro up, but not suspicious. As they drew farther into New
Jersey , though, the agitation of the countryside increased
markedly . Farms  had been raide d by foraging parties, both by
Hessians from Howe’ s army , trying to lure W ashington into
open bat tle from  his lurking plac e in the W atchung Mountains,
and from the Continental army , desperate for supplies.
Farmhouses tha t would normally have welcomed strangers
for the news the y bore now rep elled them with muskets and
harsh words. Food was growing harder to find. Rachel’ s
presence sometimes helped them get close enough to of fer
money—and W illiam’ s small store of gold and silver was
certainly helpful; Denzell had put most of the money from the
sale of their ho use with a ba nk in Philadelphia to secure
Rachel’ s future safety , and the paper money issued by the
Congress was almost universally rejected.There was no means by which W illiam could masquerade as
a Q uaker , though. Beyond his in ability to master plain speech,
his size and bea ring made people nervous—the more so as he,
with the memories of Captain Nathan Hale vivid in his mind,
would not say that he meant to enlist in the Continental army
nor a sk any ques tions that might later be presented as evidence
of s pying. His silence—perceived as menacing—also made
people nervous.
He hadn’ t spoken to the Hunters  regarding their parting, and
both De nzell and Rachel had been careful not to ask about his
own plans. Everyone knew the time had come, though; he
could feel it in  the air when he woke that morning. When
Rachel handed him a chunk of bread for breakfast, her hand
brushed his, and he nearly sei zed her fingers. She felt the
strength of his stifled impulse and looked up, startled, directly
into his eyes. More green than brown today , and he would
have sen t discretion to the devil and kissed her—he thought
she would not have objected—had her brother not just then
emer ged from the bushes, buttoning his flies.
He c hose the pla ce, all of a sudden. Naught to be gained by
delay , and maybe better to do it without thinking too much. He
pulled his horse to a stop in the middle of the crossroad,
startling Denzel l, whose mare b ridled and danced at the jerk
on her reins.
“I will leave you here,” W illia m said abruptly , and more
harshly than he had intended. “My way lies north”—he
nodded in that d irection, and thank God the sun was up so he
could tell which way north wa s—”while I think that if you
continue to the east, you will encounter some representatives
of M r . W ashington’ s army . If…”  He hesitated, but they should
be warn ed. From what the farmers had said, it was plain that
Howe had sent troops into the area.
“If you meet with British troops or Hessian mercenaries—
do you speak German, by chance?”
Denzell shook his head, eyes wide behind his spectacles.
“Only a little French.”“That’ s good. Most Hessian of ficers have good French. If
you mee t with Hessians who d on’ t and they of fer to molest
you, say to them, ‘ Ich v erlange, Eur en V or gcsctztc n zu sehen;
ich b in mit seine m Fr eund bekannt?  T hat means, ‘I demand to
see y our of ficer; I know his frie nd.’ Say the same thing if you
meet with British troops. In E nglish, of course,” he added
awkwardly .
A faint smile crossed Denzell’ s face.
“I thank thee,” he said. “But if t hey do take us to an of ficer ,
and he demands to know the name of this theoretical friend?”
W illiam smiled back.
“It won’ t really matter . Once you’re in front of an of ficer ,
you will  be safe. But as for a name—Harold Grey , Duke of
Pardloe, Colonel of the Forty-sixth Foot.” Uncle Hal didn’ t
know e veryone, as his own f ather did, but anyone in the
military world would know him— or of him, at least.
He could see Denzell’ s lips move silently , committing this
to memory .
“And who is Fr iend Harold to thee, W illiam?” Rachel had
been regarding him narrowly beneath the sagging brim of her
hat, and  now pushed this back o n her head to view him more
directly .
He h esitated again, but after all,  what did it matter now? He
would n ever see the Hunters ag ain. And while he knew that
Quakers would not be impress ed by worldly shows of rank
and family , he still sat straighter in his saddle.
“Some kin to m e,” he said casually , and, digging in his
pocket, brought out the small pu rse the Scotsman Murray had
given him. “Here. Y ou will need this.”
“W e will do well enough,” Denzell said, waving it away .
“So will I,” W illiam said, and tossed the purse toward
Rachel, who put up her hands i n reflex and caught it, looking
as much  surpris ed by the fact that she had done so as by his
own action. He smiled at her , too, his heart full.“Fare th ee well,” he said gruf fly , then wheeled his horse and
set of f at a brisk trot, not looking back.
 
“THEE KNOWS HE is a British soldier?” Denny Hunter
said quie tly to his sister , watching W illiam ride away . “Likely
a deserter .”
“And if he is?”
“V iolence follow s such a man.  Thee knows it. T o remain
long wit h such a man is a dange r—not only to the body . But to
the soul, as well.”
Rachel sat her mule in silence for a moment, watching the
empty road. Insects buzzed loud in the trees.
“I think thee ma y be a hypocrite , Denzell Hunter ,” she said
evenly , a nd pulled her mule’ s he ad around. “He saved my life
and  thine. W ould thee prefer him to have held his hand and see
me d ead and butchered in that dreadful place?” She shuddered
slightly in spite of the heat of the day .
“I would  not,” her brother said  soberly . “And I thank God
that he was there  to save thee. I am sinner enough to prefer thy
life to the welfar e of that young man’ s soul—but not hypocrite
enough to deny it, no.”
She snorted and, taking of f her hat, waved away a gathering
cloud of flies.
“I am honored. But as for thy talk of violent men and the
danger of being in the vicinity o f such men—is thee not taking
me to join an army?”
He laughed ruefully .
“I am. Perhaps  thee is right and I am a hypocrite. But,
Rachel—” He leaned out and caught her mule’ s bridle,
keeping her from turning away . “Thee knows I would have no
harm be fall thee , either of body  or soul. Say the word and I
will find  thee a place with Friends, where you may stay in
safety . I am sur e that the Lord has spoken to me, and I mustfollow m y consc ience. But there is no need for thee to follow
it, too.”
She gave him a long, level look.
“And how does thee know that  the Lord has not spoken to
me, as well?”
His eyes twinkled behind his spectacles.
“I am happy for thee. What did He say?”
“He said, ‘Keep thy fat-headed brother from committing
suicide, for I will require his blood at thy hand,’ ” she snapped,
slapping his hand away from th e bridle. “If we are going to
join the army , Denny , let us go and find it.”
She kick ed the mule viciously in the ribs. Its ears sprang
straight up, and with a startled whoop from its rider , it shot
down the road as though fired from a cannon.
 
WILLIAM RO DE FOR some way , back particularly
straight, showing excellent form in his horsemanship. After
the r oad curved out of sight of the crossroad, he slowed and
relaxed a bit. H e was sorry to leave the Hunters, but already
beginning to turn his thoughts ahead.
Bur goyne. He’d met General Bur goyne once, at a play . A
play written by the general, no less. He didn’ t recall anything
about th e play itself, as he’d bee n engaged in a flirtation of the
eyes with a girl in the next box, but afterward he’d gone down
with his father to congratulate the successful playwright, who
was flushed and handsome with triumph and champagne.
“Gentleman Johnny” they called  him in London. A light in
London society’ s firmament, in spite of the fact that he and his
wife had  some years before been obliged to flee to France to
escape a rrest for debt. No one held debt against a man, though;
it was too common.
W illiam was more puzzled by the fact that his uncle Hal
seemed to like John Bur goyne. Uncle Hal had no time forplays, nor for th e people who wrote them—though, come to
think, h e had the complete w orks of Aphra Behn on his
shelves, and W illiam’ s father h ad once told him, in deepest
secrecy , that his brother Hal had conceived a passionate
attachment for Mrs. Behn follow ing the death of his first wife
and before his marriage to Aunt Minnie.
“Mrs. B ehn was dead, you see,” his father had explained.
“Safe.”
W illiam had nodded, wishin g to seem worldly and
understanding, t hough in fact he had no real notion what his
father meant by this. Safe? How , safe?
He shook his h ead. He didn’ t expect ever to understand
Uncle H al, and chances were that was best for both of them.
His grandmother Benedicta was probably the only person who
did. Thought of his uncle, tho ugh, led him to think of his
cousin Henry , and his mouth tightened a little.
W ord w ould have reached Adam, of course, but he likely
could do nothing for his brother . Neither could W illiam, whose
duty called him north. Betwee n his father and Uncle Hal,
though, surely…
The horse threw up his head, sn orting a little, and W illiam
looked ahead to see a man standing by the road, one arm
raised to hail him.
He r ode slowly , a sharp eye on the wood, lest the man have
confederates hidden to waylay  unwary travelers. The ver ge
was ope n here, though, with a  thick but spindly growth of
saplings behind it; no one could hide in there.
“Good day to y ou, sir ,” he said, reining up a safe distance
from the  old man. For old he w as; his face was seamed like a
tin mine ’ s slag heap, he leaned o n a tall staf f, and his hair was
pure white, tied back in a plait.
“W ell m et,” the old gentleman said. Gentleman for he stood
proud, a nd his clothes were dec ent, and now W illiam came to
look, there was a good horse, too, hobbled and cropping grass
some distance away . W illiam relaxed a little.“Where do you fare, sir?” he asked politely . The old man
shrugged a little, easy .
“That m ay depend upon what yo u can tell me, young man.”
The old man was a Scot, though  his English was good. “I am
in search of a man called Ian Murray , whom I think you
know?”
W illiam was disconcerted by this; how did the old man
know that? But he knew Murray; perhaps Murray had
mentioned W illiam to him. He replied cautiously , “I know
him. But I am afraid I have no idea where he is.”
“No?” The old man looked keenly at him. As though he
thinks I might lie to him , W illiam thought. Suspicious old sod!
“No,” h e repeated firmly . “I me t him in the Great Dismal,
some weeks ago, in company with some Mohawk. But I do not
know where he might have gone since then.”
“Mohawk,” the old man repeated thoughtfully , and W illiam
saw the sunken eyes fasten on his chest, where the great bear
claw rested outside his shirt. “ Did you get that wee bawbee
from the Mohawk, then?”
“No,” W illiam replied stif fly , not knowing what a bawbee
was, but thinking that it sound ed in some way disparaging.
“Mr . Murray brought it to me, from a—friend.”
“A frien d.” The old man was frankly studying his face, in a
way that made W illiam uncomfortable and therefore angry .
“What is your name, young man?”
“None of your business, sir ,” W illiam said, as courteously as
possible, and gathered his reins. “Good day to you!”
The old man’ s f ace tightened, as did his hand on the staf f,
and W il liam turned sharply , lest the old bugger mean to try to
strike him with it. He didn’ t, but W illiam noticed, with a small
sense of  shock, that two finger s of the hand that grasped the
staf f were missing.
He t hought for a moment that the old man might mount and
come af ter him, but when he glanced back, the man was stillstanding by the road, looking after him.
It m ade no real  dif ference, but, moved by some obscure
notion o f avoiding notice, W illiam put the bear ’ s claw inside
his shirt, where it hung safely concealed next to his rosary . COUNTDOWN
 Fort T iconderoga
 June 18, 1777
 
Dear Br ee and Roger ,
T wenty-thr ee days and counting. I  hope we’ll be able
to le ave on sche dule. Y our cousin Ian left the fort a month
ago, say ing that  he had a wee b it of business to take car e
of but would be back by t he time Jamie’ s militia
enlistment was up. Ian himself declined to enlist, being
instead a volunteer forager , so he’ s not technically
A WOL. Not that the fort’ s co mmander is r eally in a
position to do anything about deserters, save hang them if
they’r e silly enough to come ba ck, and none of them  do.
I’m not sur e wh at Ian’ s doing, but I have some hope that
it may be good for him .
Speaking of the fort’ s command er , we have a new one.
Gr eat excitement! Colonel W ayne left a few weeks ago—
doubtless sweating with r elief as much as with the
humidity—but w e have come u p in the world. The new
commander is a major general, no less: one Arthur St.
Clair , a  genial and very handsome Scot, whose
attractiveness is  considerably enhanced by the pink sash
he affects on formal occasions. (The nice thing about
belonging to an  ad hoc army is that one appar ently gets
to design one’ s own uniform. None of this stuffy old
British convention about r egimentals.)
General St. Clair comes with outriders: no fewer than
three lesser g enerals, one of them Fr ench (your father
says General Fermoy is rather fishy , militarily speaking),
and about thr ee thousand new r ecruits. This has
substantially he artened everyone (though placing an
ungodly strain on the latrine facilities. The lines ar e
fifteen deep in the mornings a t the pits, and ther e is a
sever e s hortage of thunder mugs), and St. Clair made a
nice spe ech, assuring us that the fort cannot possibly betaken now . Y our father , who was standing next to the
general at the time, said something under his br eath in
Gaelic at this point, but not very far under , and while I
understand the  general was born in Thurso, he
conveniently affected not to understand .
The bri dge-building between the fort and Mount
Independence c ontinues apace… and Mount Defiance
continues to sit ther e acr oss the water . An inoffensive
little hil l, to look at—but a good  bit higher than the fort.
Jamie ha d Mr . Marsden r ow acr oss with a tar get—a four -
foot squar e of wood, painted white—and set it up near the
top of the hill, w her e it was plainly visible fr om the fort’ s
batteries. He invited General F ermoy (he does  not get a
pink sash, despite being Fr ench)  to come and try his hand
at s hooting with one of the new rifles (Jamie having
thoughtfully abstracted several of these fr om the car go of
the  T eal befor e patriotically donating the r est to the
American cause). They blasted the tar get to bits, an act
whose si gnificance was not lost on General St. Clair , who
came along to watch. I think General St. Clair will be
almost as pleased as I will be when your father ’ s
enlistment is up .
The new influx has made things busier , of course. Most
of th e new r ecruits ar e r easonab ly healthy , for a wonder ,
but t her e ar e the usual minor accidents, cases of vener eal
disease, and summer ague—enough that Major Thacher
—he’ s the chief medical officer—has taken to turning a
blind ey e when I surr eptitiously bind up a wound, though
he draw s the line at allowing me access to sharp
instruments. Fortunately , I have a small knife with which
to lance boils .
I am  also gr owing very short of useful herbs, since
Ian’ s defection. He used to bring me things fr om his
foraging expedit ions, but it r eall y isn’ t safe to ventur e out
of th e fort save in lar ge bodies. T wo men who went out
hunting a few days ago wer e found mur der ed and
scalped .While my medical kit thus r emains a little sparse, I
have as some  compensation a cquir ed a ghoul. This is a
Mrs. Raven fr om New Hampshir e, whose husband is a
militia officer . She’ s r elatively young, in her thirties, but
has never had c hildr en and thus has a lot of emotional
ener gy to expend. She battens  on the sick and dying,
though I’m sur e she considers herself to be sympathetic
in the extr eme. S he r evels in ghastly detail, which, while
mildly r epulsive in itself, does make her a competent aide,
since sh e can be counted on n ot to faint while I set a
compound fractur e or amputate (quickly , befor e Major
Thacher or his h enchman, Lieu tenant Stactoe, notices) a
gangr enous digit, for fear of mis sing something. Granted,
she does  wail and carry on a bit, and is much given to
clutching her rather flat chest and allowing her eyes to
bulge while describing these adventur es to other people
afterwar d (sh e nearly pr ostrated herself fr om
hyperventilation when they br ought in the men who wer e
scalped), but one takes what one can get in the way of
help .
At t he other en d of the scale in terms of medical
competence, though, the new influx of r ecruits has
br ought with it a young Quaker doctor named Denzell
Hunter and his s ister , Rachel. I haven’ t yet spoken to him
personally , but fr om what I se e, Dr . Hunter r eally is a
doctor , and seems even to hav e some vague notion of
germ theory , owing to his having trained with John
Hunter , one of t he gr eat men of medicine (on the chance
that Roger will be r eading this, I will r efrain fr om telling
you the manner in which John Hunter discover ed how
gonorr hea is transmitted—well,  no, actually I won’ t: he
stabbed himself in the penis wit h a lancet cover ed in pus
fr om an infected victim and was deeply gratified with the
r esults, accor din g to Denny Hu nter , who r ecounted this
inter esting incident to your father while bandaging his
thumb, w hich got squashed between two r olling logs—
don’ t worry , it isn’ t br oken; just badly bruised). I’d love tosee how  Mrs. Raven would take  this story , but I suppose
pr opriety would pr event young Dr . Hunter telling her .
Y ou ar e, of course, minding the childr en’ s vaccination
schedule .
W ith all my love,
 Mama
 
 
BRIANNA HAD CLOSED the book, but her hand kept
returning involuntarily to the cover , as though she wished to
open it again, in case it might say something dif ferent.
“What’ s twenty-three days past June eighteenth?” She
should be able t o reckon that—she could do things like that in
her head —but n ervousness had  deprived her of the ability to
compute.
“Thirty days hath September ,” Roger chanted quickly under
his brea th, rolling up his eyes to the ceiling, “April, June—
right, June’ s got thirty days, so twelve days from the
eighteenth to the thirtieth, and t en more makes it the tenth of
July .”
“Oh, dear Lord.”
She’d read it three times, look ing again wouldn’ t make a
dif ference; still, she opened the book once more, to the page
with Jo hn Bur goyne’ s portrai t. A handsome man—”And
doesn’ t he just know it, too!” s he said aloud, making Roger
frown at her in consternation—as painted by Sir Joshua
Reynolds, he was in uniform, his hand resting on the hilt of his
sword, standing against a dramatic backdrop of gathering
storm cl ouds. A nd there it was on the next page, plain in black
and white.
On the sixth of July , General Bur goyne attacked Fort
T iconder oga with a for ce of some 8,000 r egulars, plus several
German r egiments under the Bar on von Riedesel, and a
number of Indians .
 
WILLIAM FOUND General Bur goyne and his army
somewhat more easily than the Hunters had discovered
General W ashington’ s whereabouts. On the other hand,
General Bur goyne was making no attempt to hide.
It was a lavish camp, by army  standards. Neatly arranged
rows of white ca nvas tents covered three fields and ran of f into
the woo ds. Making his way to the commander ’ s tent to report,
he spotted a pile  of empty wine  bottles near the general’ s tent
that rose nearly to his knee. A s he had not heard that the
general was a no table souse, he assumed this lar gesse to be the
result of an open -handed hospitality and a liking for company .
A good sign in a commander , he thought.
A yawni ng servant was picking of f the remnants of the lead
seals, tossing the metal into a ca n, presumably to be melted for
bullets. He gave W illiam a sleepy , inquiring eye.
“I’ve come to report to General Bur goyne,” W illiam said,
drawing himself up. The servant’ s eye traveled slowly up the
length of his bo dy , lingering with vague curiosity on his face
and making him doubt the thoroughness of his morning shave.
“Dinner party with the brigadier and Colonel St. Leger last
night,” the servant said at last,  and belched slightly . “Come
back this afternoon. Meanwhile”—he stood slowly , wincing as
though the movement hurt his head, and pointed—”the mess
tent’ s over there.” FRIENDS
 Fort T iconderoga
 June 22, 1777
 
M UCH T O MY surprise, I found Captain Stebbings
sitting up. White-faced, bathed in sweat, and swaying like a
pendulum—but upright. Mr . Dic k hovered over him, clucking
with the tender anxiety of a hen with one chick.
“I see you’re feeling better , Captain,” I said, smiling at him.
“Have you on your feet any day now , won’ t we?”
“Been… on my feet,” he wheezed. “Think I might die.”
“What?”
“Him be walking!”  Mr . Dick assu red me, torn b etween
pride and dismay . “On my arm, but him walk, sure!”
I w as on my kne es, listening to lungs and heart through the
wooden stethoscope Jamie had made for me. A pulse fit for an
eight-cylinder r ace car , and a good bit of gur gling and
wheezing, but nothing horribly alarming.
“Congratulations, Captain Stebbings!” I said, lowering the
stethoscope and smiling at him. He still looked dreadful, but
his breathing was beginning to slow . “Y ou probably won’ t die
today . What brought on this burst of ambition?”
“My… bosun,” he managed, before a fit of coughing
intervened.
“Joe Ormiston,”  Mr . Dick cla rified, with a nod in my
direction. “Him foot stink. The captain go see him.”
“Mr . Ormiston. His foot stinks? ” That sounded all sorts of
alarm bells. For a wound in thi s particular setting to smell so
notably as to dr aw attention was a very bad indication. I rose
to m y feet but was detained by Stebbings, who had taken a
firm grip of my skirt.
“Y ou—” he said, laboring for air . “Y ou take care of him.”
He bared stained teeth at me in a grin.” ‘S an order ,” he wheezed. “Ma’am.”
“A ye, aye, Cap’n,” I said tar tly , and made of f for the
hospital building, where the majority of the sick and wounded
were housed.
“Mrs. Fraser! What’ s amiss?” The eager cry came from
Mrs. Raven, who was coming  out of the commissary as I
passed. She was tall and lean, with dark hair that perpetually
straggled out from under her cap, which it was doing at the
moment.
“I don’ t know yet,” I said briefly , not stopping. “But it
might be serious.”
“Oh!” she said, barely refraining from adding, “Goody!”
T ucking her basket under her arm, she fell in beside me, firmly
set to Do Good.
Invalid British prisoners we re housed alongside the
American sick in a long stone building lit by narrow , glassless
windows and either freezing or stifling, depending on the
weather . It was presently hot and humid outdoors—it was mid-
afternoon—and entering the building was like being struck in
the face with a hot, wet towel. A dirty  hot, wet towel.
It wasn’ t hard to find Mr . Ormiston; there was a knot of men
standing round his cot. Lieutentant Stactoe was among them—
that was bad—ar guing with little Dr . Hunter—that was good—
with a couple of other sur geons trying to put in their own
opinions.
I knew without looking what they were ar guing about;
clearly Mr . Ormiston’ s foot had taken a turn for the worse, and
they inte nded to amputate it. In all probability , they were right.
The ar gument would likely be about wher e  to amputate, or
who was to do it.
Mrs. Raven hung back, nervous at sight of the sur geons.
“Do you  really think …” she  began, but I paid her no
attention. There are times for th inking, but this wasn’ t one of
them. O nly action, and fast, decisive action at that, would
serve. I took in a lungful of the thick air and stepped forward.“Good afternoon, Dr . Hunter ,” I said, elbowing my way
between the two militia sur geo ns and smiling at the young
Quaker doctor . “Lieutenant Stactoe,” I added as an
afterthought, not to be overtly rude. I knelt beside the patient’ s
cot, wiped my sweaty hand on my skirt, and took his.
“How are you, Mr . Ormiston? Captain Stebbings has sent
me to take care of your foot.”
“He what ?” Lieutenant Stactoe began, in a peeved sort of
voice. “Really , Mrs. Fraser , what can you possibly—”
“That’ s good, ma’am,” Mr . Ormiston interrupted. “The
captain said as how he’d send you; I was just a-telling these
gentlemen here as they needn’ t be concerned, as I was sure
you’d  know the best way to do it.”
And I’m sur e they wer e pleased to hear that , I thoug ht, but
smiled at him and squeezed his hand. His pulse was fast and a
little light, but r egular . His hand, though, was very hot, and I
wasn’ t even faintly surprised to see the reddish streaks of
septicemia rising up his leg from the mangled foot.
They had unwrapped the foot, and Mr . Dick had
unquestionably been right: him stank.
“Oh, my God,”  said Mrs. Raven behind me, in complete
sincerity .
Gangrene had set in; if the smel l and tissue crepitation were
not enough, the toes had begu n to blacken already . I didn’ t
waste time in being angry at Stactoe; given the original
condition of the foot, and the tr eatment available, I might not
have be en able to save it, either . And the fact that gangrene
was so clearly present was actually a help; there couldn’ t be
any question that amputation was necessary . But in that case, I
wondered, why were they ar guing?
“I take it you agree that amputation is necessary , Mrs.
Fraser?” the lieutenant said, with sarcastic courtesy . “As the
patient’ s physician?”  He had his instruments already laid out
on cloth, I saw . Decently kept; not disgustingly filthy—but
plainly not sterilized.“Certainly ,” I said mildly . “I’m very sorry about it, Mr .
Ormiston, but he’ s right. And yo u will feel much better with it
of f. Mrs. Raven, will you go and bring me a pan of boiling
water?” I turned to Denzell Hu nter , who, I saw , was holding
Mr . Ormiston’ s other hand, plainly counting his pulse.
“Do you not agree, Dr . Hunter?”
“I do, yes,” h e said mildly . “W e are in disagreement
regarding the degree of amputation required, not its necessity .
What is the boiling water for , Friend… Fraser , he said?”
“Claire,” I said briefly . “Sterilization of the instruments. T o
prevent postoperative infection. As much as possible,” I added
honestly . Stactoe  made a very disrespectful noise at this, but I
ignored it. “What do you recommend, Dr . Hunter?”
“Denzell,” he said, with a fleeting smile. “Friend Stactoe
wishes to amputate below the knee—”
“Of course I do !” Stactoe said, furious. “I wish to preserve
the knee joint, and there is no need to do it higher!”
“Oddly enough,  I’m inclined to agree with you,” I told him,
but turned back to Denzell Hunter . “But you don’ t?”
He shoo k his head and pushed his spectacles up the bridge
of his nose.
“W e must do a mid-femoral a mputation. The man has a
popliteal aneurysm. That means—”
“I know  what it means.” I did, and was already feeling
behind Mr . Ormiston’ s knee. He emitted a high-pitched giggle,
stopped abruptly , and went red in the face with
embarrassment. I smiled at him.
“Sorry , Mr . Ormiston,” I said. “I won’ t tickle you again.”
I w ould n’ t need to. I could feel the aneurysm plainly; it
throbbed gently against my fing ers, a big, hard swelling right
in th e ho llow of the joint. He mu st have had it for some time; a
wonder it hadn’ t burst during the sea battle or the arduous
portage to T iconderoga. In a mo dern operating room, it mightbe poss ible to do the lesser amputation and repair the
aneurysm—but not here.
“Y ou’re right, Friend Denzell,” I said, straightening up. “As
soon as Mrs. Raven brings the hot water , we’ll—” But the men
weren’ t listening to me. They were staring at something
behind me, and I turned to see Guinea Dick, stripped to a
breechclout because of the heat and glistening with sweat, all
his t attoos on d isplay , advancing upon us with a black glass
bottle held ceremoniously between his hands.
“Him captain send you grog, Joe,” he said to Mr . Ormiston.
“W ell, God bless the captain for a good un!” Mr . Ormiston
said in heartfelt thanks. He too k the bottle of rum, drew the
cork wi th his teeth, and bega n to swallow with a single-
minded determination.
Sloshing and splashing heralded Mrs. Raven’ s return with
the wate r . Nearly every fire ha d a kettle on; finding boiling
water was no d if ficulty . She had, bless her , also brought a
bucket of cold water so that I c ould wash my hands without
burning myself.
I took one of the short-bladed, brutal amputation knives,
preparing to plunge it into th e hot water , only to have it
snatched from my hand by an outraged Lieutenant Stactoe.
“What a re you doing, madam!” he exclaimed. “That is my
best blade!”
“Y es, th at’ s why I propose to use it,” I said. “ After  I wash
it.”
Stactoe was a small man with close-cropped, bristly gray
hair; he was also two or three inches shorter than I, as I
discovered when I stood up and faced him, eyeball to eyeball.
His face went a shade or two redder .
“Y ou will ruin the temper of the metal, subjecting it to
boiling water!”
“No,” I said, keeping my own temper—for the moment.
“Hot wa ter will do nothing but  clean it. And I will not use adirty blade on this man.”
“Oh, won’ t you?” Something like satisfaction glimmered in
his eyes, and he clutched the blade protectively to his bosom.
“W ell, th en. I suppose you’ll have to leave the work to those
who can do it, won’ t you?”
Guinea Dick, who had remained to watch after delivery of
the bottle, had been following the progress of the ar gument
with int erest and, at this point,  leaned over and plucked the
knife from Stactoe’ s hand.
“Him captain says her does for  Joe,” he said calmly . “Her
does.”
Stactoe’ s mouth fell open in outrage at this gross insult to
his rank, and he  lunged at Dick , grabbing for the blade. Dick,
with ref lexes honed by tribal warfare and years of British
seamanship, swung the blade at Stactoe with the obvious
intent of removing his head. He  would likely have succeeded,
save for Denzell Hunter ’ s equally good reflexes, which sent
him leaping for Dick’ s arm. He missed but succeeded in
knocking the big Guineaman into Stactoe. They clutched each
other—Dick dropping the knife—and staggered to and fro for
an inst ant before both overbalanced and crashed into
Ormiston’ s cot, sending patient, rum bottle, hot water , Denzell
Hunter , and the rest of the ins truments sprawling across the
stone floor with a clatter that stopped every conversation in the
building.
“Oooh!” said Mrs. Raven, deli ciously shocked. This was
turning out even better than she had expected.
“Denny!” said an equally shocked voice behind me. “What
does thee think thee is doing?”
“I am… assisting Friend Claire in her sur gery ,” Denzell said
with some dignity , sitting up a nd patting round the floor in
search of his spectacles.
Rachel Hunter bent and picked up the errant spectacles,
which had slid a cross the stones, and restored these firmly to
her brother ’ s face, while keepi ng a wary eye on LieutenantStactoe, who was slowly rising from the floor , much in the
manner of a hot-air balloon, visibly swelling with rage.
“Y ou,” he said in a hoarse voice, and pointed a small,
trembling finge r at Dick. “I shall have you hanged for
assaulting an of ficer . I shall have you , sir”—swinging the
accusatory digit toward Denzell  Hunter—”court-martialed and
broke! As for you, madam— ” He spat the word, but then
stopped dead, momentarily u nable to think of anything
suf ficiently terrible with which to threaten me. Then, “I shall
ask your husband to beat you!” he said.
“Come ‘n’ tickle me, darlin’,” a slurred voice said from the
floor . I looked d own, to see a leering Mr . Ormiston. He had
kept hold of th e rum bottle during the wreck, continued to
employ it afterward, and, face suf fused with rum, was now
making random pawing motions in the vicinity of my knee.
Lieutenant Stact oe made a noise  indicating that this was the
frozen li mit, if not well beyond , and, hastily bundling up his
fallen instruments, he marched of f, bristling with knives and
saws, dropping occasional small objects in his wake.
“Did the e want me, Sissy?” De nzell Hunter had got to his
feet by this time and was righting the fallen cot.
“Not so much me as Mrs. Brown ,” his sister said, a dry note
in her voice. “She says it is her time, and she wants thee.
Right. Now .”
He snorted briefly , and glanced at me.
“Mrs. B rown is an hysteric, in  the literal meaning of the
term,” he said a pologetically . “I think she cannot deliver for
another month yet, but she su f fers false labor on a regular
basis.”
“I know  her ,” I said, suppressin g a smile. “Better you than
me, mate.” Mrs. Brown was  an hysteric. Also the wife of a
colonel of militia and therefore— she thought—well above the
services of a me re midwife. Hearing that Dr . Denzell Hunter
had worked with Dr . John Hunter , who was accoucheur  to the
Queen! —obviously , my services could be dispensed with.“She is not bleeding, nor her water broke?” Denzell was
asking his sister in a resigned  voice. Guinea Dick, totally
unperturbed by the recent confli ct, had restored the bedding to
the cot and no w squatted, lifted all fifteen stone of Mr .
Ormiston as if h e were a feather bed, and deposited him and
his bottle gently thereon.
“I think him ready ,” he announced, after scrutinizing the
patient, who was now lying back, eyes closed, happily
murmuring, “Just a little lower , dear , aye, that’ s it, tha’ s it…”
Denzell looked helplessly from Mr . Ormiston to his sister to
me.
“I w ill have to go to Mrs. Br own, though I think it not
pressingly ur gen t. Can thee wait  a little while and I will do this
for thee?”
“Her does it,” said Dick, glowering.
“Y es, her does,” I assured him , tying back my hair . “But
what he r is going to do it with  is  another ques tion. Have you
any instruments that I might borrow , Dr .—er , Friend Denzell?”
He rubbed his forehead, thinking.
“I h ave a decen t saw .” He smiled briefly . “And I do not
mind if thee wis hes to boil it. But no heavy blade. Shall I send
Rachel to ask one of the other sur geons?”
Rachel’ s face closed a bit at thi s suggestion, and I thought
that perhaps Dr . Hunter was not all that popular with the other
sur geons.
I eyed Mr . Ormiston’ s very solid leg, estimating the
thickness of flesh to be cut, and put a hand through the slit in
my s kirt to the sheath of my kni fe. It was a good, sturdy knife,
and Jamie had ju st sharpened it for me. A curved blade would
be better , but I thought the length was suf ficient…
“No, don’ t trouble. I think this w ill work. If you would find
your brother ’ s saw , Miss—er , R achel.” I smiled at her . “And,
Mrs. Raven, I’m afraid the water ’ s gone, would you—”“Oh, yes!” she cried, and seiz ing the pan, clattered of f,
kicking one of Lieutenant Stactoe’ s oddments on the way .
A number of people had been watching the drama of Mr .
Ormiston’ s foot, fascinated. Now that the lieutenant was gone,
they beg an to sidle nearer , looking fearfully at Guinea Dick,
who grinned genially at them.
“Can Mrs. Brown wait a quarter of an hour?” I asked
Denzell. “It will be a little easier if I have someone who knows
what the y’re doing to support the leg while I cut. Dick can
restrain the patient.”
“A quarter of an hour?”
“W ell, t he actual amputation will take a little less than a
minute, if I don’ t encounter any dif ficulties. But I’ll need a bit
of time to prepare, and I could use your help in ligating the
severed blood vessels afterward. Where has the rum bottle
gone, by the way?”
Denzell’ s dark brows were almost touching his hairline, but
he g estured to M r . Ormiston, who had gone to sleep and was
now snoring loudly , the rum bottle cradled in his arm.
“I d on’ t propose to drink it,” I said dryly , answering his
expression. I pulled the bottle f ree and poured a little onto a
clean ra g, with which I began to swab Mr . Ormiston’ s hairy
thigh. The lieutenant had fortuna tely left his jar of sutures, and
the oddment Mrs. Raven had kicked was a tenaculum. I would
need it to seize  the ends of severed arteries, which had an
annoying tendency to pop back into the flesh and hide,
squirting blood all the while.
“Ah,” said Denzell, still at a loss but game. “I see. Can I…
help?”
“If I might borrow your belt for a ligature?”
“Oh, yes,” he murmured, and unbuckled it without
hesitation, looking interested. “I collect thee has done this
before.”“Many times, unfortunately .” I bent to check Mr . Ormiston’ s
breathing, which was stertorous but not labored. He’d downed
nearly half the bottle within five  minutes. That was a dose that
would likely kill someone less inured to rum than a British
seaman, but his vital signs were reasonably good, fever
notwithstanding. Drunkenness was not by any means the
equivalent of anesthesia; the patient was stunned, not
unconscious, and would certainly come to when I began
cutting. It did al lay fear , though, and might dull the immediate
pain slightly . I wondered whether—and when—I might ever
be able to make ether again.
There w ere two or three small ta bles in the long room, these
heaped with bandages, lint, and other dressing materials. I
chose a good supply of relatively clean materials and returned
with the m to the bedside just as Mrs. Raven—panting and red-
faced, anxious lest she had mi ssed anything—arrived, water
bucket sloshing. A moment later , Rachel Hunter returned,
similarly panting from her hurry , with her brother ’ s saw .
“If you would not mind dousing the saw blade, Friend
Denzell?” I said, tying a burlap  sack round my waist to serve
as a n apron. S weat was running down my back, tickling
between my buttocks, and I tied  a length of bandaging round
my head  bandan na-style, to keep the sweat from running into
my eyes  as I worked. “And scrub the stains there near the
handle? Then my knife and that tenaculum, if you don’ t
mind.”
Looking bemused, he did, to interested murmurs from the
crowd, who had plainly never witnessed such an outlandish
proceeding, though Mr . Dick’ s savage presence was keeping
them at a safe distance.
“Does thee suppose the lieutenant would indeed have our
friend here hanged?” Denzell w hispered to me, with a nod at
Dick. “Or could, come to that?”
“I’m sur e he’d love to, but I really don’ t think he can, no.
Mr . Dic k is an English prison er . Can he have you court-
martialed, do you think?”“I suppose he might try ,” Denzell said, seeming not
perturbed at the prospect. “I enlisted, after all.”
“Did you?” That seemed odd, but he wasn’ t the only Quaker
I’d met on a battlefield, so to speak.
“Oh, yes. I think  the army does not have so many sur geons
that it can af ford to hang one, though. And I doubt that being
reduced in rank would much af fect my expertise.” He smiled
cheerfully at me. “Thee has no rank at all, if I am not
mistaken, and yet I trust thee will manage.”
“God willing,” I said, and he nodded gravely .
“God willing,” he repeated, and handed me the knife, still
hot from the boiling water .
“Y ou m ight want to stand b ack a bit,” I said to the
spectators. “It’ s going to be messy .”
“Oh, dear , oh, dear ,” said Mrs . Raven, with a tremulous
gasp of anticipation. “How perfectly ghastly!” THREE ARROWS
 Mottville, Pennsylvania
 June 10, 1777
 
G REY SA T UP suddenly , narro wly avoiding cracking
his h ead on the low beam that p assed above his bed. His heart
was pou nding, his neck and tem ples wet with sweat, and he
had no notion for a moment where he was.
“The third arrow ,” he said aloud , and shook his head, trying
to match  the words to the extr aordinarily vivid dream from
which he had so abruptly emer ged.
W as it dream, memory , or something partaking of the nature
of both?  He had been standin g in the main salon of T r ois
Fleches , loo king at the very fine Stubbs hanging to the right of
the baro que m antelpiece. The walls were crowded with
pictures—hung above, below , c rammed in without regard to
subject or merit.
W as that how it had been? He remembered vaguely a sense
of oppression at the abundanc e of ornament, but had the
paintings truly crowded in so, portraits leering from above,
below , faces in every direction?
In the dream, the Baron Amandine had stood to one side of
him, the solid s houlder touching his; they were much of a
height. T he Baron was speaking of one of the paintings, but
Grey co uld not remember what he was saying—something
about the technique employed by the painter , perhaps.
On his other side stood Cecile Beauchamp, the baron’ s
sister , standing equally close, a bare shoulder brushing Grey’ s.
She wor e powder in her hair and a perfume of jasmine; the
baron, a  feral cologne of ber gamot and civet. He remembered
—for surely dreams had no sme ll?—the mingling of the thick
fragrances with the bitterness of wood ash in the stifling
warmth of the room, and the faint feeling of nausea this
mingling induced. Someone’ s hand had cupped one of his
buttocks, squeezed it familiarly , and then commenced to strokeit in an insinuating fashion. He didn’ t know whose hand it
was.
That hadn’ t been part of the dream.
He lay back slo wly on his pil low , eyes closed, trying to
recapture the images from his sleeping mind. The dream had
changed after that to something erotic, someone’ s mouth on
his highly responsive flesh; it was the sensations associated
with this, in fac t, that wakened him. He didn’ t know whose
mouth it  was, either . Dr . Frankli n had been somewhere in this
dream, as well; Grey recalled the white buttocks, slightly
sagging, still firm, as the man w alked down a corridor in front
of him, long gra y hair straggling down a bony back, loose rolls
of skin around the waist, talking with complete unconcern
about the pictures, which lined the walls of the corridor , as
well. It was a vivid recollection, char ged with feeling. Surely
he hadn ’ t—not with Franklin, even in a dream. But it was
something to do with the paintings …
He tried to reca ll some of the paintings but was no longer
sure what was r eal, what emer ged from the bourne of dreams.
There were landscapes… a thing  purporting to be an Egyptian
scene, though he took leave to d oubt that the painter had ever
set foot south of the Breton coast. The usual family portraits—
“Y es!” he sat up abruptly and this time did smack  the crown
of his head on the beam, hard enough that he saw stars and
emitted a grunt of pain.
“Uncle John?” Dottie’ s voice came clearly from the other
bed, startled, and a rustling o f bedclothes from the floor
indicated that her maid had likewise wakened. “What’ s
happened?”
“Nothing, nothing. Go back to sleep.” He swung his legs out
of bed. “Just… going to the privy .”
“Oh.” Flouncings and mutterings from the floor , a sternly
rebuking shush!  from Dottie. He found the chamber door by
feel, for  the shutters had been p ut up and the room was blackas si n, a nd made  his way downs tairs by the dim light from the
banked fire in the inn’ s main room.
The air outside was fresh and c ool, scented with something
he d idn’ t recognize but that tu gged at his memory . It was a
relief to  let go the struggle with his obstinate dream and
submer ge himself in this purely sensory remembrance. It
brought back long rides in V ir ginia, muddy roads, fresh leaves,
the sens e of a ho rse beneath him, the kick of a gun, the feel of
a d eer ’ s blood s pilling hot over his hand… of course, hunting
with W illiam.
He felt the imme diacy of the wil derness wash over him, that
strong, strange sense so pecul iar to America: the sense of
something waiting among the trees—not inimical, but not
welcoming, eith er . He had loved those few years in V ir ginia,
away from the intrigues of Eur ope, the constant sociality of
London. V alued them mostly , though, for the closeness that
had grown between him and his son in those years in the
wilderness.
He had not yet seen fireflies on this journey . He glanced
into the thick grass as he walked , but it was probably too late;
fireflies came out mostly in t he early evening. He looked
forward to showing them to Dottie. W illiam had been
enchanted by his first sight of th em when they came to live in
V ir ginia—had caught them in his hand, cupping one gently
and exclaiming as it lit the darkened hollow of his palm. Had
greeted their return each summer with joy .
Relieved in body and at least superficially soothed in mind,
he s at slowly d own on the chopping block in the innyard,
unwilling to return yet to the frowsy darkness above.
Where was Henry? he wondered. Where did he sleep
tonight? Housed in some dungeon? No, the Colonies really
had no such thing. Even common houses were remarkably
comfortable and  airy . Perhaps his nephew was held in a gaol, a
barn, so me cellar—and yet he had, so far as they knew ,
survived the winter in spite of w hat must be a serious wound.He w ould have had money , thou gh; perhaps he had been able
to pay for better housing, perhaps a doctor ’ s care.
God wil ling, they would find hi m soon. They were no more
than two days’ r ide from Philadelphia. And he had the letters
of intro duction Franklin had given him—Franklin again!
Damn th e man and his air -bathing. Though Grey had joined
him in this proc ess once, from curiosity , and found it oddly
pleasant, if a lit tle unnerving, to be sitting mother -naked in a
room equipped with elegant furniture, potted plants in the
corners, paintings on the—
No. No, there were no paintings in the solar at T r ois
Fleches , of course not.
There i t was. The tail of his elusive dream, twitching
tantalizingly at him from under a rock. He closed his eyes,
filled his lungs with the scen t of the summer night, and
purposely forced his mind to go blank.
T r ois Fleches. Thr ee arr ows. Who is the thir d?  The  wo rds of
Hal’ s let ter appeared on the inside of his eyelids, suf ficiently
startling that he opened his ey es. Used as he was to Hal’ s
oblique thought processes, he hadn’ t made much of this at the
time. Ev idently it had taken roo t in his subconscious, though,
only to emer ge in the middle of the night in the middle of
nowhere, out of the depths of an absurd dream. Why?
He r ubbed gently at the crown of his head, which was sore
from his collision with the beam, but not broken. His fingers
unconsciously moved down, fi ngering the spot where Jamie
Fraser ’ s wife had covered the trephine hole in his skull with a
silver si xpence h ammered flat. She had stitched the skin over
it qu ite c leverly and the hair had  grown again, but it was easy
to fe el the small hard curve under it. He seldom noticed or
thought of it save in cold weather , when the metal grew
markedly cold and sometimes caused headache and made his
nose run.
It had been cold , very cold, when he visited T r ois Fleches .
The thought floated through his head like a moth.There were sounds behind the inn. The clop of hooves on
packed dirt, the murmur of voices. He sat very still.
The moon was h alfway down; it was late, but hours yet ‘til
dawn. N o one should have business at this hour , save it was a
dark business. The sort of busin ess he had no desire to witness
—let alone to be seen witnessing.
They were coming, though; he couldn’ t move without being
seen, an d instead stilled even h is breathing to the barest wisp
of air .
Three men, quiet, purposeful, on horseback, one leading a
laden m ule. They passed no m ore than two paces from him,
but he didn’ t move, and the horses, if they sensed him, found
him no threat. They turned onto the road that led to
Philadelphia. Why this secrecy? he wondered—but didn’ t
waste tim e in much wondering. He had noticed it at once upon
his retu rn to North Carolina the year before: a morbid
excitement, an uneasiness in the air itself. It was more
pronounced here; he had been aware of it since they had
landed.
People w ere wary in a way that they hadn’ t been. They don’ t
know who to trust , he thought. And so they trust no one .
The thought of trust conjured an immediate and vivid
recollection of Percy W ainwright. If th er e is anyo ne in the
world I trust less…
And just like that, he had it. The  picture of Percy , dark-eyed
and smiling, thumb running ove r the surface of his wineglass
as th ough he stro ked Grey’ s prick, saying casually , ” I married
one of the sisters of the Bar on Amandine… ”
“One  of the sisters,” Grey whispered aloud, and the dream
crystallized in his mind, the sen se of cold from the stones of
T r ois Fleches  so vivid that he shivered, though the night was
not c old at all. Felt the warmth of those two lascivious, vicious
bodies p ressing on him from ei ther side. And on the wall to
one side, disregarded among the careless profusion, a small
painting of three children, two girls, one boy , posed with adog, and  the outer wall of T r ois Fleches  recognizable behind
them.
The second sister . The third arrow , whom Hal, with his
unerring sense of oddity , had never seen but had noticed
nonetheless.
The Beauchamp s were a noble , ancient family—and like
most such families, they referred often, if casually , to
themselves. He had heard during his visit of the doings of
cousins, uncles, aunts, distant connections… but never of the
second sister .
She mig ht have  died in childh ood, of course; such things
were com mon. But in that case,  why would Percy have said…
?
Now his head was  beginning to ache. W ith a sigh, he rose
and wen t inside. He had no notion where or when—but he was
going to  have to speak to Percy again. He was appalled to find
that the prospect did not alarm him. LEY LINES
 
B RIANNA P AUSED BY the fish-viewing chamber . It
wasn’ t yet the b reeding season,  when—she’d been told—the
great salmon swarmed through  the chutes of the fish ladder
that allowed them to climb the dam at Pitlochry , but now and
then a silvery flash shot into view with heart-stopping
suddenness, fighting strongly against the current for a moment
before s hooting up into the tub e that led to the next stage of
the ladder . The chamber itself was a small white housing let
into the side of t he fish ladder , w ith an algae-clouded window .
She’d paused there to gather her thoughts—or , rather , to
suppress some of them—before going in to the dam.
It w as nonsense to worry about  something that had already
happened. And she did know that her parents were all right. Or
at least, she amended, had made it out of Fort T iconderoga;
there were a good many letters left.
And she  could at any moment r ead  those letters, too, and
find out . That was what made it so ridiculous. She supposed
she wasn’ t really worried . Just… preoccupied. The letters
were wo nderful. But at the same  time, she was only too aware
of how much e ven the most co mplete letter must leave out.
And according to Roger ’ s book, General Bur goyne had left
Canada in early June, his plan being to march south and join
General Howe’ s troops, cuttin g the Colonies essentially in
half. And on July 6, 1777, he had paused to attack Fort
T iconderoga. What—
“Coimhead air sin!”  s aid a voice behind her . She jerked
round, startled, to find Rob Cameron standing there, gesturing
excitedly at the fish-viewing wi ndow . She turned back just in
time to see a t remendous silve r fish, spotted dark over the
back, give a great heave against the current before
disappearing up the chute.“Nach e sin an rud as br eagha a chunnaic thu riamh?”he
said, the  wonder  of it still showing on his face. Is that not the
most beautiful thing you’ve ever seen?
“Cha mhor!”  she replied, wary , but unable not to smile in
return. Almost.
His own smile remained but b ecame more personal as he
focused on her . “Ah, ye do have the Gaidhlig!  My  cou sin said ,
but I didna quite believe it—you with your prah-pah Bah-ston
accent,” he said, drawling the syllables in what he plainly
thought was  a Boston accent.
“Y eah, p ahk yah cah in Hah-vahd Y ahd,” she said, in a real
—but exaggerated—one. He burst out laughing.
“How d’ye do t hat? Y e don’ t sp eak Gaidhlig  wit h th at sort
of accen t. I mean—ye’ve got one, but it’ s… dif ferent. More
like ye’d hear on the Isles—Barra, maybe, or Uist.”
“My da was Scots,” she said. “I got it from him.”
That made him look at her afr esh, as though she were a
novel sort of fish he’d just pulled up on his hook.
“Y eah? From around here? What’ s his name?”
“James Fraser ,” she replied. Safe enough; there were
dozens. “And was. He’ s… gone.”
“Ach, too bad,” he said sympathetically , and briefly touched
her arm. “Lost my dad last year . T ough, eh?”
“Y es,” she said briefly , and made to go past him. He turned
at once and fell into step beside her .
“Y e’ve g ot wee ones, too, Roger said?” He felt her start of
surprise, and smiled sideways at her . “Met him in lodge. Nice
guy .”
“Y es, he is,” she said, guarded. Roger hadn’ t mentioned
meeting Rob, and she did wonde r why not. Clearly he’d talked
with Ro b long enough for Rob to know that Roger was her
husband and that they had children. Rob didn’ t pursue thereference any further , though, instead stretching and throwing
back his head.
“Gahhh… too nice a day to spen d in a dam. W ish I could be
on the water .” He nodded toward the tumbling river , where
half a dozen be-wadered anglers stood among the waves with
the p redatory intentness of herons. “Y ou or Roger fly-fish at
all?”
“I have, ” she said, and felt the memory of a casting rod
whipping in her hands, sendin g a small thrill up the nerve
endings. “Y ou fish, then?”
“A ye, I’ve got a permission for Rothiemurchus.” He looked
proud, a s though this was something special, so she made
approving noise s. He glanced s ideways at her , caramel-eyed
and smi ling. “If  ever ye want to come out with your rod, just
say the word. B oss.” He grinned suddenly at her , careless and
charming, and went ahead of her into the dam of fice,
whistling.
 
A ley line is an observed alignment between two
geographical featur es of inter est, usually an ancient
monument or megalith. Ther e ar e a number of theories
about ley lines and considerable contr oversy as to
whether they actually exist as a phenomenon, and not
only as an artifact.
By that I mean that if you choo se any two points that
have int er est for humans, ther e’ s very likely to be a path
that leads between them, no mat ter what those points ar e.
Ther e is a major r oadway between London and
Edinbur gh, for instance, because people fr equently want
to go  fr o m one to the other , but this is not normally called
a ley  line. What  people usually have in mind when using
this term  is an ancient pathwa y that leads, say , fr om a
standing stone to an ancient abbey , which is itself likely
built on a spot of much older worship .Since ther e isn’ t much objective evidence beyond the
obvious existence of such lines, ther e’ s a lot of guff talked
about th em. Some people think the lines have a magical
or mystical significance. I don’ t see any gr ounds for  this
myself, a nd neither does your mother , who is a scientist.
On the other hand, science ch anges its mind now and
then, an d what looks like magic may r eally have a
scientific explanation (NB—put in footnote about Clair e
and the plant-harvesting) .
However , among  the theories r egar ding ley lines, ther e
is one that appe ars to have at least a possible physical
basis. Per haps you will alr eady know what dowsers ar e,
by th e ti me you come to r ead this; I will take you out with
one as soon as the opportuni ty occurs. Just in case,
though—a dowser is a person who can detect the
pr esence of water or sometimes bodies of metal
under gr ound, lik e the or e in mines. Some of them use a Y -
forked s tick, a metal r od, or some other object with which
to “ divine” the water; some m er ely sense it. The actual
basis of this sk ill is not known; your mother says that
Occam’ s razor would say that such people just r ecognize
the type of geology that is most likely to harbor
under gr ound water . I’ve seen dowsers work, though, and
am pr etty sur e ther e is mor e to it than that—especially in
view of the theories I’m telling you her e .
One theory of how dowsing works is that the water or
metal has a ma gnetic curr ent,  to which the dowser is
sensitive. Y our mother says tha t the first part of this is
true and that, furthermor e, ther e ar e lar ge bands of
geomagnetic for ce in the earth’ s crust, which run in
opposing dir ections all r ound the globe. Further , she tells
me that these bands ar e detectible by objective measur es
but ar e not necessarily permanent; indeed, the earth
under goes occas ional (every umpty-million years, I think;
she didn’ t know the exact fr equency) r eversals of its
geomagnetic for ce—nobody knows why , but the usual
suspect is sunspots—with the poles exchanging places .Another inter esting bit of information is that homing
pigeons (and quite possibly other sorts of bir ds)
demonstrably  do sense th ese geomagnetic lines, and use
them to navigate by , though no one yet has figur ed out
quite how they do it .
What we suspect—your mothe r and I—and I must
emphasize that we may easily be wr ong in this
supposition—is that ley lines do exist, that they ar e (or
corr elate with) lines of geomagnetic for ce, and that wher e
they cr o ss or conver ge you get a spot wher e this magnetic
for ce is…  differ ent, for lack of  a better wor d. W e think
these co nver gences—or some of  them—may be the places
wher e it is poss ible for people who ar e sensitive to such
for ces (like pigeons, I suppose)  to go fr om one time to
another (that would be your mother and me, and you,
Jem, and Mandy). If the person r eading this is a child (or
grandchildr en) not yet born, then I don’ t know whether
you will have this sensitivity , ability , what-you-may-call-
it, but I assur e  you that it is r eal. Y our grandmother
speculated that it is a genetic trait, much like the ability
to r o ll o ne’ s ton gue; if you have n’ t got it, the “how” of it
is simply incompr ehensible, even though you can observe
it in someone who does have th e trait. If that’ s the case
for you, I don’ t know whether to apologize or
congratulate you , though I supp ose it’ s no worse than the
other things par ents give their childr en, all unknowing,
like cr oo ked tee th or shortsightedness. W e didn’ t do it on
purpose, either way , please believe that .
Sorry , I’ve got off the track her e. The basic point is that
the ability to  time-travel may  be dependent o n a genetic
sensitivity to these… conver gences? vortices? … of ley
lines .
Owing to the peculiar geological history of the British
Isles, yo u find a lot of ley lines h er e and, likewise, a gr eat
number of ar chaeological sites that seem to be linked by
those lines. Y our mother and I intend to note, so far as
can be done without danger—and make no mistake about
this; it is  very danger ous—the occurr ence of such sites asmight be portals. Obviously , ther e’ s no way of knowing
for sur e whether a specific site is a portal or not .*
*Footnote: Y our mother says—well, she said quite a
bit, in which I  picked out th e wor ds “Unified Field
Theory ,” which I gather is something that doesn’ t yet
exist, but if it did, it would explain a hell of a lot of things,
and among these might be an answer to why a
conver gence of geomagnetic lines might affect time in the
spot wher e the conver gence occurs. All I personally got
fr om this explanation is the no tion that space and time
ar e occasionally the same thing, and gravity is somehow
involved. This makes as much sense to me as anything
else r egar ding this phenomenon .
Footnote 2:
The obs ervation that sites seem to be “open” on the
dates that corr espond to the sun  feasts and fir e feasts of
the ancient world (or at least mor e open than at other
times) may—if this hypothesis is right—have something to
do with the grav itational pull of the sun and moon. This
seems r easonable, given that those bodies r eally do affect
the behavior of the earth with r espect to tides, weather ,
and the like—why not time vortices, too, after all?
 
“Does that make sense?” Roger asked. “So far , at least?”
“Insofar as anything about it makes sense, yes.” Despite the
uneasiness that came over her whenever they discussed it, she
couldn’ t help smiling at him; he  looked so earnest. There was
a blotch  of ink on his cheek, an d his black hair was ruf fled up
on one side.
“Professoring m ust be in the blood,” she said, pulling a
tissue ou t of her pocket, licking  it in mother -cat fashion, and
applying it to h is face. “Y ou know , there’ s this wonderful
modern invention called a ballpoint…”
“Hate th em,” he  said, closing hi s eyes and suf fering himself
to b e tidied. “ Besides, a fountain pen is a great luxury ,
compared to a quill.”“W ell, that’ s true. Da always looked like an explosion in an
ink facto ry when he’d been writing letters.” Her eyes returned
to t he page, an d she snorted briefly at the first footnote,
making Roger smile.
“Is that a decent explanation?”
“Considering that this is meant for the kids, more than
adequate,” she assured him, lowering the page. “What goes in
Footnote T wo?”
“Ah.” H e leane d back in his chair , hands linked, looking
uneasy . “That.”
“Y es, that,” she said, instantly alerted. “Is there something
like an Exhibit A that’ s meant to go there?”
“W ell, yes,” he said reluctantly , and met her eyes. “Geillis
Duncan’ s notebooks. Mrs. Graham’ s book would be Exhibit B.
Y our mother ’ s explanation of planting superstitions is
Footnote Four .”
Brianna could feel the blood dra ining from her head and sat
down, just in case.
“Y ou’re sure that’ s a good idea?” she asked, tentative. She
didn’ t herself know where Geillis Duncan’ s notebooks wer e—
and didn’ t want to. The little b ook that Fiona Graham, Mrs.
Graham’ s granddaughter , had given them was safely tucked
away in a safe-d eposit box in the Royal Bank of Scotland in
Edinbur gh.
Roger blew out his breath and shook his head.
“No, I’m not,” he said frankly . “But look. W e don’ t know
how old  the kids will be when they read this. Which reminds
me—we need to make some kind of provision about it. Just in
case something happens to us b efore they’re old enough to be
told … everything.”
She felt  as though a melting ice cube were sliding slowly
down he r back. He was right, though. They might both be
killed in a car crash, like her m other ’ s parents. Or the house
might burn—“W ell, no,” she said aloud, looking at the window behind
Roger , w hich was set into a stone wall some eighteen inches
thick. “I don’ t suppose this  house will burn down.”
That made him smile.
“No, not too worried about that . But the notebooks—aye, I
know what ye mean. And I did think of maybe just going
through them myself and sort o f straining out the information
—she did have quite a bit about which stone circles seemed to
be a ctive, and th at’ s useful. Because reading the rest of it is…”
He waved a hand in search of the right word.
“Creepy ,” she supplied.
“I was going to  say like watchi ng someone go slowly mad
in fr ont of you, but ‘creepy’ will do.” He took the pages from
her and  tapped them together . “It’ s just an academic tic, I
suppose. I don’ t feel right in suppressing an original source.”
She gave a dif ferent snort, one indicating what she thought
of Geillis Duncan as an orig inal source of anything bar
trouble. Still…
“I suppose you’re right,” she said reluctantly . “Maybe you
could do a sum mary , though, and just mention where the
notebooks are, in case someo ne down the line is r eally
curious.”
“Not a bad thou ght.” He put the papers inside the notebook
and rose , closin g it as he did so. “I’ll go down and get them,
then, maybe when school’ s out. I could take Jem and show
him the city; he’ s old enough to walk the Royal Mile, and he’d
love the castle.”
“Do not  take him to the Edinbur gh Dungeon!” she said at
once, and he broke into a broad grin.
“What, ye don’ t think wax figu res of people being tortured
are educational? It’ s all historical, aye?”
“It w ould be a lot less horrible if it wasn’ t,” she said, and,
turning, caught sight of the wa ll clock. “Roger! Aren’ t yousupposed to be doing your Gaelic class at the school at two
o’clock?”
He glanced at the clock in disbelief, snatched up the pile of
books and papers on his desk, and shot out of the room in a
flurry of very eloquent Gaelic.
She wen t out into the hall to see him hastily kiss Mandy and
char ge f or the door . Mandy stoo d in the open doorway , waving
enthusiastically .
“Bye-bye, Daddy!” she cried. “Bwing me ice cweam!”
“If he for gets, w e’ll go into the village after supper and get
some,” Brianna promised, bending down to pick her daughter
up. She stood there holding Mandy , watching Roger ’ s ancient
orange Morris cough, choke, shu dder , and start up with a brief
belch of blue smoke. She fr owned slightly at the sight,
thinking she must get him a set of new spark plugs, but waved
as he leaned out at the corner of the drive, smiling back at
them.
Mandy snuggled close, murmuring one of Roger ’ s more
picturesque Gaelic phrases, which she was obviously
committing to memory , and Bree bent her head, inhaling the
sweet scent of J ohnson’ s baby shampoo and grubby child. No
doubt it was the  mention of Ge illis Duncan that was making
her feel still une asy . The woman was well and truly dead, but
after all… she was Roger ’ s mu ltiple great-grandmother . And
perhaps the ability to travel thro ugh stone circles was not the
only thing to be passed down through the blood.
Though surely some things were  diluted by time. Roger , for
instance, had nothing in common with W illiam Buccleigh
MacKenzie, Geillis’ s son by Dougal MacKenzie—and the
man responsible for Roger ’ s being hanged.
“Son of a witch,” she said, unde r her breath. “I hope you rot
in hell.”
“‘At’ s a bad word, Mummy ,” Mandy said reprovingly .
 IT WENT BETTER than he could have hoped. The
schoolroom was crowded, with lots of kids, a number of
parents, and even a few grandparents crammed in round the
walls. He had that moment o f light-headedness—not quite
panic or stage fright, but a sense of looking into some vast
canyon t hat he couldn’ t see the bottom of—that he was used to
from his days as a performer . He took a deep breath, put down
his stack of bo oks and papers, smiled at them, and said,
“Feasgar math!”
That’ s a ll it ever took; the first words spoken—or sung—
and it was like t aking hold of a live wire. A current sprang up
between him and the audience, and the next words seemed to
come fr om nowhere, flowing through him like the crash of
water through one of Bree’ s giant turbines.
After a word o r two of introduction, he started with the
notion of Gaelic cursing, know ing why most of the kids had
come. A few p arents’ brows shot up, but small, knowing
smiles appeared on the faces of the grandparents.
“W e hav en’ t got bad words in the Gaidhlig , like there are in
the English,” he said, and grinned at the feisty-looking
towhead in the s econd row , who had to be the wee Glasscock
bugger who’d told Jemmy he  was going to hell. “Sorry ,
Jimmy .
“Which is not to  say ye can’ t give a good, strong opinion of
someone,” he went on, as soon as the laughter subsided. “But
Gaidhlig  cursing is a matter of art, not crudeness.” That got a
ripple of laughter from the old people, too, and several of the
kids’ heads turned toward their grandparents, amazed.
“For example, I once heard a farmer whose pig got into the
mash tell her that he hoped her intestines would burst through
her belly and be eaten by crows.”
An impressed “Oo!” from the kids, and he smiled and went
on, giving carefully edited ve rsions of some of the more
creative things he’d heard his father -in-law say on occasion.
No need to add that, lack of bad words notwithstanding, it is
indeed possible to call someone a “daughter of a bitch” whenwishing to be seriously nasty . If  the kids wanted to know what
Jem had  really said to Miss Glendenning, they’d have to ask
him. If they hadn’ t already .
From there, he went to a more serious—but quick—
description of the Gaeltacht, that area of Scotland where
Gaelic was traditionally spoken , and told a few anecdotes of
learning the Gaelic on herring bo ats in the Minch as a teenager
—including the entire speech given by a particular Captain
T aylor when a s torm scoured out his favorite lobster hole and
made aw ay with all his pots (this piece of eloquence having
been add ressed, with shaken fist, to the sea, the heavens, the
crew , and the lobsters). That one  had them rolling again, and a
couple of the old buggers in the back were grinning and
muttering to one another , they having obviously encountered
similar situations.
“But the Gaidhlig  is a language,” he said, when the laughter
had died down once more. “And that means its primary use is
for comm unication—people talking to one another . How many
of you have ever heard line singing? W aulking songs?”
Murmurs of interest; some had, some hadn’ t. So he
explained what waulking was: “The women all working
together , pushing and pulling and kneading the wet wool cloth
to make it tight and waterproof—because they didn’ t have
macs or wellies in the auld days, and folk would need to be out
of doors day an d night, in all kinds of weather , tending their
animals or their crofts.” His vo ice was well warmed by now;
he t hought he c ould make it through a brief waulking song
and, flip ping open the folder , sang them the first verse and
refrain, then got them to do it, as well. They got four verses,
and then  he could feel the strain  starting to tell and brought it
to a close.
“My gran used t o sing that one,”  one of the mothers blurted
impulsively , then blushed red as a beet as everyone looked at
her .
“Is your gran still alive?” Roger asked, and at her abashed
nod, sai d, “W ell , then, have he r teach it to you, and you canteach it to your kids. That kin d of thing shouldn’ t be lost,
aye?”
A small murmur of half-surprised agreement, and he smiled
again and lifted the battered hymnbook he’d brought.
“Right. I mentioned the line sing ing, too. Y e’ll still hear this
of a Sunday in kirk out on the Isles. Go to Stornaway , for
instance, and ye’ll hear it. It’ s a way of singing the psalms that
goes bac k to when folk hadn’ t many books—or maybe not so
many o f the congregation could read. So there’d be a
precentor , whos e job it was to sing the psalm, one line at a
time, an d then the congregation would sing it back to him.
This book”—and he raised the hymnal—”belonged to my own
father , the Reverend W akefield; some of you might recall him.
But originally it belonged to another cler gyman, the Reverend
Alexander Carm ichael. Now he…” And he went on to tell
them about the Reverend Carmichael, who had combed the
Highlands and the Isles in the nineteenth century , talking with
people, ur ging them to sing him their songs and tell him their
ways, collecting “hymns, charm s, and incantations” from the
oral trad ition wherever he could find them, and had published
this great work of scholarship in several volumes, called the
Carmina Gadelica .
He’d br ought o ne volume of t he Gadelica  with him, and
while he passed the ancient hy mnal round the room, along
with a booklet of waulking son gs he’d put together , he read
them one of the charms of the new moon, the Cud Chewing
Charm, the Indigestion Spell, the Poem of the Beetle, and
some bits from “The Speech of Birds.”
Columba went out
 An early mild morning;
 He saw a white swan,
 “Guile, guile,”
 Down on the strand,
 “Guile, guile,”
 W ith a dir ge of death,
 “Guile, guile.” 
A white swan and she wounded, wounded,
 A white swan and she bruised, bruised,
 The white swan of the two visions,
 “Guile, guile,”
 The white swan of the two omens,
 “Guile, guile,”
 Life and death,
 “Guile, guile,”
 “Guile, guile.”
 
When thy journey ,
 Swan of mourning?
 Said Columba of love,
 “Guile, guile,”
 Fr om Erin my swimming,
 “Guile, guile,”
 Fr om the Fiann my wounding,
 “Guile, guile,”
 The sharp wound of my death,
 “Guile, guile,”
 “Guile, guile.”
 
White swan of Erin,
 A friend am I to the needy;
 The eye of Christ be on thy wound,
 “Guile, guile,”
 The eye of affection and of mer cy ,
 “Guile, guile,”
 The eye of kindness and of love,
 “Guile, guile,”
 
Making thee whole,
 “Guile, guile,”
 “Guile, guile.” 
Swan of Erin,
 “Guile, guile,”
 No harm shall touch thee,
 “Guile, guile,”
 Whole be thy wounds,
 “Guile, guile.”
 
Lady of the wave,
 “Guile, guile,”
 Lady of the dir ge,
 “Guile, guile,”
 Lady of the melody ,
 “Guile, guile.”
 
T o Christ the glory ,
 “Guile, guile,”
 T o the Son of the V ir gin,
 “Guile, guile,”
 T o the gr eat High-King,
 “Guile, guile,”
 T o Him be thy song,
 “Guile, guile,”
 T o Him be thy song,
 “Guile, guile,”
 “Guile guile!”
 
His throat hurt almost unbearably from doing the swan
calls, from the soft moan of the wounded swan to the
triumphant cry of the final words, and his voice cracked with it
at the last, but triumphant it w as, nonetheless, and the room
erupted in applause.
Between soreness and emotion,  he couldn’ t actually speak
for a  few mome nts, and instead bowed and smiled and bowed
again, m utely handing the stack of books and folders to JimmyGlasscock to be passed round, while the audience swarmed up
to congratulate him.
“Man, t hat was  gr eat !” said a half-familiar voice, and he
looked up to fin d that it was Rob Cameron wringing his hand,
shining-eyed w ith enthusiasm.  Roger ’ s surprise must have
shown on his face, for Rob bobbed his head toward the little
boy at his side: Bobby Hurragh, whom Roger knew well from
the choi r . A heartbreakingly pure soprano, and a wee fiend if
not carefully watched.
“I brought wee Bobby ,” Rob said, keeping—Roger noticed
—a tight grip o n the kid’ s hand. “My sister ’ s had to work
today and couldn’ t get of f. She’ s a widow ,” he added, by way
of explanation, both of the m other ’ s absence and his own
stepping in.
“Thanks,” Roge r managed to croak, but Cameron just
wrung his hand again, and the n gave way to the next well-
wisher .
Among the mob was a middle-a ged woman whom he didn’ t
know but who recognized him.
“My hu sband and I saw you sing once, at the Inverness
Games,” she said, in an educate d accent, “though you went by
your late father ’ s name then, did you not?”
“I d id,” he said,  in the bullfrog croak that was as far as his
voice was prepared to go just now . “Y our—you have—a
grandchild?” He  waved vaguely at the buzzing swarm of kids
milling round an elderly lady who, pink with pleasure, was
explaining the pronunciation of some of the odd-looking
Gaelic words in the storybook.
“Y es,” the woman said, but wouldn’ t be distracted from her
focus, w hich wa s the scar across  his throat. “What happened?”
she asked sympathetically . “Is it permanent?”
“Accident,” he said. ” ‘Fraid so.”
Distress creased the corners of her eyes and she shook her
head.“Oh, such  a lo ss,” she said . “Y our voice w as beautiful. I am
so sorry .”
“Thanks,” he said, because it w as all he could say , and she
let h im go then, to receive the praise of people who’d never
heard him sing. Before.
Afterward, he thanked Lionel Menzies, who stood by the
door to see pe ople out, beaming like the ringmaster of a
successful circus.
“It was wonderful,” Menzies said, clasping him warmly by
the hand . “Even  better than I’d hoped. T ell me, would ye think
of doing it again?”
“Again?” He laughed, but broke  of f coughing in the middle.
“I barely made it through this one.”
“Ach.” M enzies waved that of f. “A dram’ll see your throat
right. Come down the pub with me, why don’ t you?”
Roger w as abou t to refuse, but  Menzies’ s face shone with
such pleasure that he changed h is mind. The fact that he was
wringing with sweat—performing always raised his body
temperature by several degrees—and had a thirst fit for the
Gobi Desert had nothing to do with it, of course.
“Just the one, then,” he said, and smiled.
As they crossed  the parking lot,  a battered small blue panel
truck pulled up and Rob Camer on leaned out of the window ,
calling to them.
“Like it, did ye, Rob?” Menzies asked, still beaming.
“Loved it,” Cameron said, with every evidence of sincerity .
“T wo th ings, Rog—I wanted to ask, maybe, if ye’d let me see
some of  the old songs ye have; S iegfried MacLeod showed me
the ones you did for him.”
Roger was a little taken aback, but pleased.
“A ye, sure,” he said. “Didn’ t know you were a fan,” he
joked.“I lo ve all the old stuf f,” Cameron said, serious for once.
“Really , I’d appreciate it.”
“Okay , then. Come on out to the house, maybe, next
weekend?”
Rob grinned and saluted briefly .
“W ait—two things, ye said?” Menzies asked.
“Oh, aye.” Cameron reached over and picked up something
from the seat be tween Bobby and him. “This was in with the
Gaelic bits ye w ere handing round. It looked as though it was
in th ere by mist ake, though, so I took it out. W riting a novel,
are ye?”
He handed out the black notebook, “The Hitchhiker ’ s
Guide,” and Roger ’ s throat clenched as though he’d been
garroted. He took the notebook, nodding speechlessly .
“Maybe ye’ll let me read it when it’ s done,” Cameron said
casually , putting  his truck in gear . “I’m a great one for the
science fiction.”
The truck pulled away , then stopped suddenly and reversed.
Roger took a fir mer grip on the notebook, but Rob didn’ t look
at it.
“Hey ,” he said. “For got. Brianna said ye’ve got an old stone
fort or some such on your place?”
Roger nodded, clearing his throat.
“I’ve got a friend, an archaeolog ist. W ould ye mind, maybe,
if he was to come and have a look at it sometime?”
“No,” Roger croaked, then cleared his throat again and said
more firmly , “No, that’d be fine. Thanks.”
Rob grinned cheerfully at him and revved the engine.
“Nay bother , mate,” he said. HIGH PLACES
 
R OB’S ARCHAEOLOGIST friend, Michael Callahan,
turned o ut to be a genial bloke in his fifties with thinning
sandy h air , sunburned so badly and so often that his face
looked like patchwork, dark freckles blotched among patches
of raw pink skin. He ferreted about among the collapsed stones
of th e old churc h with every sign of interest, asking Roger ’ s
permission to dig a trench along the outside of one wall.
Rob, Bri anna, an d the kids all came up briefly to watch, but
archaeological work is not a s pectator sport, and when Jem
and Man dy got bored, the lot of  them went down to the house
to make lunch, leaving Roger and Mike to their poking.
“I d on’ t need you,” Callahan said, glancing up at Roger
after a bit. “If you’ve things to do.”
There w ere alwa ys things to do— it was a farm, after all, if a
small one—but Roger shook his head.
“I’m interested,” he said. “If I won’ t be in your way… ?”
“Not a bit of it,” Callahan said cheerfully . “Come and help
me lift this, then.”
Callahan whist led through his teeth as he worked,
occasionally mu ttering to himself, but for the most part made
no c omment on whatever he wa s looking at. Roger was called
on n ow and then  to help clear away rubble or hold an unstable
stone wh ile Call ahan peered underneath it with a small torch,
but f or t he most  part Roger sat on the bit of uncollapsed wall,
listening to the wind.
It was quiet on the hilltop, in the way that wild places are
quiet, with a co nstant sense of unobtrusive movement, and it
struck h im odd that this should be so. Normally you didn’ t get
that feeling in places where people had lived, and plainlypeople had been mucking about on this hilltop for a good long
time, ju dging from the depth of Callahan’ s trench and the
small whistles of interest he gave of f now and then, like a
marmoset.
Brianna brought them up sandwiches and lemonade and sat
down beside Roger on the wall to eat.
“Rob gone of f, then?” Roger asked, noticing that the truck
was gone from the dooryard.
“Just to run some errands, he sa id. He said it didn’ t look as
though Mike would be finished anytime soon,” she said, with
a glance  at Callahan’ s trouser seat, this sticking out from a
bush as he burrowed happily beneath it.
“Maybe not,” Roger said, smiling, and leaning forward,
kissed her lightly . She made a  low , contented noise in her
throat and stepped back, but kept hold of his hand for a
moment.
“Rob as ked about the old son gs you did up for Sandy
MacLeod,” she said, with a side ways glance down toward the
house. “Did you tell him he could see them?”
“Oh, aye, I’d fo r got that. Sure. If I’m not down when he
comes back, you can show him them. The originals are in my
bottom file drawer , in a folder labeled Ceolas .”
She nodded and went down, lo ng sneakered feet sure as a
deer ’ s o n the stony path, and her hair down her back in a tail
the color of the same deer ’ s pelt.
As t he afternoon wore on, he fo und himself dropping into a
state no t far of f trance, his mind moving sluggishly and his
body not much faster , coming in leisurely fashion to lend a
hand where wanted, exchanging the barest of words with
Callahan, who seemed similarly bemused. The drifting haze of
the mor ning had thickened, and the cool shadows amid the
stones fa ded wit h the light. The air was cool with water on his
skin, but there was no hint of rain. Y ou could almost feel the
stones rising up around you, he thought, coming back to what
they once were.There were comings and goings at the house below: the
slam of doors, B rianna hanging  out the family wash, the kids
and a couple of wee lads from the next farm over who’d come
to spend the nig ht with Jem all racing through the kailyard and
outbuildings, playing some kind of tag that involved a good
deal of noise, t heir shrieks high and sharp as the cries of
fishing ospreys. Once he glanced down and saw the Farm and
Household truck, presumably come to deliver the pump for the
cream separator , for Roger saw Brianna shepherding the driver
into the barn, he unable to see around the lar ge carton in his
arms.
Around five, a fresh strong bre eze came up, and the haze
began to dissipate. As though this was a signal waking
Callahan from his dream, the ar chaeologist straightened, stood
a moment looking down at something, then nodded.
“W ell, i t may be an ancient site,” he said, climbing out of
his trench and g roaning as he le aned to and fro, stretching his
back. “The structure’ s not, though. Likely built sometime in
the l ast couple o f hundred years, though whoever built it used
much older stones in the construction. Probably brought them
from somewher e else, though some may be from an earlier
structure built on the spot.” H e smiled at Roger . “Folk are
thrifty in  the Highlands; last week I saw a barn with an ancient
Pictish stone used in the found ation and a floor made with
bricks from a demolished public lavatory in Dornoch.”
Callahan looked out to the west,  shading his eyes, where the
haze now hung low over the distant shore.
“High places,” he said, matter -of-factly . “They always chose
the high  places, the old ones. W hether it was a fort or a place
of worship, they always went up.”
“The old ones?” Roger asked, and felt a brief prickle of the
hair on his nape. “Which old ones?”
Callahan laughed, shaking his head.
“Don’ t know . Picts, maybe—all we know about them is the
bits of stonework they left her e and there—or the folk whocame be fore them. Sometimes you see a bit of something that
you kno w was made—or at leas t placed—by men, but can’ t fit
it into a known culture. The megaliths, for instance—the
standing stones. Nobody knows who set those up or what for .”
“Don’ t they ,” Roger murmured. “Can you tell what sort of
ancient site this was? For war or worship, I mean?”
Callahan shook his head.
“Not fro m what’ s apparent on th e surface, no. Maybe if we
excavated the underlying site— but to be honest, I don’ t see
anything that would make anyone really want to do that. There
are h undreds of sites like this o n high places, all through the
British Isles and Brittany , too— old Celtic, many of them, Iron
Age, lots much older .” He picked up the battered saint’ s head,
stroking it with a sort of af fection.
“This lady’ s much more rece nt; maybe the thirteenth,
fourteenth century . Maybe the family’ s patron saint, handed
down over the years.” He ga ve the head a brief, unself-
conscious kiss and handed it gently to Roger .
“For what it’ s worth, though—and this isn’ t scientific, just
what I think my self, having seen more than a few such places
—if the modern structure was a chapel, then the ancient site
beneath it was likely a place of worship, too. Folk in the
Highlands are set in their ways . They may build a new barn
every two or three hundred ye ars—but chances are it’ll be
right where the last one stood.”
Roger laughed.
“T rue en ough. Our barn’ s still the original one—built in the
early 1700s, along with the house. But I found the stones of an
earlier croft buried when I dug up the stable floor to put in a
new drain.”
“The 1700s? W ell, you’ll not be needing a new roof for at
least another hundred years, then.”
It was nearly six but still fu ll daylight. The haze had
vanished in that mysterious way it sometimes did, and a pale
sun had come out. Roger traced a small cross with his thumbon the statue’ s forehead and set the head gently in the niche
that see med made for it. They’d finished, but neither man
made a move to leave just yet. There was a sense of comfort in
each other ’ s company , a sharing of the spell of the high place.
Down below , he saw Rob Cameron’ s battered truck parked
in the dooryard and Rob himself sitting on the back stoop,
Mandy , Jem, and Jem’ s friends leaning in on either side of
him, evidently absorbed in the pages he held. What the devil
was he doing?
“Is that singing I  hear?” Callahan, who had been looking of f
to th e no rth, tur ned half round, and as he did so, Roger heard
it, too. Faint and sweet, no mo re than a thread of sound, but
enough to pick up the tune of “Crimond.”
The strength of the stab of jealousy that went through him
took his breath, and he felt his  throat close as though some
strong hand choked him.
Jealousy is cruel as the grave: t he coals ther eof ar e coals of
fir e .
He c losed his ey es for an instant, breathing slow and deep,
and with a little ef fort, dred ged up the first bit of that
quotation: Love is str ong as death .
He felt the cho king sensation begin to ease and reason
return. Of course Rob Camero n could sing; he was in the
men’ s choir . Only make sense t hat if he saw the rudimentary
musical settings  Roger had noted for some of the old songs,
he’d try to sing them. And kids—especially his kids—were
attracted to music.
“Have you known Rob for long, then?” he asked, and was
pleased to hear his voice sound normal.
“Oh, Ro b?” Cal lahan considere d. “Fifteen years, maybe…
No, I tell a lie, more like twenty . He came along as a volunteer
on a dig I had going on Shapinsay—that’ s one of the Orkneys
—and he wasn’ t but a lad then, in his late teens, maybe.” He
gave Roger a mild, shrewd look. “Why?”
Roger shrugged.“He wor ks with my wife, for the Hydro Board. I don’ t know
him much myself. Only met him recently , in lodge.”
“Ah.” Callahan watched the scene below for a moment,
silent, then said, not looking at Roger , “He was married, to a
French girl. W ife divorced him a couple of years ago, took
their son back to France. He’ s not been happy .”
“Ah.” T hat explained Rob’ s attachment to his widowed
sister ’ s family , then, and his en joyment of Jem and Mandy’ s
company . He breathed once more, freely , and the small flame
of jealousy flickered out.
As thou gh this brief exchange had put a period to the day ,
they picked up the leavings from their lunch and Callahan’ s
rucksack and came down the hill, companionable in silence.
 
“WHA T’S THIS?” There were two wineglasses set on the
counter . “Are we celebrating something?”
“W e are,” Bree said firmly . “Th e children going to bed, for
one thing.”
“Oh, bad, were they?” He felt a  small twinge of guilt—not
very sev ere— for having spent the afternoon in the high, cool
peace of the ruin ed chapel with Callahan rather than chivvying
small mad things out of the kailyard.
“Just really ener getic.” She cast a suspicious glance toward
the doo r to the hall, through which the muted roar of a
television came from the big front parlor . “I hope  they’ll be
too worn  out to spend the night jumping on the beds. They’ve
had enough pizza to put six g rown men into a coma for a
week.”
He laughed at that—he’d eaten most of a full-sized
pepperoni himself and was beginning to feel comfortably
stuporous.
“What else?”“Oh, wh at else are we celebratin g?” She gave him a cat-in-
the-cream look. “W ell, as for me …”
“Y es?” he said, obliging.
“I’ve passed the provisional employment period; now I’m
permanent, and  they can’ t get rid of me, even if I wear
perfume to work. And you ,” s he added, r eaching into the
drawer and placing an envelope  in front of him, “are formally
invited b y the school board to do a reprise of your Gaidhlig
triumph at five dif ferent schools next month!”
He f elt a mome nt’ s shock, then a warm flood of something
he could n’ t quit e identify , and realized with a greater shock
that he was blushing.
“Really?”
“Y ou don’ t think I’d tease you about something like that?”
Not waiting for an answer , she poured the wine, purple-rich
and aro matic, and handed him a glass. He clinked it
ceremoniously against her own.
“Here’ s tae us. Wha’ s like us?”
“Damned few ,” she replied in b road Scots, “and they’re all
deid.”
 
THERE W AS A certain amount of crashing upstairs after
the children were sent to bed, bu t a brief appearance by Roger
in the persona of Heavy Father put a stop to that, and the
slumber party simmered down into storytelling and stifled
giggles.
“Are they telling dirty jokes?” Bree asked, when he came
back down.
“V ery li kely . Ought I make Mandy come down, do you
think?”
She shook her head.“She’ s p robably asleep already . And if not, the sort of jokes
nine-year -old boys tell won’ t warp her . She isn’ t old enough to
remember the punch lines.”
“That’ s true.” Roger took up his refilled glass and sipped,
the w ine soft on  his tongue and dense with the scents of black
currant and black tea. “How o ld was Jem when he finally
learned to tell jokes? Y ou reme mber how he got the form of
jokes but didn’ t really understand the idea of content?”
“What’ s the dif ference between  a … a … a button and a
sock?” she mimicked, catching Jem’ s breathless excitement to
a T . “A… BUFF ALO! HAHAHAHAHA!”
Roger burst out laughing.
“Why are you laughing?” she demanded. Her eyes were
growing heavy-lidded, and her lips were stained dark.
“Must be the wa y you tell it,” he said, and lifted his glass to
her . “Cheers.”
“Slainte.”
He close d his eyes, breathing th e wine as much as drinking
it. H e was begin ning to have the pleasant illusion that he could
feel the heat of his wife’ s body , though she sat a few feet away .
She seemed to emanate warmth, in slow , pulsing waves.
“What do they call it, how you find distant stars?”
“A t elescope,” she said. “Y ou ca n’ t be drunk on half a bottle
of wine, good as it is.”
“No, that’ s not what I mean. There’ s a term for it—heat
signature? Does that sound right?”
She closed one eye, considering, then shrugged.
“Maybe. Why?”
“Y ou’ve got one.”
She looked down at herself, squinting.
“Nope. T wo. Definitely two.”He wasn’ t  quite drunk, and neither was she, but whatever
they were was a lot of fun.
“A h eat signature,” he said, and , reaching out, took hold of
her hand. It w as markedly warmer than his, and he was
positive he could feel the heat  of her fingers throb slowly ,
increasing and diminishing with  her pulse. “I could pick you
out of a crowd blindfolded; you glow in the dark.”
She put aside her glass and slid out of her chair , coming to a
stop kneeling between his knee s, her body not quite touching
his. She did glow . I f he cl osed his eyes, he could just about see
it through the white shirt she wore.
He tipped up his glass and drained it.
“Great wine. Where did ye get it?”
“I didn’ t. Rob brought it—a thank-you, he said, for letting
him copy the songs.”
“Nice guy ,” he s aid generously . At the moment, he actually
thought so.
Brianna reached  for the wine bottle and poured the last of it
into Roger ’ s glass. Then she sat  back on her heels and looked
at him owl-eyed, the empty bottle clutched to her chest.
“Hey . Y ou owe me.”
“Big-time,” he assured her gravely , making her giggle.
“No,” sh e said, recovering. “Y ou said if I brought my hard
hat home, you’d tell me what you were doing with that
champagne bottle. All that hooting, I mean.”
“Ah.” He considered for a moment—there was a distinct
possibility she’d  hit him with the wine bottle if he told her , but
then, a bar gain was a bar gain, after all—and the vision of her
naked save for the hard hat, radiating heat in all directions,
was enough to make a man cast caution to the winds.
“I was trying to see if I could  get the exact pitch of the
sounds ye make when we’re making love and you’re justabout to  … er… to … it’ s something between a growl and a
really deep hum.”
Her mou th opened slightly , and her eyes slightly more. The
tip of her tongue was a dark, dark red.
“I think it’ s the F below middle C,” he concluded hurriedly .
She blinked.
“Y ou’re kidding.”
“I am not.” He picked up his half-full glass and tilted it
gently , s o the rim touched her lip. She closed her eyes and
drank, slowly . He smoothed her hair behind her ear , his finger
moving slowly down the leng th of her neck, watching her
throat m ove as she swallowed, moved his fingertip along the
strong arch of her collarbone.
“Y ou’re getting warmer ,” she whispered, not opening her
eyes. “The second law of thermodynamics.”
“What’ s that?” he said, his voice dropping, too.
“The en tropy of an isolated syste m that is not in equilibrium
tends to increase, reaching a maximum at equilibrium.”
“Oh, aye?”
“Mmm-hmm. T hat’ s why a warm body loses heat to a
colder one, until they’re the same temperature.”
“I knew  there had to be a reaso n why that happened.” All
sounds from upstairs had ceased, and his voice sounded loud,
even though he was whispering.
Her eyes opened suddenly , an inch from his, and her black-
currant breath on his cheek was as warm as his skin. The bottle
hit the parlor carpet with a soft thud.
“W ant to try for E flat?” HENR Y
 June 14, 1777
 
H E HAD FORBIDDEN Dottie t o accompany him. He
wasn’ t sure what he might find. In the event, though, he was
surprised. The address to which he had been directed was in a
modest street in Germantown, but the house was commodious
and well kept, though not lar ge.
He knocked at the door and was greeted by a pleasant-faced
young A frican woman in neat calico, whose eyes widened at
sight of  him. He had thought best not to wear his uniform,
though there were men in British uniform here and there in the
streets—paroled prisoners, perhaps, or soldiers bearing of ficial
communications. Instead, he had put on a good suit of bottle-
green, with his best waistcoat , this being gold China silk,
embroidered with a number of fanciful butterflies. He smiled,
and the woman smiled in turn a nd put a hand over her mouth
to hide it.
“May I help you, sir?”
“Is your master at home?”
She laughed. Softly , and with real amusement.
“Bless you, sir , I have no master . The house is mine.”
He blinked, disconcerted.
“Perhaps I have been misdire cted. I am in search of a
British s oldier , Captain V iscount Asher—Henry Grey is his
name. A British prisoner of war?”
She low ered her hand and stare d at him, eyes wide. Then
her smile returned, broad enough to show two gold-stuf fed
teeth at the back.
“Henry! W ell, why didn’ t you say so, sir? Come in, come
in!”
And bef ore he could put down  his stick, he was whisked
inside, up a nar row staircase, and into a neat small bedroom,where he discovered his nephew Henry , sprawled on his back
and naked from the waist up, with a small, beaky-looking man
in black poking at his belly—th is crisscrossed with a number
of violent-looking scars.
“I beg your pardon?” He pee red over the beaky man’ s
shoulder and waved gingerly . “How do you do, Henry?”
Henry , w hose eyes had been f astened on the ceiling in a
tense sort of w ay , glanced at him, away , back, then sat up
abruptly , this movement resulting in an exclamation of protest
from the little beaky person and a cry of pain from Henry .
“Oh, God, oh, God, oh, God.”  Henry doubled over , arms
clutching his belly and his face clenched in pain. Grey seized
him by the shoulders, seeking to ease him back.
“Henry , my dear . Do for give me. I didn’ t mean—”
“And who are you, sir?” the  beaky man cried angrily ,
springing to his feet and facing Grey with clenched fists.
“I am his uncle,”  Grey informed him shortly . “Who are you,
sir? A doctor?”
The little man drew himself up with dignity .
“Why , no, sir . I am a dows er . Joseph Hunnicutt, sir ,
professional dowser .”
Henry was still bent double, gasping, but seemed to be
getting a little of his breath back. Grey touched his bare back
gently . The flesh was warm, a little sweaty , but didn’ t seem
fevered.
“I a m sorry , He nry ,” he said. “W ill you survive, do you
think?”
Henry , to his credit, managed a breathless grunt of laughter .
“It’ll do,” he got out. “Just… it takes… a minute.”
The pleasant-faced black woman was hovering at the door , a
sharp eye on Grey .
“This man says he’ s your uncle, Henry . Is that so?”Henry n odded, panting a little. “Lord John … Grey . May I
pre … sent Mrs. Mercy W ood… cock?”
Grey bowed punctiliously , feeling slightly ridiculous.
“Y our s ervant, madam. And yours, Mr . Hunnicutt,” he
added politely , bowing again.
“Might I ask,” he said, straightening up, “ why  the re is a
dowser poking you in the abdomen, Henry?”
“Why , to find th e bit o’ metal what’ s a-troubling the poor
young m an, o’ course,” said Mr . Hunnicutt, looking up his
long nose—for he was shorter than Grey by several inches.
“I called for him, sir—your lordship, I mean.” Mrs.
W oodcock had come into the room by this time, and was
looking at him with a faint air of apology . “It’ s only that the
sur geons hadn’ t any luck, and I was so afraid that they’d kill
him next time.”
Henry had by n ow managed to unbend. Grey eased him
slowly back until he lay against the pillow , pale and sweating.
“I couldn’ t bear it again,” he said, closing his eyes briefly . “I
can’ t.”
W ith Henry’ s stomach exposed to view and an opportunity
to exam ine it at leisure, Grey co uld see the puckered scars of
two bullet wounds and the long er , clean-edged scars made by
a su r geon digging for metal. T hree of them. Grey had five
such scars himself, crisscrossing  the left side of his chest, and
he touched his nephew’ s hand in sympathy .
“Is it truly necessary to remo ve the ball—or balls?” he
asked, lo oking up at Mrs. W oo dcock. “If he has survived so
far , perhaps the ball is lodged in a place where—”
But Mrs. W oodcock shook her head decidedly .
“He can ’ t eat,” she said bluntly . “He can’ t swallow a thing
but soup , and none so much of  that. He wasn’ t but skin and
bones when they brought him to me,” she said, gesturing at
Henry . “And you can see, he’ s not that much more now .”He wasn’ t. Henry took after h is mother rather than Hal,
being normally ruddy-cheeked and of a rather stocky build.
There w as no evidence of either trait at the moment; every rib
showed plain, his belly was so s unken that the points of his hip
bones po ked up sharp through the linen sheet, and his face was
approximately the same hue as said sheet, bar deep violet
circles under the eyes.
“I s ee,” Grey s aid slowly . He glanced at Mr . Hunnicutt.
“Have you managed to locate anything?”
“W ell, I  have,” the dowser said, and, leaning over Henry’ s
body , la id a long, thin finger gently on the young man’ s belly .
“One, at least. T’other , I’m not so sure of, just yet.”
“I to ld you, Me rcy , it’ s no good.” Henry’ s eyes were still
closed, but his h and rose a little and Mrs. W oodcock took it,
with a naturalne ss that made Grey blink. “Even if he was sure
—I can’ t do it ag ain. I’d rather die.” W eak as he was, he spoke
with an absolute conviction, and Grey recognized the family
stubbornness.
Mrs. W oodcock’ s pretty face was creased in a worried
frown. S he seemed to feel G rey’ s eyes upon her , for she
looked b riefly up at him. He didn’ t change expression, and she
lifted he r chin a little, meeting h is eyes with something not far
from fierceness, still holding Henry’ s hand.
Oh, like that, is it?  Grey thought. W ell, well .
He coughed, and Henry opened his eyes.
“Be that  as it m ay , Henry ,” he s aid, “you will oblige me by
not dying before I can bring your sister to bid you farewell.” RESER V A TIONS
 July 1, 1777
 
T HE INDIANS WORRIED hi m. General Bur goyne
found them enchanting. But General Bur goyne wrote plays.
It is not , W illiam  wrote slowly in the letter to his father that
he was compos ing, struggling to find form in words for his
reservations, that I think him a fantasist or  suspect that he
does not appr eciate the essentia l natur e of the Indians he deals
with. He appr eciates it very muc h. But I r emember talking with
Mr . Ga rrick once in London, and his r efer ence to the
playwright as a little god who dir ects the actions of his
cr eations, exerti ng absolute contr ol upon them. Mrs. Cowley
ar gued with this, saying that it is delusion to assume that the
cr eator contr ols  his cr eations and that an attempt to exert such
contr ol while ignoring the true natur e of those cr eations is
doomed to failur e .
He stopped, biting his quill, feeling that he had come close
to the heart of the matter but perhaps not quite reached it.
I think General Bur goyne does not quite appr ehend the
independence o f mind and purpose that…  No , that wasn’ t
quite it. He drew a line throug h the sentence and dipped his
quill for a fresh try . He turned a phrase over in his mind,
rejected it, did the same with another , and at last abandoned
the search for eloquence in favor of a simple unburdening of
his mind. It was late, he’d walked nearly twenty miles in the
course of the day , and he was sleepy .
He belie ves he can use the Indians as a tool, and I think he
is wr ong . He  star ed at the sentence for a  bit, shook his head at
its blunt ness, but could think of nothing better and could waste
no m ore time on  the ef fort; the  stub of his candle had almost
burned o ut. Comforting himself with the idea that, after all, his
father kn ew Indians—and proba bly General Bur goyne—much
better than he did, he briskly  signed, sanded, blotted, and
sealed the letter , then fell into his bed and a dreamless sleep.The sense of uneasiness regarding the Indians remained
with him, though. He had no dislike of Indians; in fact, he
enjoyed their company , and hun ted now and again with some
of th em, or shared a companiona ble evening drinking beer and
telling stories round their fires.
“The thing is,” he said to Balc arres one evening, as they
walked back from a particularly bibulous dinner that the
general had held for his staf f of ficers, “they don’ t read the
Bible.”
“Who don’ t? Hold up.” Major Alexander Lindsay , Sixth
Earl of Balcarre s, put out a hand to ward of f a passing tree
and, clutching it one-handed to  keep his balance, groped for
his flies.
“Indians.”
It was dark, but Sandy turned his head and W illiam could
just abou t see one eye shut slow ly in the ef fort to fix the other
on him. There had been a great d eal of wine with dinner , and a
number of ladies present, which added to the conviviality .
Balcarres concentrated on his pissing, then exhaled with
relief and closed both eyes.
“No,” he said. “They mostly don’ t.” He seemed content to
leave the  matter there, but it had occurred to W illiam—himself
a little less or ganized in thought than usual—that perhaps he
had failed to express himself completely .
“I mean,” he said, swaying just a little as a gust of wind
boomed down through the trees, “the centurion. Y ou know , he
says go and the fellow goeth. Y ou tell an Indian go and maybe
he goeth and maybe he damned well goeth not, depending how
the prospect strikes him.”
Balcarres was now concentrating on the ef fort of doing up
his flies and didn’ t answer .
“I mean,” W illiam amplified, “they don’ t take orders.”
“Oh. No. They don’ t.”“Y ou give your Indians orders, though?” He’d meant to
make it a statem ent, but it didn’ t quite come out that way .
Balcarres led a regiment of light infantry but also kept a lar ge
group of rangers, many of them  Indians; he not infrequently
dressed like one himself.
“But then, you’re a Scot.”
Balcarres had succeeded in doing up his flies and now stood
in the center of the path, squinting at W illiam.
“Y ou’re drunk, W illie.” This was said with no tone of
accusation; more with the pleased sense of one who has made
a useful deduction.
“Y es. But I’ll be sober in the morning and you’ll still  be a
Scot.” T his stru ck them both a s hilarious and they staggered
some distance together , repeating the jest at intervals and
bumping into each other . By simple chance, they stumbled
upon W illiam’ s tent first, and he  invited Balcarres to join him
in a glass of negus before bed.
“Sett … les the stomach,” he said, narrowly avoiding falling
headfirst into his campaign che st as he groped for cups and
bottles. “Makes you sleep better .”
Balcarres had succeeded in lighting the candle and sat
holding it, blinking owl-eyed in  its glow . He sipped the negus
W illiam handed to him carefully , eyes closed as though to
savor it, then suddenly opened them.
“What’ s being a Scot have to do  with reading the Bible?” he
demanded, this remark having evidently returned suddenly to
his cognizance. “Y ou calling me a heathen? My grandmother ’ s
Scots an d she reads the Bible al l the time. I’ve read it myself.
Bits of it,” he added, and gulped the rest of his glass.
W illiam frowned, trying to remember what on earth …
“Oh,” he said. “Not the Bible. Indians. Stubborn buggers.
Don’ t go eth. Scots don’ t goeth either when you tell them, or
not all the time . I thought maybe that was why . Why they
listen to you,” he added as an afterthought. “Y our Indians.”Balcarres though t that funny , too, but when he had at length
stopped laughing, he shook his head slowly to and fro.
“It’ s … you know a horse?”
“I know a lot of horses. Which one?”
Balcarres spit a small quantity o f negus down his chin, but
wiped it away .
“A hors e,” he repeated, drying his hand on his breeches.
“Y ou can’ t make a horse do any thing. Y ou see what he’ s going
to do and then you tell him to do that, and he thinks it’ s your
idea, so next tim e you tell him something, he’ s more likely to
do what you tell him.”
“Oh.” W illiam considered this c arefully . “Y es.” They drank
for a bit in sil ence, mulling over this profundity . At last
Balcarres looked up from a long contemplation of his glass.
“Who d o you think has better tits?” he asked seriously .
“Mrs. Lind or the baroness?” EXODUS
 Fort T iconderoga
 June 27, 1777
 
M RS. RA VEN W AS beginning to worry me. I found her
waiting outside the barracks at dawn, looking as though she
had slept in her clothes, eyes hollow but gleaming with
intensity . She clung to me, close on my heels through the day ,
talking constantly , and her conversation, usually focused at
least nominally  on the patien ts we were seeing and the
inescapable logistics of daily life in a fort, began to deviate
from the narrow confines of the present.
At f irst, it was no more than an occasional reminiscence of
her early married life in Boston ; her first husband had been a
fisherman, and she had kept two goats whose milk she sold in
the s treets. I did n’ t mind hearing about the goats, named Patsy
and Petunia; I had known a few memorable goats myself,
noticeably a billy goat named Hiram, whose broken leg I had
set.
It wasn’ t that I was uninterested in her randomly dropped
remarks about her first husban d; they were, if anything, too
interesting. The late Mr . Evans appeared to have been a violent
drunkard on shore—which wa s far from unusual—with a
penchant for cutting of f the e ars or noses of people who
displeased him, which was a trifle more individualistic.
“He nailed the ears to the lintel of my goat shed,” she said,
in the tone one  might use to describe one’ s breakfast. “Up
high, so  the goats couldn’ t get a t them. They shrivel up in the
sun, you know , like dried mushrooms.”
“Ah,” I said. I th ought of remarking that smoking a severed
ear prevented that little proble m, but thought better of it. I
didn’ t k now whether Ian was s till carrying a lawyer ’ s ear in
his sporran, but I was reasonab ly sure he wouldn’ t welcome
Mrs. Raven’ s eager interest in  it, if so. Both he and Jamie
made of f when they saw her coming, as though she had the
plague.“They say the Indians cut pieces of f their captives,” she
said, her voice going low , as one imparting a secret. “The
fingers first, one joint at a time.”
“How very revolting,” I said . “Do please go to the
dispensary and get me a bag of fresh lint, would you?”
She went of f obediently—she always did—but I thought I
heard he r talking  to herself und er her breath as she did so. As
the days crept o n and tension m ounted in the fort, I became
convinced of it.
Her conversational swings were getting wider—and wilder .
Now she ranged from the d istant past of her idealized
childhood in Maryland to an equally distant future—a rather
grisly on e, in which we had all been either killed by the British
army or captured by Indians, with consequences ranging from
rape to dismemb erment—these p rocedures often accomplished
simultaneously , though I told her that most men had neither
the necessary concentration nor yet the coordination for it. She
was still capable of focusing on  something directly in front of
her , but not for long.
“Could you speak to her husba nd, do you think?” I asked
Jamie, who had just come in at sunset to tell me that he’d seen
her trudg ing in circles round and round the big cistern near the
parade ground, counting under her breath.
“D’ye think he hasn’ t noticed t hat his wife’ s going mad?”
he replied. “If h e hasn’ t, I think  he’ll no appreciate being told.
And if he has,” he added logica lly , “what d’ye expect him to
do about it?”
There was in fact not much anyone could do about it, bar
keep an eye on her and try to so othe her more vivid fancies—
or at least keep her from talk ing about them to the more
impressionable patients.
As the days went on, though, Mrs. Raven’ s eccentricities
seemed not much more pronounced than the anxieties of most
of th e fort’ s inhabitants, particularly the women, who could do
nothing but tend their children, wash the laundry—underheavy guard on the lakeshore, or in small mobs round the
steaming cauldrons—and wait.
The woods were not safe; a fe w days before, two picket
guards had been found no mo re than a mile from the fort,
murdered and scalped. This grisly discovery had had the worst
ef fect on  Mrs. Raven, but I cou ldn’ t say that it did much for
my own fortitude. I couldn’ t look out from the batteries with
my earl ier sense of pleasure i n the endless miles of thick
green; th e very vigor of the fore st itself seemed a threat now . I
still wanted clean linen, but my skin tingled and crept
whenever I left the fort.
“Thirteen days,”  I said, running a thumb down the doorpost
of our sanctum.  Jamie had, with  no comment, cut a notch for
each day of the enlistment perio d, slashing through each notch
when he  came to bed at night. “Did you notch the posts when
you were in prison?”
“Not in Fort W i lliam or the Bastille,” he said, considering.
“Ardsmuir… aye, we did then. There wasna any sentence to
keep tra ck of, but… ye lose so much, so fast. It seemed
important to keep a hold on som ething, even if it was only the
day of the week.”
He came to stan d beside me, loo king at the doorpost and its
long line of neat notches.
“I think  I might have been tempted to run,” he said, very
quietly . “If it weren’ t for Ian being gone.”
It wasn’ t anything I hadn’ t thou ght—or been aware of him
thinking. It was becoming more obvious by the second that the
fort cou ldn’ t stand attack by th e size of the force that was—
indubitably—on its way . Sco uts were coming in more
frequently with reports on Bur goyne’ s army , and while they
were whisked instantly into the commandant’ s of fice and just
as h astily trundled out of the for t again, everyone knew within
an hour what news they had b rought—precious little so far ,
but that  little, alarming. And y et Arthur St. Clair could not
bring himself to order the evacuation of the fort.“A b lot on his record,” Jamie said, with an evenness that
betrayed his anger . “He canna bear to have it said that he lost
T iconderoga.”
“But he will lose it,” I said. “He must, mustn’ t he?”
“He will. But if he fights and loses it, that’ s one thing. T o
fight and  lose it to a superior force is honorable. T o abandon it
to th e enemy without a fight? He canna reconcile himself to it.
Though he’ s no a wicked man,” he added thoughtfully . “I’ll
talk to him again. W e all will.”
“All” being the militia of ficer s, who could af ford to be
outspoken. A number of the regular army of ficers shared the
militia’ s feelings, but discipline prevented most of them from
speaking bluntly to St. Clair .
I d idn’ t think A rthur St. Clair w as a wicked man, either—
nor yet a stupid one. He knew—must know—what the cost of
fighting would be. Or the cost of surrender .
“He’ s waiting  for Whitcomb, ken,” Jamie said
conversationally . “Hoping he’ll tell him Bur goyne hasna got
any arti llery to speak of.” Th e fort could indeed hold out
against standard siege tactics; forage and provisions had been
coming in from the surrounding countryside in abundance, and
T iconderoga still had some artillery defenses and the small
wooden fort on Mount Indepen dence, as well as a substantial
garrison decently supplied with muskets and powder . It could
not h old out against major artille ry placed on Mount Defiance,
though. Jamie had been up ther e, and told me that the entire
interior of the fort was visible—and thus subject to
enfiladement at the enemy’ s discretion.
“He can’ t really think that, surely?”
“No, bu t until he knows for sur e, he hasna got to make up
his mind for su re, either . And none of the scouts has yet
brought him anything certain.”
I s ighed and pre ssed a hand to my bosom, blotting a tickle
of sweat.“I can’ t sleep in  there,” I said abruptly . “It’ s like sleeping in
hell.”
That took him by surprise and made him laugh.
“All right for you,” I said, rather cross. “Y ou get to go sleep
under canvas tomorrow .” Half the garrison was being moved
to tents outside the fort, the bett er to be out and maneuverable,
ready in case of Bur goyne’ s approach.
The Brit ish were coming; how close they were, how many
men they had, and how well armed they were was unknown.
Benjamin Whitc omb had gone to find out. Whitcomb was a
lanky , pockmarked man in his thirties, one of the men known
as the Long Hunters, men who could—and did—spend weeks
in the wilderne ss, living of f t he land. Such men were not
sociable, having no use for civilization, but they were
valuable. Whitc omb was the best of St. Clair ’ s scouts; he had
taken five men to go and find Bur goyne’ s main force. I hoped
they would return before the en listment period was up; Jamie
wanted to be gone—so did I, badly—but plainly we couldn’ t
go without Ian.
Jamie moved abruptly , turning and going back into our
room.
“What do you n eed?” He was digging in the small blanket
chest that contained our few spare clothes and the other
oddments we’d picked up since coming to the fort.
“My kil t. If I’m going to make representations to St. Clair ,
I’d best be formal about it.”
I helped  him to dress and brushed and plaited his hair for
him. He  had no proper coat, bu t he had clean linen, at least,
and his dirk, and even in shirtsleeves he looked impressive.
“I haven’ t seen you in your kilt  in weeks,” I said, admiring
him. “I’m sure y ou’ll make an impression on the general, even
without a pink sash.”
He smiled and kissed me.“It’ll do  no good,” he said, “bu t it wouldna be right not to
try .”
I w alked  with him across the parade ground to St. Clair ’ s
house. There were thunderheads rising out on the lake,
charcoal black against the blazin g sky , and I could smell ozone
in the air . It seemed a suitable portent.
 
SOON. EVER Y THING said, Soon . The fragmentary
reports and rumors that flew lik e pigeons through the fort, the
closeness of the sultry air , the occasional boom of cannon in
the distance, fired for practice— we hoped it was only practice
—from the distant picket position called the Old French Lines.
Everyone was restless, unable to sleep in the heat unless
drunk. I wasn’ t drunk, and I was  restless. Jamie had been gone
for more than t wo hours, and I wanted him. Not because I
cared wh at St. Clair had had to say to the militia. But between
heat and exhaustion, we hadn’ t made love in more than a
week, an d I was beginning to suspect that time was growing
short. If we wer e obliged either to fight or to flee in the next
few day s, heaven only knew how long it might be before we
had a private moment again.
I ha d been strolling round the parade ground, keeping an
eye on St. Clair ’ s house, and wh en at last I saw him come out,
I m ade my way  toward him, w alking slowly to allow him to
take leave of the other of ficers who had come out with him.
They stood for a moment c lose together , the slump of
shoulders and angry tilt of heads telling me that the ef fect of
their protests had been exactly what Jamie had predicted.
He walked slowly away , hands  behind him, head bent in
thought. I came quietly alongside and tucked my hand into the
crook of his elbow , and he looked down at me, surprised but
smiling.
“Y e’re out late, Sassenach. Is aught amiss?”“Not at all,” I said. “It just seemed like a nice evening for a
walk in a garden.”
“In a garden,” he repeated, giving me a sideways glance.
“The commandant’ s garden, to be exact,” I said, and
touched the pocket of my apron. “I, um, have the key .” There
were a number of small gardens  inside the fort, most of them
practical plots meant for the production of vegetables. The
formal garden behind the commandant’ s quarters had been
designed by the French many years before, though, and while
it h ad since be en neglected and overrun by the seeds of
airborne weeds, it had one rather interesting aspect—a high
wall sur rounding it, with a gate  that locked. I’d thoughtfully
abstracted the key earlier in the  day from General St. Clair ’ s
cook, w ho had come to me for a throat wash. I would put it
back when I called on him the next day to check his sore
throat.
“Ah,” said Jamie thoughtfully , and turned obligingly back
toward the commandant’ s house.
The gate was ro und the back, o ut of view , and we slipped
hastily d own the  alley that led past the garden wall, while the
guard o utside St. Clair ’ s house was talking to a passerby . I
closed th e gate quietly behind u s, locked it, and pocketed the
key , then went to Jamie’ s arms.
He kissed me slowly , then raised his head, eyeing me.
“I might need a bit of help, mind.”
“That can be arranged,” I assured him. I laid a hand on his
knee, where the kilt had folded up, exposing flesh. I moved a
thumb lightly , liking the soft, wiry feel of the hairs on his leg.
“Um … did you have any particular sort of help in mind?”
I could smell him in spite of his careful washing, the dried
sweat of  his labor on his skin spiced with dust and wood chips.
He’d taste of it, too, sweet and salt and musk.
I slid my hand up his thigh beneath the kilt, feeling him shift
and flex, the su dden groove of muscle smooth beneath myfingers. T o my surprise, though, he stopped me, grasping my
hand through the fabric.
“Thought you wanted help,” I said.
“T ouch yourself, a nighean,”  he said softly .
That was a trifle disconcerting, particularly given that we
were sta nding in an over grown garden no more than twenty
feet from an alleyway much patronized by militiamen looking
for a place to ge t quietly drunk. Still… I leaned back against
the wall  and obligingly pulled the shift above my knee. I held
it there,  gently stroking the skin of my inner thigh—which
was, in fact, ver y soft. I drew the other hand up the line of my
stays, to the top, where my breasts swelled out against the thin,
damp cotton.
His eyes were heavy; he was still half drunk with fatigue but
becoming more  alert by the moment. He made a small
interrogative sound.
“Ever h ear the one about sauc e for the gander?” I said,
twiddling thoughtfully with the string that held the neckline of
my shift.
“What?” That had brought him out of the haze; he was
starkly awake, bloodshot eyes wide open.
“Y ou heard me.”
“Y e want me to … to—”
“I do.”
“I couldna do that! In front of you?”
“If I can do it in front of you , y ou can certai nly return the
favor . Of course, if you’d rathe r I stopped…” I let my hand
fall—slowly—from the string. Paused, thumb very lightly
ticking t o and fro, to and fro, ov er my breast like the hand of a
metronome. I could feel my nipple, round and hard as a
musket ball; it m ust be visible through the fabric, even in this
light.
He swallowed; I heard it.I smiled and let my hand fall farther , taking hold of the hem
of my skirt. And paused, one eyebrow raised.
As thou gh hypnotized, he reached down and took hold of
the hem of his kilt.
“That’ s a good l ad,” I murmured, leaning back on one hand.
I raised one kne e and set my foot on the wall, letting the skirt
fall away , baring my thigh. Reached down.
He s aid something under his bre ath in Gaelic. I couldn’ t tell
if it was an obse rvation on the imminent prospect before him
or wheth er he was commending his soul to God. In either case,
he lifted his kilt.
“What do you mean, you need help?” I asked, eyeing him.
He mad e a small, ur gent noise indicating that I should
continue, so I did.
“What are you thinking?” I asked after a moment,
fascinated.
“I’m not thinking.”
“Y es, you are; I can see it on your face.”
“Y e don’ t want to know .” Swe at was beginning to gleam
across his cheekbones, and his eyes had gone to slits.
“Oh, yes, I do— oh, wait. If you’re thinking about someone
other than me, I don’ t want  to know .”
He opened his eyes at that, and fixed me with a look that ran
straight up between my quivering legs. He didn’ t stop.
“Oh,” I said, a little breathless myself. “W ell… when you
can talk again, I do  want to know , then.”
He w ent on look ing at me, with  a gaze that now struck me
as marke dly aki n to that of a wolf eyeing a fat sheep. I shifted
a lit tle a gainst th e wall and wav ed away a cloud of gnats. He
was breathing fast, and I could smell his sweat, musky and
acrid.“Y ou,” he said, and I saw his throat move as he swallowed.
He crooked the index finger of his free hand at me.
“Come here.”
“I—”
“Now .”
Mesmerized, I slid away from t he wall and took two steps
toward h im. Before I could say or do anything else, there was
a flurry of kilt and a lar ge, hot hand was gripping me by the
scruf f of  the neck. Then I was l ying on my back in long grass
and wild tobacco, Jamie solidly  inside me, and the hand was
over my  mouth—a good thing, I realized dimly , as there were
voices c oming toward us along the alley on the other side of
the garden wall.
“Play w i’ fire and ye may get singed, Sassenach,” he
whispered in my ear . He had m e pinned like a butterfly and,
with a solid gri p on my wrists, kept me from moving, even
though I was je rking and writhing under him, slippery and
desperate. V ery slowly , he lowered himself so his full weight
rested on me.
“Y e wa nt to know what I was thinking, do ye?” he
murmured in my ear .
“Mmp!”
“W ell, I’ll tell ye, a nighean , but —” He pau sed in order to
lick my earlobe.
“NNG!”
The hand tightened warningly over my mouth. The voices
were ne ar enough to make out words now: a small party of
young militiamen, half drunk and in search of whores. Jamie’ s
teeth clo sed delicately on my ear , and he began to nibble
thoughtfully , his breath warm and tickling. I wriggled madly ,
but he wasn’ t budging.
He g ave the sam e thorough treatment to the other ear before
the m en had mo ved out of earsh ot, then kissed the end of my
nose, taking his hand of f my mouth at last.“Ah. No w , wher e was I? Oh, aye—ye wanted to hear what I
was thinking of.”
“I’ve changed my mind.” I was  panting shallowly , as much
from the weight on my chest  as from desire. Both were
considerable.
He made a Scottish noise indicating deep amusement and
tightened his grip on my wrists.
“Y ou started it, Sassenach—but I’ll finish it.” Whereupon
he put his lips t o my wet ear and told me in a slow whisper
exactly  what he’d been  thinking. Not moving an inch while he
did s o, s ave to put his hand back over my mouth when I began
to call him names.
Every muscle in my body wa s jumping like a snapped
rubber b and when he finally mo ved. In one sudden motion, he
raised himself and slid back, then forward hard.
When I could see and hear again, I realized that he was
laughing, still balanced above me.
“Put ye out of your misery , did I, Sassenach?”
“Y ou…” I croaked. W ords faile d me, but two could play at
this gam e. He hadn’ t moved, in part to torture me—but in
equal part because he couldn’ t; n ot without ending it at once. I
flexed m y soft, slick muscles once around him, slowly , gently
—then did it three times, fast. He made a gratifying noise and
lost it, jerking and groaning, the pulse of it exciting an echo in
my own flesh. V ery slowly , he lowered himself, sighing like a
deflated bladder , and lay beside me, breathing slowly , eyes
closed.
“Now  you can sleep,” I said, stroking his hair . He smiled
without opening  his eyes, breathed deep, and his body relaxed,
settling into the earth.
“And next time, you bloody Scot,” I whispered in his ear ,
“I’ll tell you what I  was thinking.”
“Oh, God,” he said, and laughe d without making a sound.
“D’ye remember the first time I kissed ye, Sassenach?”I lay there for some time, feeling the bloom of sweat on my
skin and the re assuring weight of him curled asleep in the
grass beside me, before I finally remembered.
“I said I was a vir gin, not a monk. If I find I need help… I’ll
ask.”
 
IAN MURRA Y WOKE from a deep and dreamless sleep
to the sound of a bugle. Rollo, l ying close beside him, lurched
upright w ith a startled, deep WOOF! , a nd glared roun d for the
threat, hackles raised.
Ian scra mbled u p, as well, one hand on his knife, the other
on the dog.
“Hush,” he said under his breath, and the dog relaxed
fractionally , thou gh he kept up a low , rolling growl, just below
the rang e of human hearing—Ian felt it, a constant vibration in
the huge body under his hand.
Now he  was awake, he heard t hem easily . A subterranean
stirring through the wood, as submer ged—but quite as vibrant
—as Rollo’ s growl. A very l ar ge body of men, a camp,
beginning to wake at no very great distance. How had he
managed not to perceive them the night before? He snif fed,
but the wind wa s wrong; he pi cked up no scent of smoke—
though n ow he saw  smoke, thin threads of it rising against the
pale dawn sky . A lot of campfires. A very big camp.
He had been rolling up his blank et as he listened. There was
nothing more to his own camp, and within seconds he had
faded in to the brush, blanket tied to his back and his rifle in
hand, the dog huge and silent at his heel. THE BRITISH ARE COMING
 Three Mile Point, New Y ork Colony
 July 3, 1777
 
T HE DA RK P A TCH of sweat between Brigadier
Fraser ’ s broad shoulders had the shape of the Isle of Man on
the map in the old schoolroom at home. Lieutenant
Greenleaf ’ s coat was entirely soaked with sweat, the body
almost black, and only the faded sleeves showing red.
W illiam’ s own coat was less faded—shamefully new and
bright, i n fact—but likewise clung to his back and shoulders,
heavy with the humid exhalatio ns of his body . His shirt was
wringing; it had been stif f with salt when he put it on a few
hours before, the constant sweating of the previous days’
exertion crystall ized in the linen , but the stif fness had washed
away as the sun rose, borne on a flood of fresh sweat.
Looking up at t he hill the brigadier proposed to climb, he
had had some hope of coolness at the summit, but the exertion
of th e climb had  canceled out any benefit of altitude. They had
left camp just after dawn, the  air then so delicious in its
freshness that he’d longed to run  naked through the woods like
an Indian, catch fish from the lak e, and eat a dozen of them for
his breakfast, fried in cornmeal, fresh and hot.
This was Three Mile Point, so called because it was three
miles so uth of the fort at T iconderoga. The brigadier , leading
the adva nce force, had staged h is troops here and proposed to
climb to a height with Lieutenant Greenleaf, an engineer , to
survey the terrain before moving further .
W illiam had been assigned to the brigadier a week earlier , to
his ple asure. The brigadier was a friendly , sociable
commander , but not in the sam e way as General Bur goyne.
Though W illiam would not have cared had the man been a
tartar—he would be in the for ward lines; that was all that
mattered.He w as carrying some of the en gineer ’ s equipment, as well
as a couple of c anteens of water and the brigadier ’ s dispatch
box. He  helped to set up the su rveying tripod and obligingly
held me asuring rods at intervals, but at length it was done,
everything recor ded, and the brigadier , having conferred with
Greenleaf at some length, sent the engineer back to camp.
The immediate business concluded, the brigadier seemed
disinclined to descend at once, instead walking slowly about,
appearing to enjoy the slight b reeze, and then settling on a
rock, uncorking his canteen with a sigh of pleasure.
“Sit, W i lliam,” he said, motioning W illiam to his own rock.
They sa t in silence for a bit, listening to the sounds of the
forest.
“I know your father ,” the brigadier said suddenly , then
smiled, a charming smile. “Everyone tells you that, I suppose.”
“W ell, yes, they do,” W illiam a dmitted. “Or if not him, my
uncle.”
General Fraser laughed. “A con siderable burden of family
history to be borne,” he commiserated. “But I’m sure you bear
it nobly .”
W illiam didn’ t know what to  say and made a politely
indeterminate noise in response . The brigadier laughed again
and passed him the canteen. Th e water was so warm that he
barely fe lt it pass down his thro at, but it smelled fresh and he
could feel it slake his thirst.
“W e were together at the Plain s of Abraham. Y our father
and I, I mean. Did he ever tell you about that night?”
“Not a great deal,” W illiam s aid, wondering if he was
doomed to meet every soldier who had fought on that field
with James W olfe.
“W e came down the river at night, you know . All of us
petrified. Especially me.” The brigadier looked out over the
lake, sha king his  head a little at the memory . “Such a river , the
St. Lawrence. General Bur goyne mentioned that you had been
in Canada. Did you see it?”“Not a great dea l, sir . I traveled overland for the most part
on th e way to Quebec, and then came down the Richelieu. My
father to ld me about the St. Lawrence, though,” he felt obliged
to add. “He said it was a noble river .”
“Did he  tell you that I nearly broke his hand? He was next
to me in the boat, and as I leaned out to call to the French
sentry , h oping that my voice wo uld not break, he gripped my
hand to steady me. I felt his b ones grinding, but under the
circumstances didn’ t really notic e until I let go and heard him
gasp.”
W illiam saw the brigadier ’ s eye s drift to his own hands and
the small ripple across his wide brow , not quite puzzlement but
the look of som eone trying unconsciously to fit memory to
present circumstance. His fath er had long, slender , elegant
hands w ith fine  bones. W illiam’ s fingers were long, but his
hands were vulgarly lar ge, broad of palm and brute-knuckled.
“He—Lord John—he is my stepfather ,” he blurted, then
blushed painfully , embarrassed both by the admission and by
whatever freak of mind had made him say it.
“Oh? Oh, yes,” the brigadier said vaguely . “Y es, of course.”
Had the brigadie r thought he sp oke from pride, pointing out
the ancientness of his own bloodline?
The only comfort was that his face—the brigadier ’ s face,
too—was so red from exertion that the blush could not show .
The brig adier , as though responding to the thought of heat,
struggled out of his coat, then unbuttoned his waistcoat and
flapped it, nodding to W illiam that he might do likewise—
which he did, sighing with relief.
The conversation turned casuall y to other campaigns: those
the b rigadier had fought in, tho se W illiam had (mostly) heard
of. He became g radually aware that the brigadier was gauging
him, weighing his experience and his manner . He was
uncomfortably aware that the former was inglorious; was
General Fraser aware of what h ad happened during the Battle
of Long Island? W ord did travel fast in the service.Eventually , there was a pause in the conversation and they
sat com panionably in their shirtsleeves for a bit, listening to
the soughing of the trees over head. W illiam wished to say
something in his own defense but could think of no way to
approach the matter gracefully . But if he did not speak, explain
what had happened… well, there was no good explanation.
He’d been a booby , that was all.
“General Howe speaks well of your intelligence and
boldness, W illiam,” the brigadi er said, as though continuing
their ear lier conversation, “though he said he thought you had
not had opportunity as yet to show your talent for command.”
“Ah… no, sir ,” W illiam replied, sweating.
The brigadier smiled.
“W ell, w e must be sure to reme dy that lack, must we not?”
He stood up, groaning slightly as he stretched and shrugged
his way back into his coat. “Y ou’ll dine with me later . W e shall
discuss it with Sir Francis.” CONFLAGRA TION
 Fort T iconderoga
 July 1, 1777
 
W HITCOMB HAD COME back. W ith several British
scalps, according to popular rumor . Having met Benjamin
Whitcomb and one or two of t he other Long Hunters, I was
prepared to believe this. They s poke civilly enough, and they
were far  from the only men at the fort who dressed in rough
leather a nd ragg ed homespun or whose skin shrank tight to
raw bon es. But they were the  only men with the eyes of
animals.
The next day , Jamie was called to the commandant’ s house
and didn’ t come back until after dark.
A man was sing ing by one of the courtyard fires near St.
Clair ’ s q uarters, and I was sittin g on an empty salt-pork barrel
listening, when I saw Jamie pas s by on the far side of the fire,
heading for our barracks. I rose quickly and caught him up.
“Come away ,” he said softly , and led me toward the
commandant’ s garden. There was no echo of our last
encounter in this garden, though I was terribly aware of his
body , of  the tension in it and the beating of his heart. Bad
news, then.
“What’ s happened?” I asked, my voice low .
“Whitcomb caug ht a British regular and brought him in. He
wouldna say anything, of course—but St. Clair was canny
enough to put Andy T racy in a cell with the man, saying he
was accused of being a spy—that T racy was a spy , I mean.”
“That was bright,” I said with approval. Lieutenant Andrew
Hodges T racy was an Irishman, bluf f and charming, a born liar
—and if anyone could winkle information out of someone
without the use of force, T racy would have been my own first
choice. “I take it he found out something?”“He did. W e also had in three British deserters—Germans.
St. Clair wanted me to talk to them.”
Which he had. The information brought by the deserters
might be suspect—save that it correlated with the information
tricked from the captured British soldier . The solid information
for which St. Clair had been waiting for the last three weeks.
General Carleton had remained in Canada with a small
force; it was in deed General John Bur goyne, in char ge of a
lar ge invasion army , who was heading toward the fort. He was
reinforced by General von Riedesel, himself in command of
seven B runswick regiments, plus  a light infantry battalion and
four companies of dragoons. And his vanguard was less than
four days’ march away .
“Not too good,” I observed, taking a deep breath.
“It is not,” he a greed. “W orse, Bur goyne has Simon Fraser
as brigadier under him. He has the forward command.”
“A r elative of yours?” That wa s a rhetorical question; no
one with that na me could possibly be anything else, and I saw
the shadow of a smile cross Jamie’ s face.
“He is,” he said  dryly . “A sec ond cousin, I think. And a
verra bonny fighter .”
“W ell, h e would  be, wouldn’ t h e? Is that the last of the bad
news?”
He shook his head.
“Nay . The deserters said Bur goyne’ s army is short of
supplies. The dragoons are on foot, because they canna get
fresh ho rses. Th ough I dinna ke n whether they’ve eaten them
or not.”
It was a hot, mu ggy night, but a shiver raised the hairs on
my arms. I touc hed Jamie’ s wrist and found the hairs there
bristling, as well. He’ll dr eam of Culloden tonight , I thought
abruptly . I dismissed that for the moment, though.
“I should think that would be good news. Why isn’ t it?”His wris t turned and his hand took mine, lacing our fingers
tight together .
“Because they havena supplies enough to mount a siege.
They’ll need to overrun us and  take us by force. And they
verra likely can.”
 
THREE DA YS LA TER, the  first British lookouts
appeared on Mount Defiance.
 
THE NEXT DA Y , anyone could see—and everyone did
see—the beginnings of an artillery emplacement being built on
Mount Defiance. Arthur St. Clair , bowing at last to the
inevitable, gave word to begin the evacuation of Fort
T iconderoga.
Most of the gar rison was to move to Mount Independence,
taking w ith them all the most valuable supplies and ordnance.
Some o f the sheep and cattle must be slaughtered, the rest
driven of f into the woods. Som e militia units were to leave
through the woods and find the road to Hubbardton, where
they wo uld wait as reinforcements. W omen, children, and
invalids were to be dispatched down the lake by boat, with a
light gua rd. It began in an orderly manner , with word sent out
to b ring everything that would float up to the lakeshore after
dark, men collecting and checking their equipment, and orders
sent out for the systematic destr uction of everything that could
not be carried away .
This wa s the usual procedure, to deny the enemy any use of
supplies. In this instance, the matter was somewhat more
pressing: the deserters had said that Bur goyne’ s army was
running short of supplies already; denying him the facilities of
T iconderoga might bring him to a halt—or at least slow him
down pe rceptibly , as his men w ould be obliged to forage and
live of f the co untry while they waited for supplies from
Canada to follow him.All of this—the packing, the loading, the slaughtering and
livestock-driving, the destruction—must be accomplished
clandestinely , under the very noses of the British. For if they
saw that  a retreat was imminen t, they would fall on us like
wolves, destroying the garrison  as they left the safety of the
fort.
T remendous thunderheads boiled up over the lake in the
afternoons, towering black things that rose miles high and full
of lightn ing. Sometimes they broke after nightfall, pounding
the l ake, the mo unts, the picket lines, and the fort with water
that fell as though dumped from a bottomless bucket.
Sometimes they only drifted past, grumbling and ominous.
T onight the clouds were low and fierce, veined with
lightning and blanketing the sky . Heat lightning throbbed
through their bodies and crackl ed between them in bursts of
sudden, silent conversation. An d now and then a sudden fork
shot blue-white and vivid to the ground with a crack of
thunder that made everyone jump.
There was very little to pack. Just as well, as there was very
little time in which to pack it. I could hear the flurry all
through the barracks as I worke d: people calling out in search
of lo st objects, mothers bellowing for lost children, and the
shuf fle and thunder of feet, s teady as echoing rain in the
wooden stairwells.
Outside, I could hear the agita ted baaing of a number of
sheep, disturbed at being turned out of their pens, and a sudden
racket o f shouting and mooing, as a panicked cow made a
break for it. No t surprising; there was a strong smell of fresh
blood in the air , from the slaughtering.
I ha d seen the garrison on parade, of course; I knew how
many m en there were. But to see three or four thousand people
pushing and shoving, trying to accomplish unaccustomed tasks
in a  tearing hur ry , was like watching a kicked-over anthill. I
made my own way through th e seething mass, clutching a
flour sack with spare clothes, m y few medical supplies, and alar ge chunk of ham I had acq uired from a grateful patient,
wrapped in my extra petticoat.
I would evacuate with the boat brigade, minding a group of
invalids—but I didn’ t mean to go without seeing Jamie.
My hear t had been in my mou th for so long that I could
barely speak. Not for the first ti me, I thought how convenient
it was to have married a very ta ll man. It was always easy to
pick Jamie out of a crowd, and  I saw him within moments,
standing on one of the demilune batteries. Some of his
militiamen were with him, all looking downward. I assumed
that the  boat brigade must be forming below; that was
heartening.
The prospect, once I reached t he edge of the battery and
could se e, was considerably less heartening. The lakeshore
below the fort looked like the return of a particularly
disastrous fishing fleet. There wer e  b oats. All kind s of boats,
from canoes and rowboats to dories and crude rafts. Some
were dragged up onto the shore,  others were evidently floating
away , un manned— I caught sight during a brief lightning flash
of a few heads bobbing in the water as men and boys swam
after them to fe tch them back. There were few lights on the
shore, fo r fear of giving away th e plan of retreat, but here and
there a torch burned, showing ar guments and fistfights, and
beyond the reach of torchlight,  the ground seemed to heave
and ripple in the dark, like a swarming carcass.
Jamie was shaking hands with Mr . Anderson, one of the
T eal ‘s original hands, who had become his de facto  corporal.
“Go wit h God,”  he said. Mr . Anderson nodded and turned
away , le ading the small knot of militiamen. They passed me as
I came u p, and one or two nodd ed to me, their faces invisible
in the shadow of their hats.
“Where are they going?” I asked Jamie.
“T oward Hubbardton,” he replied, his eyes still on the
lakeshore below . “I told them it was their own choice, but I
thought best they went sooner r ather than later .” He lifted hischin toward the humped black shape of Mount Defiance,
where th e sparks of campfires glowed near the summit. “If
they dinna ken what’ s happening, it’ s gross incompetence.
W ere I Simon Fraser , I should  be on the march before first
light.”
“Y ou don’ t mean to go with yo ur men?” A spark of hope
sprang up in my heart.
There was little light on the battery , only the reflected glow
from the torches on the stairs a nd the bigger fires inside the
fort. Thi s was enough for me to see his face clearly , though,
when he turned to look at me. It  was somber , but there was an
eagerness in the set of his mouth, and I recognized the look of
a soldier ready to sur ge into action.
“No,” he said. “I mean to go with you.” He smiled suddenly ,
and I gripped hi s hand. “Y e dinna think I mean to leave ye to
wander in the wilderness with a parcel o’ diseased half-wits?
Even if it does mean getting into a boat,” he added with a
touch of distaste.
I laughed despite myself.
“Not very kind,” I said. “But n ot inaccurate, either , if you
mean Mrs. Raven. Y ou haven’ t seen her anywhere, have you?”
He shoo k his head. The wind h ad pulled half his hair loose
from its thong, a nd he removed this now and placed it between
his teeth, gathering up his hair in a heavy tail to rebind it.
Someone down  the battery said something, sounding
startled, and both Jamie and I jerked round to look. Mount
Independence was on fire.
 
“FIRE! FIRE!”
The scre ams bro ught people—a lready flustered and upset—
rushing out of the barracks like  coveys of flushed quail. The
fire was just beneath the summit of Mount Independence,
where General Fermoy had established an outpost with hismen. A tongue of flame soared upward, steady as a candle
taking breath. Then a gust of w ind flattened it, and the flame
squatted for a moment, as thou gh someone had turned down
the g as o n a stove, before bursting out again in a much wider
conflagration th at lit up the mount, showing the tiny black
shapes of what looked like hundreds of people in the act of
striking tents and loading baggage, all silhouetted against the
fire.
“It’ s Fermoy’ s quarters on fire,” a soldier said beside me,
disbelieving. “Isn’ t it?”
“It is,” said Jamie on my other side, sounding grim. “And if
we can see the r etreat starting from here, Bur goyne’ s lookouts
must surely see it, too.”
And as simply as that, the rout began.
Had I ever doubted the existence of something like
telepathy , this would have been enough to quell any
reservations. The soldiers were already at breaking point from
St. C lair ’ s delay and the consta nt drum of rumors beating on
stretched nerves. As the fire on Mount Independence spread,
the c onviction that the redcoats and the Indians would be upon
us a t once sprea d from mind to mind without the necessity for
speech. Panic was loose, spreading its broad black wings over
the fort, and the confusion at the water ’ s edge was
disintegrating into chaos before our eyes.
“Come, then,” Jamie said. And b efore I knew it, I was being
hustled down the narrow steps of the battery . A few wooden
huts had been set on fire—these on purpose, to deprive the
invaders of useful materiel—and the light from the flames lit
up a scene from hell. W omen dragging half-dressed children,
screaming and trailing bedclothes, men throwing furniture
from wi ndows. A thunder mug crashed on the stones, sending
shards o f sharp pottery slicing across the legs of the people
nearby .
A voice came b reathless behind me. “A golden guinea says
the silly French bugger set the house on fire himself.”“I’ll gie ye nay odds on that on e,” Jamie replied briefly . “I
only hope he went up with it.”
A tr emendous flash of lightning lit up the fort like day and
screams rose from every part of it, only to be drowned almost
instantly by the explosion of thunder . Predictably , half the
people thought the wrath of God was about to be visited upon
us—this, in spite of the fac t that we had been having
thunderstorms of similar ferocity for days, I thought crossly—
while those of secular mind we re still more panicked because
the mili tia units  on the outer lines were being lit up as they
withdrew , in full sight of the  British on Mount Defiance.
Either way , it didn’ t help matters.
“I have to fetch  my invalids!” I shouted into Jamie’ s ear .
“Y ou go and get the things from the barracks.”
He shoo k his head. His flying loose hair was lit up by
another lightning flash, and he looked like one of the principal
demons himself.
“I’m no leaving you,” he said, taking a firm clasp of my
arm. “I might never find ye again.”
“But—” My objection died as I looked. He was right. There
were thousands of people running, pushing, or simply standing
in pl ace, too stun ned to think wh at to do. If we were separated,
he might not  fi nd me, and th e thought of b eing alone in the
woods below the fort—these infested with bloodthirsty Indians
as well as redcoats—was not something I wanted to
contemplate for more than ten seconds.
“Right,” I said. “Come on, then.”
The scen e inside  the hospital ba rracks was less frantic only
because most of the patients were less capable of movement.
They we re, if anything, more agitated than the people outside,
as they’d gleaned only the most fragmentary intelligence from
people rushing in and out. Those with families were being
dragged bodily from the building with barely enough time to
seize their clothes; those withou t were in the spaces betweencots, hopping on one foot to  get into their breeches or
staggering toward the door .
Captain Stebbings, of course, was not doing any of these
things. H e lay placidly on his cot, hands folded on his chest,
observing the chaos with intere st, a rush dip burning placidly
on the wall above him.
“Mrs. Fr aser!” H e greeted me c heerfully . “I suppose I shall
be a  free man again shortly . Hope the army brings me some
food; I think there’ s not much chance of supper here tonight.”
“I suppose you will,” I said, unable not to smile back at him.
“Y ou’ll take care of the other  British prisoners, will you?
General St. Clair is leaving them behind.”
He looked mildly of fended at this.
“They’re my men,” he said.
“So they are.” In fact, Guinea Dick, almost invisible against
the stone wall in the dim ligh t, was crouching beside the
captain’ s bed, a stout walking stick in his hand—in order to
fend of f would-be looters, I supposed. Mr . Ormiston was
sitting up on his  own cot, pale-faced but excited, picking at the
binding on his stump.
“They’re really coming, are they , ma’am? The army?”
“Y es, they are. Now , you mu st take good care of your
wound a nd keep  it clean. It’ s healing well, but you mustn’ t put
any stra in at all on it for another month at least—and wait at
least tw o months before you have a peg fitted. Don’ t  let the
army sur geons bleed you—you need all your strength.”
He n odded, though I knew he’d be lining up for a fleam and
a ble eding-bowl the moment a B ritish sur geon showed up; he
believed deeply in the virtues of being let blood and had been
slightly mollified only by my h aving leeched his stump now
and then.
I clasped  his hand in farewell, a nd was turning to go when
his own grip tightened.“A m oment, ma’am?” He let g o my hand, fumbling at his
neck, and withdrew something o n a string. I could barely see it
in the gloom, but he put it into m y hand and I felt a metal disc,
warm from his body .
“If h appen you might see that b oy Abram again, ma’am, I
should t ake it kind if you’d give him that. That’ s my lucky
piece, w hat I’ve carried for thi rty-two years; you tell him it
will keep him safe in time o’ danger .”
Jamie was looming up in the dark beside me, radiating
impatience and agitation. He ha d a small group of invalids in
tow , all clutching random possessions. I could hear Mrs.
Raven’ s distinct ive high-pitched  voice in the distance, wailing.
I thought she was calling my name. I ducked my head and put
Mr . Ormiston’ s lucky piece around my neck.
“I’ll tell him, Mr . Ormiston. Thank you.”
 
SOMEONE HA D SET fire to Jeduthan Baldwin’ s elegant
bridge. A pile o f rubbish smoldered near one end, and I saw
black de vil shapes running to and fro along the span with
chisels and pry bars, ripping up  the planks and throwing them
into the water .
Jamie sh ouldered a way through the mob, me behind him
and our little ba nd of women, children, and invalids scurrying
at my heels like goslings, honking in agitation.
“Fraser! Colonel Fraser!” I turned at the shout, to see Jonah
—Bill, I mean—Marsden running down the shore.
“I’ll come with you,” he said, breathless. “Y ou’ll need
someone can steer a boat.”
Jamie di dn’ t hesitate for more than a fraction of a second.
He nodded, jerking his head toward the shore.
“A ye, run. I’ll bring them along as fast as I can.”
Mr . Marsden vanished into the dark.“The rest of your men?” I said, coughing from the smoke.
He shrugged, a broad-shouldered silhouette against the
black shimmer of the water .
“Gone.”
Hysterical screams came from the direction of the Old
French Lines. These spread like wildfire through the woods
and dow n the lakeshore, people shouting that the British were
coming. Panic beating its wings . It was so strong a thing, that
panic, th at I felt a scream rise in my own throat. I throttled it
and felt irrational anger in its place, displaced from myself to
the fools behind me who wer e shrieking and would have
scattered, had they been able to. But we were close upon the
shore now , and people were pre ssing toward the boats in such
numbers that they were capsiz ing some of the craft as they
piled in, higgledy-piggledy .
I didn’ t think  the British were at hand—but I didn’ t know . I
knew th at there had been m ore than one battle at Fort
T iconderoga… but when had they occurred? W as one of them
going to be toni ght? I didn’ t know , and the sense of ur gency
propelled me to the shore, help ing to support Mr . W ellman,
who had contracted the mumps from his son, poor man, and
was doing very badly in consequence.
Mr . Marsden, bless him, had commandeered a lar ge canoe,
which h e had paddled a little wa y out from shore to prevent its
being overrun. When he saw Jamie approaching, he came in,
and we succeeded in getting a t otal of eighteen people—these
including the W ellmans and M rs. Raven, pale and staring as
Ophelia—into it.
Jamie gl anced quickly back at th e fort. The main gates hung
wide, and firelight shone out of them. Then he glanced up at
the battery where he and I had stood a little while before.
“There are four men by the cannon trained on the bridge,”
he s aid, his eyes still fixed on th e red-bellied billows of smoke
rising from the interior of the fort. “V olunteers. They’ll stay
behind. The British—or some of them— will certainly comeacross th e bridg e. They can de stroy almost everyone on the
boom, and then flee—if they can.”
He turne d away then, and his shoulders bunched and flexed
as he dug the paddle hard. MOUNT INDEPENDENCE
 Mid-afternoon, July 6
 
B RIGADIER FR ASER’S MEN advanced upon the
picket fort at th e top of the mount, the one the Americans
ironically called “Independence.” W illiam led one of the
forward parties and had his m en fix their bayonets as they
drew close. There was a deep silence, broken only by the snap
of branc hes and shuf fle of boo ts in the thick leaf mold, the
stray cla ck of a cartridge box against musket butt. W as it a
waiting silence, though?
The Americans could not fail to know they were coming.
Did the rebels lie in ambush, ready to fire upon them from the
crude b ut very solid fortification he could see through the
trees?
He moti oned to his men to stop some two hundred yards
short of the summit, hoping to p ick up some indication of the
defenders, if defenders there were. His own company halted
obediently , but there were men b ehind, and they began to push
into and  throug h his own com pany without regard, eager to
storm the fort.
“Halt!” he shouted, aware as he did so that the sound of his
voice p resented almost as good a tar get to an American
rifleman as would the sight of h is red coat. Some of the men
did halt but wer e at once dislodged by more behind them, and
within seconds the whole of th e hillside was a mass of red.
They co uld not stop longer; the y would be trampled. And if
the d efenders had meant to fire, they could not ask for a better
opportunity—and yet the fort stayed silent.
“On!” W illiam roared, throwin g up his arm, and the men
burst from the trees in a splendid char ge, bayonets held ready .
The gat es hung ajar , and the men char ged straight in,
heedless of danger—but danger there was none. W illiam came
in w ith his m en, to find the place deserted. Not only
abandoned, but evidently abandoned in an amazing hurry .The d efenders’ personal b elongings were strewn
everywhere, as though dropped in flight: not only heavy things
like cooking utensils, but cloth es, shoes, books, blankets…
even mo ney , seemingly cast aside or dropped in panic. Much
more to the point, so far as W i lliam was concerned, was the
fact that the d efenders had made no ef fort to blow up
ammunition or powder that cou ld not be carried away; there
must be two hundredweight, stacked in kegs! Provisions, too,
had been left behind, a welcome sight.
“Why d id they not set fire to the place?” Lieutenant
Hammond aske d him, looking goggle-eyed round at the
barracks, still fully furnished with beds, bedding, chamber pots
—ready for the conquerors to move straight in to.
“God knows,” W illiam replied briefly , then lunged forward
as h e saw a private soldier come out of one of the rooms,
festooned in a lacy shawl and with his arms full of shoes.
“Y ou, there! W e’ll have no loo ting, none! Do you hear me,
sir?”
The priv ate did and, dropping h is armful of shoes, made of f
precipitately , lacy fringes flapping. A good many others were
at it , too, thoug h, and it was clear to W illiam that he and
Hammond would be unable to stop it. He shouted above the
increasing din for an ensign and, seizing the man’ s dispatch
box, scribbled a hasty note.
“T ake that to General Fraser ,” he said thrusting it back at the
ensign. “Fast as ever you can go!”
 
Dawn
 July 7, 1777
 
“I WIL L NOT HA VE these horrid irregularities!”
General Fraser ’ s face was deeply creased, as much with rage
as w ith fatigue. The small trave ling clock in the general’ s tent
showed just before five o’clock  in the morning, and W illiamhad the oddly dreamy feeling  that his head was floating
somewhere over his left shoulder . “Looting, theft, rampant
undiscipline—I will not have it, I say . Am I understood? All of
you?”
The small, tired group of of ficers gave assent in a chorus of
grunts. T hey had been up all night, chivvying their troops into
some form of ro ugh order , keeping back the rank and file from
the worst excesses of looting, hurriedly surveying the
abandoned outposts at the Old French Lines, and tallying the
unexpected bounty of provisions and ammunition left for them
by the fort’ s def enders—four of whom had been found when
the fort was sto rmed, dead drunk by the side of a primed
cannon, trained on the bridge below .
“Those men, the ones who were taken. Has anyone been
able to talk with them as yet?”
“No, sir ,” Captain Hayes said, st ifling a yawn. “Still dead to
the world—very nearly dead for good, the sur geon said,
though he thinks they’ll survive.”
“Shit th emselves with fear ,” Hammond said softly to
W illiam. “W aiting all that time for us to come.”
“More likely boredom,” W illiam murmured back without
moving his mouth. Even so, he caught the brigadier ’ s
bloodshot eye and straightened up unconsciously .
“W ell, it’ s not as though we need them to tell us much.”
General Fraser waved a hand to dispel a cloud of smoke that
had drifted in, and coughed. W illiam inhaled gently . There was
a succulent scent embodied in that smoke, and his stomach
coiled in anticipation. Ham? Sausage?
“I’ve sent word back to General Bur goyne that T iconderoga
is ours—again,”  the brigadier added, breaking into a grin at
the h oarse cheer from the of fice rs. “And to Colonel St. Leger .
W e s hall leave a  small garrison t o take stock and tidy things up
here, but the res t of us … W ell, there are rebels to be caught,
gentlemen. I cannot of fer you m uch respite, but certainly there
is time for a hearty breakfast. Bon appetit!” RETURN OF THE NA TIVE
 Night, July 7
 
I AN M URRA Y P ASSED IN T O the fort without
dif ficulty . There were rangers and Indians aplenty , mostly
lounging against the buildings, many of them drunk, others
poking through the deserted barracks, occasionally chased
away by harassed-looking soldiers set to guard the fort’ s
unexpected bounty .
There was no sign of slaughter , and he breathed easier . That
had been  his first fear , but while  there was mess—and to spare
—there was no blood and no sm ell of powder smoke. No shot
had been fired here in the last day or so.
He had a thoug ht and went toward the hospital barracks,
lar gely ignored, as it held noth ing anyone would want. The
smells of urine, shit, and old blo od had decreased; most of the
patients must have gone with th e retreating troops. There were
a few  pe ople th ere, one in a green coat who he thought must
be a sur geon, so me plainly orderlies. As he watched, a pair of
stretcher -bearers came out through the door , boots scraping as
they neg otiated the shallow stone steps. He leaned back into
the concealment of the doorway , for following the stretcher
was the tall form of Guinea Dic k, his face split in a cannibal’ s
grin.
Ian smiled himself, seeing it; Captain Stebbings still lived,
then—and Guin ea Dick was a  free man. And here, Jesus,
Mary , an d Bride  be thanked, ca me Mr . Ormiston behind him,
stumping slowly on a pair of crutches, tenderly supported on
either side by a pair of order lies, the puny wee creatures
dwarfed by the seaman’ s bulk.  He could tell Auntie Claire,
then—she’d be pleased to hear they were all right.
If he found Auntie Claire again—but he wasn’ t much
worried, really . Uncle Jamie would see her safe, come hell,
wildfire, or the entire British a rmy . When or where he’d see
them ag ain was another matter , but he and Rollo moved much
faster than any army could; he’d catch them up soon enough.He waite d, curious to see wheth er there was anyone else left
in the hospital, b ut either there w as not or they were to be left
there fo r the nonce. Had the Hunters gone with St. Clair ’ s
troops? In a way , he hoped they had—even knowing that they
would likely fare better with the  British than on the run down
the Hudson V alley with the refugees from T iconderoga. As
Quakers, he thought they would do well enough; the British
probably woudn ’ t molest them. But he thought he would like
to see Rachel H unter again sometime, and his chance of that
was much better if she and her brother had gone with the
rebels.
A little more poking about convinced him of two things:
that the  Hunters had indeed g one, and that the leaving of
T iconderoga had been accomplished in the midst of panic and
disorder . Someo ne had set fire to the bridge below , but it had
only par tially burned, perhaps put out by a rainstorm. There
was a great deal of debris on the lakeshore, suggesting a
massive embarkation—automatically he glanced toward the
lake, where he could plainly se e two lar ge ships, both flying
the Unio n flag. From his current perch on the battery , he could
see redcoats swarming over both Mount Defiance and Mount
Independence, and knew a small, surprising flare of
resentment against them.
“W ell, you’ll not keep it long,” he said under his breath. He
spoke in  Gaelic, and a good thing, too, for a passing soldier
glanced casually at him, as though feeling the stress of his
regard. He looked away himself, turning his back on the fort.
There was nothing to do here, no one to wait for . He’d eat
and pick  up some provisions, then go fetch Rollo and be of f.
He could—
A shattering whoom!  close at hand made him jerk round. T o
his right, one of the cannon was trained downward toward the
bridge, and just behind it, openmouthed with shock, was a
Huron man, swaying with drink.
There w as a lot of shouting from below; the troops thought
they were being fired on from the fort, though the shot hadgone high, splashing harmlessly into the lake.
The Huron giggled.
“What did you do?” Ian asked,  in an Algonkian tongue he
thought the man would most likely know . Whether he
understood or not, the man simply laughed harder , tears
beginning to run down his face. He gestured to a smoking tub
nearby; good Christ, the defend ers had gone so fast, they had
left a tub of slow match burning.
“Boom,” said the Huron, and g estured at a length of slow
match, pulled from the tub and left draped on the stones like a
glowing snake. “Boom,” he said again, nodding at the cannon,
and laughed until he had to sit down.
Soldiers were running up to th e battery , and the shouting
from outside was equaled by that inside the fort. It was
probably a good time to go. RETREA T
 
… w e ar e pursui ng the r ebels, a gr eat number of whom
have tak en to the lake in boats. The two sloops on the
lake ar e following, but I am sending four companies
down to the por tage point, wher e I think the chance of
captur e is good.
—Brigadier General Simon Fraser , to Major
General J. Bur goyne
 
 
July 8, 1777
 
W ILLIAM WISHE D HE hadn’ t ac cepted the brigadier ’ s
invitation to breakfast. If he had contented himself with the
lean rations that were a lieuten ant’ s lot, he would have been
hungry , but happy . As it was, h e was on the spot—blissfully
filled to the eye s with fried sausage, buttered toast, and grits
with hon ey , for which the brigadier had developed a fondness
—when the message had come from General Bur goyne. He
didn’ t e ven know what it had said; the brigadier had read it
while sipping cof fee, frowning slightly , then sighed and called
for ink and quill.
“W ant a ride this morning, W illiam?” he’d asked, smiling
across the table.
Which is how h e’d come to be at General Bur goyne’ s field
headquarters wh en the Indians h ad come in. W yandot, one of
the s oldiers said; he wasn’ t fam iliar with them, though he had
heard th at they had a chief called Leatherlips, and he did
wonder how that had come ab out. Perhaps the man was an
indefatigable talker?There were five of them, lean, wolfish-looking rascals. He
couldn’ t have said what they wore or how they were armed; all
his attention was focused on the pole that one of them carried,
this decorated with scalps. Fresh scalps. White scalps. A
musky smell of blood hung in the air , unpleasantly ripe, and
flies moved with the Indians, buzzing loudly . The remains of
W illiam’ s lavish breakfast coagulated in a hard ball just under
his ribs.
The Indians were looking for t he paymaster; one of them
was asking, in a surprisingly melodious English, where the
paymaster was. So it was true,  then. General Bur goyne had
unleashed his Indians, sent them coursing through the woods
like hunting dogs to fall upon  the rebels and spread terror
among them.
He did not want  t o look at the scalps but couldn’ t help it; his
eyes followed them as the pol e bobbed through a growing
crowd of curious soldiers—some mildly horrified, some
cheering. Jesus. W as that a woman’ s  sca lp? It had to be; a
flowing mass of honey-colored hair , longer than any man
would wear his hair , and shining as though its owner brushed
it a hund red stro kes every night, like his cousin Dottie said she
did. It was not unlike Dottie’ s hair , though a little darker—
He turned away abruptly , hopin g that he wouldn’ t be sick,
but turn ed just as abruptly back when he heard the cry . He’d
never he ard a sound like that before—a shriek of such horror ,
such grief, that his heart froze in his chest.
“Jane! Jane!” A W elsh lieutenant he knew slightly , called
David Jo nes, wa s forcing his w ay through the crowd, beating
at the men with fists and elbows , lunging toward the surprised
Indians, his face contorted with emotion.
“Oh, God,” breathed a soldier near him. “His fiancee’ s
called Jane. He can’ t mean—”
Jones th rew himself at the po le, snatching at the fall of
honey-colored hair , shrieking “JANE!” at the top of his lungs.
The Indians, looking disconcerted, jerked the pole away . Jonesflung him self on one of them, knocking the surprised Indian to
the ground and hammering him with the strength of in sanity .
Men we re pushing forward, grabbing at Jones—but not
doing so with an y great heart. Appalled looks were being shot
at the Indians, who clustered together , eyes narrowed and
hands at  their tomahawks. The whole sense of the gathering
had changed in an instant from  approval to outrage, and the
Indians plainly sensed it.
An of ficer W illiam didn’ t know strode forward, daring the
Indians with a hard eye, and tore the blond scalp from the
pole. Then stood holding it, d isconcerted, the mass of hair
seeming alive in his hands, the long strands stirring, waving up
around his fingers.
They had finally pulled Jones of f the Indian; his friends
were patting his shoulders, trying to ur ge him away , but he
stood stock-still, tears rolling down his face and dripping from
his c hin. “Jane,” he mouthed si lently . He held out his hands,
cupped and begging, and the of f icer who held the scalp placed
it gently into them. WHILE STILL ALIVE
 
L IEUTENANT ST ACT OE W AS standing by one corpse,
arrested. V ery slowly , he squatted down, his eyes fixed on
something, and as though by reflex covered his mouth with
one hand.
I really didn’ t want to look.
He’d heard my footsteps, though, and took his hand away
from his mouth. I could see the sweat trickling down his neck,
the band of his shirt pasted to his skin, dark with it.
“Do you suppose that was done while he was still alive?” he
asked, in an ordinary tone of voice.
Reluctantly , I looked over his shoulder .
“Y es,” I said, my voice as unemotional as his. “It was.”
“Oh,” he said. He stood, contemplated the corpse for a
moment, then walked away a few steps and threw up.
“Never mind,” I said gently , a nd took him by the sleeve.
“He’ s dead now . Come and help.”
Many o f the boats had gone a stray , been captured before
they reached the end of the lak e; many more had been taken
by B ritish troops waiting at the  portage point. Our canoe and
several m ore had escaped, and w e had made our way through
the woods for a day and a night and most of another day
before m eeting with the main b ody of troops fleeing overland
from the  fort. I was beginning to think that those who were
captured were the lucky ones.
I did n’ t know how long it had been since the small group
we had just discovered was attacked by Indians. The bodies
were not fresh.
 
GUARDS WERE POSTED at night. Those not on watch
slept as though poleaxed, exha usted by a day of flight—if
anything so cumbrous and labor ed could be described by such
a gra ceful word. I woke just past dawn from dreams of Snow
White trees, gape-mouthed a nd grasping, to find Jamie
crouched beside me, a hand on my arm.
“Y e’d best come, a nighean,”  he said softly .
Mrs. Raven had cut her throat with a penknife.
There wasn’ t time to dig a gra ve. I straightened her limbs
and clos ed her eyes, and we pile d rocks and branches over her
before staggerin g back to the rut that passed for a road through
the wilderness.
 
AS DARKNESS CAME up through the trees, we began
to hear them. High ululating shrieks. Hunting wolves.
“March on, march on! Indians!” one of the militiamen
shouted.
As if summoned by the shout, a bloodcurdling shriek
wavered throug h the darkness nearby , and the stumbling
retreat turned at once to headlo ng panic, men dropping their
bundles and pushing one anothe r out of the way in their haste
to flee.
There were shrieks from the refugees, too, though these
were quickly stifled.
“Of f the road,” Jamie said, low and fierce, and began
pushing the slow and bewildered into the woods. “They may
not know where we are. Y et.”
And then again, they might.
“D’ye have your death song ready , Uncle?” Ian whispered.
He had caught us up the day before, and now he and Jamiewere pre ssed close on either side of me, where we had taken
cover behind a huge fallen trunk.
“Oh, I’ll  sing them a death song , if it comes to that,” Jamie
muttered, half under his breath, and took out one of the pistols
from his belt.
“Y ou ca n’ t sing,” I said. I hadn’ t meant to be funny—I was
so fr ightened that I said by it reflex, the first thing that came
into my mind—and he didn’ t laugh.
“That’ s true,” he said. “W ell, then.”
He p rimed the p istol, closed the pan and thrust it into his
belt.
“Dinna be afraid, a nighean,”  J am ie whispered, and I saw
his t hroat work a s he swallowed. “I’ll not let them take ye. Not
alive.” He touched the pistol at his belt.
I sta red at him, then at the pistol . I hadn’ t thought it possible
to be more afraid.
I f elt suddenly a s though my sp inal cord had snapped; my
limbs wouldn’ t move, and my bowels very literally turned to
water . I understo od in that mom ent exactly what had led Mrs.
Raven to slash her own throat.
Ian w hispered something to Jam ie and slid away , silent as a
shadow .
It oc curred to me, belatedly , tha t by taking time to shoot me
if w e should be  overrun, Jamie was very likely to fall alive
into the hands o f the Indians himself. And I was suf ficiently
terrorized that I couldn’ t tell him not to do it.
I too k hold of my courage with both hands and swallowed
hard.
“Go!” I  said. “They won’ t—they probably won’ t harm
women.” My outer skirt hung in tatters, as did my jacket, and
the w hole ensemble was covered  in mud, leaves, and the small
bloody s plotches of slow-moving mosquitoes—but I was still
identifiably female.“The devil I will,” he said briefly .
“Uncle.” Ian’ s voice came softly out of the darkness. “It’ s
not Indians.”
“What?” I made no sense of this, but Jamie straightened
abruptly .
“It’ s a redcoat, running alongside us, shrieking like an
Indian. Driving us.”
Jamie swore under his breath. It was almost completely dark
by n ow; I coul d see only a few vague shapes, presumably
those of the p eople with us. I heard a whimper , almost
underfoot, but when I looked, could see no one.
The shrieks came again, now from the other side. If the man
was driv ing us—did he know we were there? If so, where did
he m ean to drive us? I could fe el Jamie’ s indecision—which
way? A second, perhaps two, and he took me by the arm,
pulling me deeper into the wood.
W e ran slap into a lar ge group of refugees within minutes;
they had stopped dead, too terri fied to move in any direction.
They hu ddled together , the women clutching their children,
hands clasped tight over the little ones’ mouths, breathing
“Hush!” like the wind.
“Leave them,” Jamie said in my ear , and tightened his grip
on m y arm. I turned to go wi th him, and suddenly a hand
seized m y other arm. I screamed , and everyone near erupted in
screams by sheer reflex. Suddenly the wood around us was
alive with moving forms and shouts.
The soldier—it was a British soldier; from so close I could
see the buttons  on his uniform  and felt the thump of his
cartridge box as it swung, strikin g me in the hip—leaned down
to p eer at me and grinned, his breath stale and scented with
decay .
“Stand still, love,” he said. “Y ou’re going nowhere now .”
My hear t was pounding so hard  in my ears that it was a full
minute b efore I realized that th e grip on my other arm wasgone. Jamie had vanished.
 
WE WE RE MARCHED back up the road in a tight
group, moving slowly through the night. They let us drink at a
stream at daylight but kept us moving until the early afternoon,
by which time even the most able-bodied were ready to drop.
W e were  herded, none too gently , into a field. Farmer ’ s wife
that I was, I win ced to see the stalks—only weeks away from
harvest—being trampled underfoot, the fragile gold of the
wheat cut and mangled into black mud. There was a cabin
among the trees at the far end of the field; I saw a girl run out
onto the  porch, clap a hand to her mouth in horror , and
disappear back inside.
Three B ritish of ficers came across the field, heading for the
cabin, ignoring the seething mass of invalids, women, and
children, all of whom were milling to and fro, with no idea
what to do next.  I wiped the sweat out of my eyes with the end
of m y kerchief, tucked it back  into my bodice, and looked
round for anyone who might be nominally in char ge.
None of  our own of ficers or able-bodied men seemed to
have bee n captured; there had b een only a couple of sur geons
superintending the removal of the invalids, and I hadn’ t seen
either on e in two days. Neither one was here. All right, then , I
thought grimly , and walked up to the nearest British soldier ,
who was surveying the chaos through narrowed eyes, musket
in hand.
“W e need water ,” I said to him without preamble. “There’ s a
stream just beyond those trees. May I take three or four
women to fetch back water for the sick and wounded?”
He was sweatin g, too; the fade d red wool of his coat was
black under the arms, and mel ted rice powder from his hair
was rimed in the creases of his forehead. He grimaced,
indicating that he didn’ t want to deal with me, but I simply
stared at him, as close as I could get. He glanced around, inhopes of finding someone to sen d me to, but the three of ficers
had disappeared  into the cabin. He raised one shoulder in
surrender , looking away .
“A ye, go on, t hen,” he muttered, and turned his back,
stalwartly guarding the road, along which new prisoners were
still being herded.
A qu ick traverse of the field tu rned up three buckets and a
like num ber of sensible women , worried but not hysterical. I
sent them to the  stream and began to quarter the field, making
a quick assessment of the situation—as much in order to keep
my own worry at bay as because there was no one else to do it.
W ould we be ke pt here long? I  wondered. If we would be
held here for more than a few hours, sanitation trenches must
be dug— but the soldiers would have the same need. I’d leave
that for the army to deal with, then. W ater was coming; we’d
need to run relays to the stream  nonstop for a bit. Shelter… I
glanced at the sky; it was hazy but clear . Those who could
move o n their own were already helping to drag the
desperately sick or wounded into the shade of the trees along
one side of the field.
Wher e was Jamie? Had he got away safe?
Above the calls and anxious con versations, I heard now and
then the whisper of distant thun der . The air clung to my skin,
thick wi th humidity . They would have to move us somewhere
—to the nearest settlement, wherever that might be—but it
might take several days. I had no idea where we were.
Had he been captur ed, too? If so , would they take him to the
same place they’d take the invalids?
Chances were that they would release the women, not
wishing to feed them. The women would stay with their sick
men, tho ugh—or most of them w ould—sharing whatever food
was available.
I w as walking s lowly across the field, conducting a mental
triage—the man  on the stretc her there was going to die,
probably before nightfall; I could hear the rales of hisbreathing from six feet away—when I caught sight of
movement on the cabin’ s porch.
The fam ily—two adult wom en, two teenagers, three
children, and a baby in arms—was leaving, clutching baskets,
blankets, and such bits of their household as could be carried.
One of the of ficers was with them; he took them across the
field and  spoke with one of the  guards, evidently instructing
him to let the women pass. One of the women paused at the
edge of the road  and looked back—just once. The others went
straight on, without a backward glance. Where were their
men?
Wher e ar e mine?
“Hallo,” I said, smiling at a ma n with a recently amputated
leg. I didn’ t know his name bu t recognized his face; he was
one of the few b lack men at T ic onderoga, a carpenter . I knelt
down beside him. His bandages were awry , and the stump was
leaking badly . “Bar the leg, how  do you feel?” His skin was
pale gray and clammy as a wet sheet, but he gave me a feeble
grin in return.
“My lef t hand doesn’ t hurt much right now .” He lifted it in
illustration, but dropped it like a chunk of lead, lacking
strength to hold it up.
“That’ s good,” I said, sliding m y fingers under his thigh to
lift i t. “L et me fix this for you— we’ll have you some water in
a minute.”
“That’d be nice,” he murmured, and shut his eyes against
the sun.
The flapping end of the loose bandage was twisted up like a
snake’ s tongue, stif f with dried blood, and the dressing awry .
The dressing itself, a poultice o f flaxseed and turpentine, was
soggy , pink with leaking blood and lymph. No choice but to
reuse it, though.
“What’ s your name?”
“W alter .” His eyes were still closed, his breath coming in
shallow gasps. So was mine; the thick, hot air was like apressure bandage round my chest. “W alter… W oodcock.”
“Pleased to know you, W alter . My name’ s Claire Fraser .”
“Know you,” he murmured. “Y ou’re Big Red’ s lady . He
make it out of the fort?”
“Y es,” I said, a nd blotted my face against my shoulder to
keep the sweat out of my eyes. “He’ s all right.”
Dear God, let him be all right .
The English of ficer was coming back toward the cabin,
passing within a few feet of me. I glanced up, and my hands
froze.
He w as tall, slen der but broad-shouldered, and I would have
known that long stride, that unself-conscious grace, and that
arrogant tilt of the head anywhere. He paused, frowning, and
turned his head to survey the littered field. His nose was
straight as a knife blade, just that tiny bit too long. I closed my
eyes for an instant, dizzy , sure I was hallucinating—but
opened them again at once, knowing that I wasn’ t.
“W illiam Ransom?” I blurted, and his head jerked toward
me, surprised. Blue eyes, dark blue, Fraser cat-eyes, narrowed
to a slant against the sun.
“I, er , beg your  pardon.” God, wh at did you speak to him
for?  But I couldn’ t have helped it. My fingers were pressed
against W alter ’ s leg, holding the bandage; I could feel his
femoral pulse against my fingertips, bumping as erratically as
my own.
“Do I know you , ma’am?” W illiam asked, with the shadow
of a bow .
“W ell, yes, you do,” I said, rather apologetically . “Y ou
stayed for a little time with my family , some years ago. A
place called Fraser ’ s Ridge.”
His face changed at once at  the name, and his gaze
sharpened, focusing on me with interest.“Why , yes,” he said slowly . “I recall. Y ou are Mrs. Fraser ,
are you not?” I could see his  thoughts working, and was
fascinated; he hadn’ t got Jamie’ s way of hiding what he
thought—or if he did, wasn’ t using it. I could see him
wondering—nice, well-mannere d boy that he was—what the
proper social response to this aw kward situation might be, and
—a quick glance over his shoulder at the cabin—how the
demands of his duty might conflict with it.
His shoulders stif fened with decision, but before he could
say anything, I leapt in.
“Do you think it  might be possi ble to find some buckets for
water? A nd bandages?” Most of the women had already torn
strips from their petticoats to ser ve this function; much longer ,
and we’d all be half naked.
“Y es,” he said slowly , and gla nced down at W alter , then
toward the road. “Buckets, yes. There’ s a sur geon with the
division behind us; when I have  a moment, I’ll send someone
back with a request for bandages.”
“And food?” I asked hopefully . I hadn’ t eaten more than a
handful of half-ripe berries in nearly two days. I wasn’ t
suf fering hunger pangs—my stomach was in knots—but I was
having bouts of light-headedne ss, spots passing before my
eyes. No  one else was in much  better case; we were going to
lose a number of the invalids to the heat and simple weakness,
if we weren’ t given food and shelter soon.
He hesit ated, and I saw his eyes flit over the field, obviously
estimating numbers.
“That m ay be… our supply trai n is—” His lips firmed, and
he s hook his head. “I’ll see what can be done. Y our servant,
ma’am.” He bowed politely and turned away , striding toward
the road. I watched him go, fascinated, the soggy dressing
limp in my hand.
He w as dark-haired, though the  sun struck a gleam of red
from the  crown of his head; he wore no powder . His voice had
deepened—well, of course it had; he’d been no more thantwelve the last time I met him —and the sheer oddness of
hearing Jamie speaking in a cultured English accent made me
want to laugh, despite our precarious situation and my worry
for Jami e and Ian. I shook my h ead and returned to the task at
hand.
A B ritish private arrived an hour after my conversation with
Lieutenant Ransom, bearing four buckets, which he dropped
unceremoniously at my side without remark before heading
back to the roa d. T wo hours la ter , a sweating orderly came
trundling throu gh the trampled wheat with two lar ge
haversacks fille d with bandages. Interestingly enough, he
headed directly for me, which made me wonder just how
W illiam had described me.
“Thank you.” I took the sacks of bandages with gratitude.
“Do you—do you think we might get some food soon?”
The orderly was looking over the field, grimacing. Of
course—the invalids were li kely about to become his
responsibility . He turned back to me, though, civil but
obviously very tired.
“I do ubt it, ma’a m. The supply train is two days behind us,
and the troops are living of f what they’re carrying or what they
find as they go.” He nodded tow ard the road; on the other side,
I c ould see a nu mber of English soldiers making camp. “I’m
sorry ,” he added formally , and turned to go.
“Oh.” He stopped, and taking t he strap of his canteen of f,
handed it to me. It was heavy and gur gled enticingly .
“Lieutenant Elle smere said I was to give you this.” He smiled
briefly , the lines of tiredness easing. “He said you looked hot.”
“Lieutenant Ellesmere.” That must be W illiam’ s title, I
realized. “Thank you. And please thank the lieutenant, if you
see him.” He was clearly on the point of departure, but I
couldn’ t help asking, “How did you know who I was?”
His smile deepened as he glanced at my head.
“The lieutenant said you’d be the curly-wig giving orders
like a ser geant-m ajor .” He looked round the field once more,shaking his head. “Good luck, ma’am.”
 
THREE MEN DIED before s unset. W alter W oodcock
was still alive, but barely . W e’d moved as many men as we
could in to the shade of the tree s along the edge of the field,
and I’d divided the seriously wo unded into small groups, each
allocated a bucket and two or th ree women or walking invalids
to te nd them. I’d also designate d a latrine area and done my
best to separate  the infectious cases from those who were
fevered from wounds or malaria. There were three suf fering
from wh at I hoped was only “summer ague,” and one who I
feared might have diphtheria. I sat beside him—a young
wheelwright fro m New Jersey—checking the membranes of
his throa t at intervals, giving him as much water as he would
take. Not from my canteen, though.
W illiam Ransom , bless his soul, had filled his canteen with
brandy .
I uncork ed it and took a sparing sip. I’d poured out small
cupfuls for each small group, a dding each cupful to a bucket
of water—but had kept a bit for my own use. It wasn’ t
selfishness; for better or worse, I was in char ge of the captives
for the moment. I had to stay on my feet.
Or m y b ottom, as the case might be , I thought, leaning back
against t he bole of an oak tree. My feet ached all the way to
my knees, my b ack and ribs twinged with each breath, and I
had to close my  eyes now and  then to control the dizziness.
But I was sitting still, for what seemed like the first time in
several days.
The soldiers across the road were cooking their meager
rations; my mouth watered and my stomach contracted
painfully at the scent of roa sting meat and flour . Mrs.
W ellman’ s little boy was whining with hunger , his head laid on
his moth er ’ s lap. She was stroking his hair mechanically , her
eyes fixed on her husband’ s bod y , which lay a little way away .
W e had no she et or blanket with which to shroud him, butsomeone had given her a handk erchief to cover his face. The
flies were very bad.
The air had coo led, thank God, but was still heavy with the
threat of rain; thunder was a constant faint rumble over the
horizon and it would probably pour sometime during the night.
I pl ucked the s weat-soaked fa bric away from my chest; I
doubted it would have time to dry before we were drenched
with rain. I eyed the encampment across the road, with its lines
of smal l tents and brush shelt ers, with envy . There was a
slightly lar ger of ficers’ tent as well, though several of ficers
had taken up temporary quarters in the commandeered cabin.
I o ught to go there, I thought. See the most senior of ficer
present, and beg for food for the children, at least. When the
shadow of that tall pine sapling  touched my foot, I decided.
Then I’d  go. In t he meantime, I uncorked the canteen and took
another small swallow .
Movement caught my eye, and I looked up. The
unmistakable figure of Lieutenant Ransom stalked out of the
tents and came across the road. It lifted my heart a little to see
him, though the sight of him re newed my worry for Jamie—
and reminded me, with a smal l sharp pang, of Brianna. At
least she was  safe, I thought. Roger and Jemmy and Amanda,
too. I repeated their names to myself as a small refrain of
comfort, counting them like coins. Four of them safe.
W illiam had undone his stock, and his hair was untidy , his
coat stained with sweat and d irt. Evidently the pursuit was
wearing on the British army , too.
He glanced round the field, spotted me, and turned
purposefully in  my direction. I got my feet under me,
struggling upward against the press of gravity like a
hippopotamus rising from a swamp.
I’d barely got to my feet and raised a hand to smooth my
hair when someone else’ s hand poked me in the back. I started
violently but luckily didn’ t scream.“It’ s me, Auntie,” Y oung Ian whispered from the shadows
behind me. “Come with—oh, Jesus.”
W illiam had come within ten paces of me and, raising his
head, had spied Ian. He leapt forward and grabbed me by the
arm, yan king m e away from the  trees. I yelped, as Ian had an
equally firm grip on the other arm and was yanking lustily in
that direction.
“Let her go!” W illiam barked.
“The devil I will,” Ian replied hotly . “Y ou  let go!”
Mrs. W ellman’ s little son was on his feet, staring round-
eyed and open-mouthed into the forest.
“Mama, Mama! Indians!”
Shrieks rose from the women ne ar us, and everyone began a
mad scramble away from the f orest, leaving the wounded to
their own devices.
“Ah, bugger!” Ian said, letting g o in disgust. W illiam didn’ t,
jerking me with such force that I crashed into him, whereupon
he p romptly wrapped his arms a bout my waist and dragged me
a little way into the field.
“W ill ye  bloody leave go of my auntie?” Ian said crossly ,
emer ging from the trees.
“Y ou!” said W illiam. “What are you—well, never mind
that. Y o ur aunt, you say?” He l ooked down at me. “Are you?
His aunt? W ait—no, of course you are.”
“I am,” I agreed, pushing at his arms. “Let go.”
His grasp loosened a little, but he didn’ t release me.
“How many others are in there ?” he demanded, lifting his
chin toward the forest.
“If there  were any others, ye’d be deid,” Ian informed him.
“It’ s just me. Give her to me.”
“I can’ t  do that.” But there was an uncertain note in
W illiam’ s voice , and I felt his head turn, glancing toward thecabin. S o far , no one had come o ut, but I could see some of the
sentries near the road shifting to  and fro, wondering what the
matter w as. The  other captives had stopped running, but were
quivering with incipient panic, eyes frantically searching the
shadows among the trees.
I rap ped W illiam sharply on the  wrist with my knuckles and
he let go and took a step back. My head was spinning again—
not least  from the very peculiar sensation of being embraced
by a  tota l strang er whose body felt so familiar to me. He was
thinner than Jamie, but—
“D’ye o we me a life or not?” Not waiting for an answer , Ian
jerked a thumb at me. “A ye, then—it’ s hers.”
“Hardly a question of her life,” W illiam said, rather crossly ,
with an awkwar d nod in my direction, acknowledging that I
might have a possible interest in this discussion. “Surely you
don’ t suppose we kill women?”
“No,” Ia n said evenly . “I dinna suppose it at all. I ken verra
well that ye do.”
“W e do?” W illiam echoed. He looked surprised, but a
sudden flush burned in his cheeks.
“Y ou do,” I assured him. “General Howe hanged three
women at the head of his army in New Jersey , as an example.”
He seemed completely nonplused by this.
“W ell… but—they were spies!”
“Y ou thi nk I don’ t look like a spy?” I inquired. “I’m much
obliged for your good opinion, but I don’ t know that General
Bur goyne would  share it.” There were, of course, a good many
other wo men who’d died at the  hands of the British army , if
less of fi cially , but this didn’ t s eem the moment to make an
account of them.
“General Bur goyne is a gentleman,” W illiam said stif fly .
“So am I.”
“Good,” Ian said briefly . “T urn your back for thirty seconds,
and we’ll trouble ye nay more.”I don’ t know whether he would have done it or not, but just
then, Ind ian crie s tore the air , coming from the far side of the
road. Further frantic screams ca me from the captives, and I bit
my own  tongue  in order not to scream, too. A tongue of fire
shot up into the lavender sky fro m the top of the of ficers’ tent.
As I gaped, two more flaming comets shot across the sky . It
looked like the descent of the H oly Ghost, but before I could
mention this interesting observation, Ian had seized my arm
and jerked me nearly of f my feet.
I managed to snatch up the canteen as we passed, on a dead
run for the fore st. Ian grabbed it from me, almost draggging
me i n his haste. Gunfire and screams were breaking out behind
us, and the skin all down my back contracted in fear .
“This way .” I followed him without heed for anything
underfoot, stumb ling and twisting my ankles in the dusk as we
threw o urselves headlong into the brush, expecting every
moment to be shot in the back.
Such is the brain’ s capacity for self-amusement, I was able
to im agine in vivid detail my wounding, capture, descent into
infection and sepsis, and eventual lingering death—but not
before being obliged to witness the capture and execution of
both Jam ie—I had recognized the source of the Indian screams
and flaming arrows without dif ficulty—and Ian.
It was only as we slowed—perforce; I had such a stitch in
my side that I could barely breathe—that I thought of other
things. T he sick and wounded I had left behind. The young
wheelwright with the bright red throat. W alter W oodcock,
teetering over the abyss.
Y ou cou ldn’ t give any of them mor e than a hand to hold , I
told myself fiercely , limping as I stumbled after Ian. It was
true; I knew it was true. But I also knew that now and then a
hand in the dark gave a sick man something to cling to, against
the rushing wind of the dark angel. Sometimes it was enough;
sometimes it wasn’ t. But the ach e of those left behind dragged
at me like a sea anchor , and I wasn’ t sure whether the wetness
streaming down my cheeks was sweat or tears.It was full dark now , and the boiling clouds covered the
moon, a llowing only fitful glimpses of its brilliant light. Ian
had slow ed still  more, to let me keep up with him, and took
my arm now and then to help me over rocks or across creeks.
“How… far?” I gasped, stopping once more for breath.
“Not much,” Jamie’ s voice replied softly beside me. “Are ye
all right, Sassenach?”
My heart gave a  tremendous bump, then settled back in my
chest as he gro ped for my hand, then gathered me briefly
against himself.  I had a moment of relief so profound that I
thought my bones had dissolved.
“Y es,” I said, into his chest, and with great ef fort lifted my
head. “Y ou?”
“W ell enough now ,” he said, passing a hand over my head,
touching my cheek. “Can ye walk just a bit further?”
I s traigh tened, swaying a little. It had begun to rain; heavy
drops plopped into my hair , cold and startling on my scalp.
“Ian—have you got that canteen?”
There was a soft pop!  and Ian set the canteen in my hand.
V ery carefully , I tilted it into my mouth.
“Is that brandy?” Jamie said, sounding astonished.
“Mmm-hmm.” I swallowed, as slowly as I could, and
handed the canteen to him. The re were a couple of swallows
left.
“Where did ye get it?”
“Y our son gave it to me,” I said. “Where are we going?”
There was a lo ng pause from the darkness, and then the
sound of brandy being drunk.
“South,” he said at last, and taki ng my hand, led me on into
the wood, the rain whispering on the leaves all round us.
 SOAKED AND SHIVERING, we caught up to a militia
unit just  before dawn, and were nearly shot in mistake by a
nervous sentry . By that point, I didn’ t really care. Being dead
was imm ensely preferable to the prospect of taking one more
step.
Our bona fides  being established, Jamie disappeared briefly
and cam e back with a blanket a nd three fresh corn dodgers. I
inhaled my share of this am brosia in four seconds flat,
wrapped myself in the blanket, and lay down under a tree
where th e ground was damp but not soggy and so thick with
dead leaves that it gave spongily beneath me.
“I’ll be back in a bit, Sassenach,” Jamie whispered,
squatting beside me. “Dinna go anywhere, aye?”
“Don’ t worry—I’ll be here. If I move a muscle before
Christmas, it will be too soon.”  A faint warmth was already
returning to my shivering muscles, and sleep was pulling me
down with the inexorability of quicksand.
He gave the breath of a laugh, and reached out a hand,
tucking the blanket in around my shoulders. The dawn light
showed the deep lines that the n ight had carved in his face, the
smudges of dirt and exhaustion that stained the strong bones.
The wide mouth, compressed for so long, had relaxed now in
the relief of momentary safety , looking oddly young and
vulnerable.
“He look s like you,” I whispered. His hand stopped moving,
still on my shou lder , and he looked down, long lashes hiding
his eyes.
“I kn ow ,” he sai d, very softly . “T ell me of him. Later , when
there’ s t ime.” I heard his foots teps, a rustle in damp leaves,
and fell asleep, a prayer for W a lter W oodcock half finished in
my mind. THE DESER TER GAME
 
T HE WHORE GRUNTED throu gh the rag clenched in
her teeth.
“Nearly done,” I murmured, and ran the backs of my
knuckles gently  down her calf by way of reassurance before
returning to the debridement of the nasty wound in her foot.
An o f ficer ’ s horse had stepped on her as they—and a number
of o ther people and animals—h ad jostled to drink at a creek
during the retreat. I could clearly  see the print of the horseshoe
nails, bla ck in the red puf fy flesh of her instep. The edge of the
shoe itself, worn paper -thin and  sharp as a knife, had made a
deep, curved gash that ran across the metatarsals, vanishing
between the fourth and fifth toes.
I’d b een afraid I  was going to have to remove the little toe
—it seem ed to be dangling by n o more than a shred of skin—
but when I examined the foot more closely , I discovered that
all the bones w ere miraculously intact—as nearly as I could
tell, without access to an X-ray machine.
The horse’ s hoof had driven he r foot into the mud of the
stream b ank, she’d told me; th at had likely saved the bones
from be ing crushed. Now if I could manage to stem the
infection and didn’ t have to am putate the foot, she might just
be able to walk again normally . Maybe.
W ith a degree of cautious hope, I put down the scalpel and
reached for a bottle of what  I hoped was a penicillin-
containing liquid  brought with me from the fort. I’d salvaged
the barrel optic of Dr . Rawlings ’ s microscope from the house
fire and found it very useful indeed for starting fires—but
without the eyepiece, staging mechanism, or mirror , it was of
limited use in determining the genus of microor ganisms. I
could be  sure that what I’d grown and filtered was bread mold,
all right—but beyond that…Suppressing a sigh, I poured the  liquid generously over the
raw flesh I’d ju st exposed. It wasn’ t alcoholic, but the flesh
was  raw . The whore made a high-pitched noise through the
cloth an d breathed through her nose like a steam engine, but
by th e time I’d made a compress of lavender and comfrey and
bound up the foot, she was calm, if flushed.
“There,” I said, with a small pat  to her leg. “I think that will
do n icely now .” I started to say automatically , “Keep it clean,”
but bit my tongu e. She hadn’ t any shoes or stockings and was
either w alking daily through a wilderness of rocks, dirt, and
streams, or living in a filthy camp littered with piles of dung,
both hum an and animal. The bottoms of her feet were hard as
horn and black as sin.
“Come a nd find  me in a day or  two,” I said instead. If you
can , I  thought. “I’ll check it and change the dressing.” If I can ,
I thought, with a glance at the knapsack in the corner where I
kept my dwindling stocks of medicaments.
“Thank ‘ee kindly ,” the whore said, sitting up and putting
her foot  gingerly to the ground. Judging from the skin of her
legs and feet, sh e was young, though you couldn’ t tell from
her face. Her skin was weathered, lined with hunger and strain.
Her cheekbones were sharp with hunger , and her mouth was
drawn in on one side where the teeth were missing—lost to
decay or knocked out by a customer or another whore.
“W ill ‘ee be here for a bit, think?” she asked. “I’ve a friend,
like, got the itch.”
“I’ll be  here for the night, at least,” I assured her ,
suppressing a groan as I rose to my feet. “Send your friend; I’ll
see what I can do.”
Our gro up of militia had met with others, forming a lar ge
body , an d within a few days we began to cross paths with
other reb el groups. W e were running into fragments of General
Schuyler ’ s and General Arnold’ s armies, these also moving
south down the Hudson V alley .W e were still moving all day but began to feel secure
enough to sleep at night, and with food provided—irregularly ,
but still food—by the army , my  strength began to return. The
rain usually came at night, but  today it had been raining at
dawn, an d we had been trudging  through mud for hours before
some shelter came in sight.
General Arnold’ s troops had stripped the farmstead and
burnt the house. The barn was h eavily charred down one side,
but the fire had gone out before consuming the building.
A gust of wind  blew through the barn, raising eddies of
decayed straw and dirt, whipping our petticoats round our legs.
The barn had originally had a plank floor; I could see the lines
of th e boards, e mbedded in the dirt. The foragers had taken
them for firewood, but it had been too much trouble for them
to knock down the barn, thank God.
Some o f the refugees fleeing  T iconderoga had sought
shelter h ere; more would be along before nightfall. A mother
with two small, exhausted childr en slept curled by the far wall;
her husband had settled them here and gone to look for food.
Pray ye  that your flight be no t in the winter , nor on the
Sabbath day…
I f ollowe d the whore to the door and stood looking after her .
The sun was touching the horizon now; perhaps an hour of
light lef t, but the sunset breez e was already moving in the
treetops, night’ s skirts rustling as she came. I shivered
reflexively , thou gh the day wa s still warm enough. The old
barn wa s chilly , and the nights  were beginning to bite. Any
day , we would awake to frost on the ground.
And what then?  said the small, apprehensive voice that lived
in the pit of my stomach.
“Then I’ll put on  another pair of  stockings,” I muttered to it.
“Hush up!”
A truly Christian person would doubtless have given the
spar e s tockings to the bar efoot whor e , remarked the
sanctimonious voice of my conscience.“Y ou hu sh up, too,” I said. “Plenty of opportunity to be
Christian later , if the ur ge should strike me.” Half the people
fleeing needed stockings, I dared say .
I wo ndered what I might be a ble to do for the whore’ s
friend, if she di d come. “The itch” might be anything from
eczema or cowpox to gonorrhe a—though given the woman’ s
profession, something venereal was the best bet. Back in
Boston, it would likely have been a simple yeast infection—
oddly enough, I almost never s aw those here, and speculated
idly that it might be owing to the nearly universal lack of
underclothes. So much for the advances of modernity!
I gla nced at my  knapsack again, calculating what I had left
and how  I might use it. A fair amount of bandages and lint. A
pot of gentian o intment, good for scrapes and minor wounds,
which occurred in abundance. A  small stock of the most useful
herbs for tincture and compress: lavender , comfrey ,
peppermint, mustard seed. By some miracle, I still had the box
of c inchona bark I had acquire d in New Bern—I thought of
T om Christie and crossed myself, but dismissed him from
mind; there was nothing I could do about him and much too
much to think of here. T wo  scalpels I had taken from
Lieutenant Stactoe’ s body—he had succumbed to a fever on
the road—and my silver sur gical scissors. Jamie’ s gold
acupuncture nee dles; those might be used to treat others, save
that I had no id ea how to place  them for anything other than
seasickness.
I co uld hear voi ces, parties of f oragers moving through the
trees, here and there someone calling out a name, searching for
a fri end or fami ly member lost in transit. The refugees were
beginning to settle for the night.
Sticks c racked near at hand, and a man came out of the
woods. I didn’ t recognize him. One of the “greasy-stockinged
knaves” from one of the militias, no doubt; he had a musket in
one han d and a powder horn at  his belt. Not much else. And
yes, he was barefoot, though his feet were much too big to
wear my stockings—a fact that I pointed out to my conscience,in case it shou ld feel compelled to try to prod me into
charitable behavior again.
He saw me in the door and raised a hand.
“Y ou the conjure-woman?” he called.
“Y es.” I ’d given up trying to make people call me a doctor ,
let alone a physician.
“Met a whore with a mighty fine new bandage on her foot,”
the man said, giving me a smile. “She said as there’ s a
conjure-woman up to the barn, has some medicines.”
“Y es,” I said ag ain, giving him a quick once-over . I saw no
obvious wound, and he wasn’ t sick—I could tell that from his
color an d the upright way he wa lked. Perhaps he had a wife or
child, or a sick comrade.
“Hand ‘em over to me now ,” he said, still smiling, and
pointed the muzzle of the musket at me.
“What?” I said, surprised.
“Give me the m edicines you’v e got.” He made a small
jabbing motion with the gun. “ Could just shoot you and take
‘em, but I ain’ t wanting to waste the powder .”
I stood still and stared at him for a moment.
“What the devil do you want them for?” I’d been held up
once bef ore for drugs—in a Boston emer gency room. A young
addict, s weating and glassy-eyed , with a gun. I’d handed them
over instantly . At the moment, I wasn’ t inclined.
He s norted and cocked his gun . Before I could even think
about being scared, there was a  sharp bang and the scent of
powder smoke. The man looked terribly surprised, the musket
sagging in his hands. Then he fell at my feet.
“Hold that, Sassenach.” Jamie thrust the just-fired pistol
into my hand, stooped, and to ok the body by the feet. He
dragged it out of the barn into the rain. I swallowed, reached
into my bag, and took out the extra stockings. I dropped these
in the woman’ s lap, then went to set down the pistol and mysack by the wall. I was conscious of the eyes of the mother and
her child ren on me—and saw th em shift suddenly to the open
door . I turned to see Jamie com e in, soaked to the skin, his
face drawn and set with fatigue.
He cross ed the barn and sat do wn by me, laid his head on
his knees, and closed his eyes.
“Thank you, sir ,” said the woman, very softly . “Ma’am.”
I t hough t for a moment that he had fallen instantly asleep,
for he didn’ t s tir . After a moment, though, he said, in an
equally soft voice, “Y e’re welcome, ma’am.”
 
I W AS MORE THAN pleased to find the Hunters when
we r eached the n ext village; they had been in one of the bar ges
that had  been captured early , but  had succeeded in escaping by
the s imple expedient of walking  into the woods after dark. As
the s oldiers who had captured th em had not bothered to count
their captives, no one noticed they had gone.
Overall, things were looking up somewhat. Food was
becoming more  abundant, and we were among regular
Continentals. W e were still only a few miles in front of
Bur goyne’ s arm y , though, and the strain of the long retreat was
telling. Desertio n was frequent—though no one knew quite
how freq uent. O r ganization, dis cipline, and military structure
were be ing restored as we c ame under the sway of the
Continental arm y , but there were still men who could melt
away unobtrusively .
It was Jamie w ho thought of the deserter game. Deserters
would b e welcom ed into the Bri tish camps, fed, given clothes,
and interrogated for information.
“So we’ll give it to them, aye?” he said. “And it’ s only fair
we take the same in return, is it not?”
Smiles b egan to  grow on the faces of the of ficers to whom
he was propounding this ide a. And within a few days,
carefully chosen “deserters” were making their waysurreptitiously to the enemy camps and being taken before
British of ficers, where they poured out the stories with which
they’d been carefully prepared. And after a good supper , they
would take the first opportunity to re-desert back to the
American side—bringing with them useful information about
the British forces pursuing us.
Ian dropped in to Indian camps  now and then if it seemed
safe, but didn’ t p lay this particular game; he was memorable. I
thought Jamie would have liked to masquerade as a deserter—
it w ould appeal to his sense of drama, as well as his sense of
adventure, which was acute. His size and striking appearance
put t his notion o ut of consideration, though; the deserters must
all be ordinary-looking men who were unlikely to be
recognized later .
“Because sooner or later , the British are going to realize
what’ s a foot. They’re not fools. And they willna take it kindly
when they do realize.”
W e had found sh elter for the nig ht in another barn—this one
unburnt and still equipped with a few piles of musty hay ,
though t he stock had long since  vanished. W e were alone, but
probably wouldn’ t be for long. The interlude in the
commandant’ s g arden seemed as though it had taken place in
someone else’ s life, but I laid my head on Jamie’ s shoulder ,
relaxing against his solid warmth.
“Do ye think maybe—”
Jamie stopped abruptly , his hand tightening on my leg. An
instant l ater , I heard the stealthy  rustling that had alerted him,
and my mouth went dry . It migh t be anything from a prowling
wolf to an Indian ambush—but whatever it was was sizable,
and I fumbled—as silently as possible—for the pocket in
which I had stowed the knife he’d given me.
Not a wolf; som ething passed the open door , a shadow the
height of a man , and vanished. Jamie squeezed my thigh and
then was gone, moving crouched through the empty barn
without a sound. For an instant, I couldn’ t see him in the dark,
but m y eyes were well adapted, and I found him seconds later ,a long dark sha dow pressed against the wall, just inside the
door .
The shadow outside had com e back; I saw the brief
silhouette of a head against the paler black of the night
outside. I got my feet under me, skin prickling with fear . The
door wa s the only egress; perh aps I should throw myself on
the floor and rol l up against the base of a wall. I might escape
detection—or , w ith luck, be able to grab the ankles of an
intruder , or stab him through the foot.
I was just ab out to implement this strategy when a
tremulous whisper came out of the dark.
“Friend—Friend James?” it said, and I let out the breath I
had been holding in a gasp.
“Is that you, Denzell?” I said, trying to sound normal.
“Claire!” He burst through the door in relief, promptly
tripped over something, and fell headlong with a crash.
“W elcome back , Friend Hunter ,” Jamie said, the nervous
ur ge to laugh e vident in his voice. “Are ye hurt?” The long
shadow detached itself from the wall and bent to help our
visitor up.
“No. No, I don’ t think so. Though in fact I scarcely know…
James, I did it!”
There was a momentary silence.
“How close, a charaid ?” Jamie asked quietly . “And do they
move?”
“No, thank the Lord.” Denzell s at down abruptly beside me,
and I could fee l his trembling. “They’re waiting for their
wagons to come up. They daren ’ t outrun their supply line too
far , and they’re having terrible trouble; we’ve made such a
mess of the road s”—the pride in his voice was palpable—”and
the rain’ s helped a great deal, too.”
“D’ye ken how long it might be?”
I saw Denzell nod, eager .“One of the ser g eants said it might be two, even three days.
He w as telling s ome of the soldi ers to be mindful of their flour
and bee r , as they wouldn’ t ge t any more until the wagons
came.”
Jamie exhaled, and I felt some  of the tension leave him.
Mine di d, too, and I felt a pas sionate wave of thankfulness.
There would be time to sleep. I had just begun to relax a little;
now the  tension flowed out of m e like water , to such an extent
that I barely noticed what else Denzell had to confide. I heard
Jamie’ s voice, murmuring congratulations; he clapped Denzell
on t he s houlder , and slid out of the barn, no doubt to go pass
on the information.
Denzell sat still, breathing audibly . I gathered what was left
of my concentration and made an ef fort to be amiable.
“Did they feed you, Denzell?”
“Oh.” D enzell’ s voice changed, and he began to fumble in
his pocket. “Here. I brought this away for thee.” He pushed
something into my hands: a small squashed loaf, rather burnt
about th e edges— I could tell fro m the hard crust and the smell
of ashes. My mouth began to water uncontrollably .
“Oh, no ,” I managed to say , trying to give it back. “Y ou
should—”
“They fed me,” he assured me.  “Stew , of a sort. I ate all I
could. A nd I’ve another loaf in my pocket for my sister . They
gave me the food,” he assured me earnestly . “I didn’ t steal it.”
“Thank you,” I managed to say , and with the greatest self-
control, tore the loaf in half and  tucked one half in my pocket
for J amie. Then I crammed the  remainder in my mouth and
ripped at it like  a wolf wrenching bloody mouthfuls from a
carcass.
Denny’ s stomach echoed mine, rumbling with a series of
great borborygmi.
“I thought you said you ate!” I said, accusing.“I di d. B ut the stew seems not in clined to lie quiet,” he said,
with a small, pa ined laugh. He b ent forward, arms folded over
his stom ach. “I—um, don’ t s’pose that thee might have a bit of
barley water or peppermint to hand, Friend Claire?”
“I do,” I said, unspeakably relieved that I still had the
remnants in my sack. I hadn’ t much left, but I did have
peppermint. The re was no hot water; I gave him a handful to
chew , washed down with wate r from a canteen. He drank
thirstily , burped, and then stopped, breathing in a way that told
me j ust what wa s happening. I guided him hastily to the side
and held his head while he vomited, losing peppermint and
stew together .
“Food p oisoning?” I asked, trying to feel his forehead, but
he slid away from me, collapsing onto a heap of straw , his
head on his knees.
“He said he’d hang me,” he whispered suddenly .
“Who?”
“The English of ficer . A Captain  Bradbury , I think his name
was. Said he thought I was a-playing at spies and soldiers, and
if I didn’ t confess at once, he’d hang me.”
“But he didn’ t,” I said softly , and put a hand on his arm.
He was trembling all over , and I saw a drop of sweat
hanging from the tip of his chin, translucent in the dimness.
“I to ld him—told him he coul d, I s’posed. If he pleased.
And I truly thought he would. B ut he didn’ t.” His breath came
thick, and I realized that he was crying, silently .
I pu t my arms  around him, held him, making hushing
noises, and after a little he stopped. He was quiet for a few
minutes.
“I thought—I would be prepar ed to die,” he said softly .
“That I would g o happy to the Lord, whenever He chose to
call me. I am ashamed to find it untrue. I was so much afraid.”
I took a long, deep breath, and sat back beside him.“I alway s wond ered about martyrs,” I said. “No one ever
said they weren’ t afraid. It’ s only that they were willing to go
and do whatever they did in spite of it. Y ou went.”
“I did not set up  to be a martyr ,” he said after a moment. He
sounded so meek, I nearly laughed.
“I doubt very much that many people do,” I said. “And I
think a person who did would be very obnoxious indeed. It’ s
late, Denzell, and your sister will be worried. And hungry .”
 
IT W AS AN HO UR or more before Jamie came back. I
was lying in the hay , my shawl pulled over me, but wasn’ t
asleep. He crawled in beside me and lay down, sighing,
putting an arm over me.
“Why h im?” I asked after a moment, trying to keep my
voice calm. It didn’ t work; Jamie was acutely sensitive to
tones of voice—anyone’ s, but particularly mine. I saw his head
turn sharply toward me, but he paused a moment in turn before
answering.
“He wished to go,” he said, doing much better with the
approximation o f calmness than I had. “And I thought he’d do
well with it.”
“Do well?  He’ s no actor! Y ou know he can’ t lie; he must
have been stammering and tripping over his tongue! I’m
astonished that they believed him—if they did,” I added.
“Oh, the y did, aye. D’ye think a real deserter wouldna be
terrified, Sassen ach?” he said, sounding faintly amused. “I
meant him to go in sweating and stammering. Had I tried to
give him lines to speak, they’d ha’ shot him on the spot.”
The thou ght of it made the bolu s of bread rise in my throat.
I forced it back down.
“Y es,” I  said, and took a few breaths, feeling cold sweat
prickle over my own face, seeing little Denny Hunter ,sweating and stammering befo re the cold eyes of a British
of ficer .
“Y es,” I said again. “But… couldn’ t someone else have
done it? It’ s no t just that Denn y Hunter is a friend—he’ s a
doctor . He’ s needed.”
Jamie’ s head turned toward me again. The sky outside was
beginning to lighten; I could see the outline of his face.
“Did ye not hear me say he wished to do it, Sassenach?” he
asked. “I didna ask him. In fact, I tried to dissuade him—for
the v ery reason ye said. But he wouldna hear it and only asked
me to look after his sister , should he not come back.”
Rachel. My stomach clenched afresh at mention of her .
“What can he have been thinking ?”
Jamie sighed deeply and turned onto his back.
“He’ s a Quaker , Sassenach. But he’ s a man. If he was the
sort of man wh o’d not fight fo r what he believes, he’d ha’
stayed in his we e village and poulticed horses and looked after
his sister . But he’ s not.” He shook his head and looked at me.
“W ould ye have had me stay at home, Sassenach? T urn back
from the fight?”
“I w ould,” I said, agitation fa ding into crossness. “In a
heartbeat. I just know you aren ’ t bloody going  to , so what’ s
the point?”
That made him laugh.
“So ye do under stand,” he said, and took my hand. “It’ s the
same for Denzell Hunter , aye? If he’ s bound to risk his life,
then it’ s my job to see he gets the most return from his
gambling.”
“Bearing in mind that the return of most gambling is a big,
fat zero,” I rem arked, trying to repossess the hand. “Hasn’ t
anyone ever told you that the house always wins?” He wasn’ t
letting go, but had begun to run the ball of his thumb gently
back and forth over the tips of my fingers.“A ye, well. Y e reckon the odds and cut the cards, Sassenach.
And it’ s not all  luck, ken?” The light had grown, in that
imperceptible predawn way . Nothing so blatant as a sunbeam;
just a gradual em er gence of objects as the shadows round them
went from black to gray to blue.
His thumb slipped inside my ha nd, and I curled my fingers
involuntarily over it.
“Why isn’ t there a word that me ans the opposite of ‘fade’?”
I a sked,  watching the lines of his face emer ge from night’ s
shadow . I traced the shape of on e rough brow with my thumb
and felt the springy mat of his short beard against the palm of
my hand, changing as I watched it from amorphous smudge to
a d istinc tion of tiny curls and wiry springs, a glowing mass of
auburn, gold, and silver , vigorous against his weathered skin.
“I dinna suppose ye need one,” he said. “If ye mean the
light.” H e looked at me and smiled as I saw his eyes trace the
outlines of my f ace. “If the ligh t is fading, the night’ s coming
on—and when the light grow s again, it’ s the night that’ s
fading, aye?”
It w as, too. W e  should sleep, but the army would be astir
around us shortly .
“Why is it that women don’ t make war , I wonder?”
“Y e’re no made for it, Sassena ch.” His hand cupped my
cheek, h ard and rough. “And it wouldna be right; you women
take so much more with ye, when ye go.”
“What do you mean by that?”
He m ade the sm all shrugging movement that meant he was
looking for a word or a notion, an unconscious movement, as
though h is coat was too tight, th ough he wasn’ t wearing one at
the moment.
“When a man d ies, it’ s only him,” he said. “And one is
much like another . A ye, a family needs a man, to feed them,
protect them. But any decent man can do it. A woman…” His
lips moved against my fingertips, a faint smile. “A womantakes life with her when she goes. A woman is… infinite
possibility .”
“Idiot,” I said, very softly . “If you think one man is just like
any other .”
W e lay for a bit, watching the light grow .
“How m any times have ye done it, Sassenach?” he asked
suddenly . “Sat betwixt the dark and the dawn, and held a
man’ s fear in the palms of your hands?”
“T oo ma ny ,” I said, but it wasn’ t the truth, and he knew it. I
heard hi s breath come, the fain test sound of humor , and he
turned m y hand palm up, his big thumb tracing the hills and
valleys, joints and calluses, lifeline and heartline, and the
smooth fleshy swell of the mo unt of V enus, where the faint
scar of the letter “J” was still barely visible. I’d held him in my
hand for the best part of my life.
“Part of  the job,” I said, meaning no flippancy , and he did
not take it that way .
“D’ye think I’m not afraid?” he  asked quietly . “When I do
my job?”
“Oh, you’re afraid,” I said. “But  you do it anyway . Y ou’re a
frigging gamble r—and the biggest gamble of all is a life, isn’ t
it? Maybe yours—maybe someone else’ s.”
“A ye, well,” he said softly . “Y e’d know about that, I
suppose.
“I’m the less bothered for myself,” he said thoughtfully .
“Looking at it al l in all, I mean, I’ve done the odd useful thing
here and there. My children are  grown; my grandchildren are
thriving—that’ s the most important thing, no?”
“It i s,” I said. The sun was u p; I heard a rooster crow ,
somewhere in the distance.
“W ell, so. I cann a say I’m so verra much afraid as I used to
be. I shouldna like dying, of c ourse—but there’d maybe be
less regret in it.  On the other hand”—one side of his mouth
turned u p as he looked at me—”while I’m maybe less afraidfor m yself, I’m that wee bit more reluctant to kill young men
who’ve not yet lived their lives.” And that, I thought, was as
close as I’d get to an apology for Denny Hunter .
“Going to assess the age of the people shooting at you, are
you?” I asked, sitting up and beg inning to brush hay out of my
hair .
“Dif ficult,” he admitted.
“And I sincerely hope that you  don’ t propose to let some
whippersnapper kill you, mere ly because they haven’ t had
such a full life as yours yet.”
He s at up, too, and faced me, se rious, ends of hay bristling
from hair and clothes.
“No,” he said. “I’ll kill them. I’ll just mind it more.” INDEPENDENCE DA Y
 Philadelphia
 July 4, 1777
 
G REY HAD NEVER been to Philadelphia before. Bar
the stree ts, whic h were execrable, it seemed a pleasant city .
Summer had graced the city’ s tr ees with huge verdant crowns,
and a walk left h im lightly dusted with leaf fragments and the
soles of his boo ts sticky with fallen sap. Perhaps it was the
febrile temperat ure of the air that was responsible for Henry’ s
apparent state of mind, he thought darkly .
Not that he blamed his nephew . Mrs. W oodcock was
lissome but rounded, with a lov ely face and a warm character .
And  she had nursed him away from death’ s door when the
local prison of ficer had brough t him to her , worried lest a
potentially lucrative prisoner die before yielding a full harvest.
That sor t of thing formed a bond, he knew—though he had
never , thank God, felt any sort of tendr esse  for any of the
women who had attended him in ill health. Except for…
“Shit,” he said involuntarily , causing a clerical-looking
gentleman to glare at him in passing.
He had clapped a mental teacup over the thought that had
buzzed through his head like a meddlesome fly . Unable not to
look at it, though , he cautiously lifted the cup and found Claire
Fraser under it. He relaxed a little.
Certainly not a tendr esse . On the other hand, he was
damned if he could have said what it had been. A most
peculiar sort of unsettling intimacy , at least—no doubt the
result of her bei ng Jamie Fraser ’ s wife and her knowing what
his own  feelings for Jamie were. He dismissed Claire Fraser ,
and went back to worrying about his nephew .
Pleasant Mrs. W oodcock undeniably was, and just as
undeniably rather too fond of H enry for a married woman—
though h er husb and was a rebel,  Henry had told him, and God
knew when or whether he mig ht return. W ell enough; therewas no danger o f Henry losing his head and marrying her , at
least. He  could imagine the scandal, should Henry bring home
a ca rpenter ’ s widow , and she a sable enchantress, to boot. He
grinned at the th ought and felt more charitable toward Mercy
W oodcock. She had, after all, saved Henry’ s life.
For now . The unwelcome thought buzzed in before he could
clap the  teacup over it. He cou ldn’ t avoid it for long; it kept
coming back.
He und erstood Henry’ s reluc tance to under go another
sur gery . And there was the linge ring fear that he might be too
weak to withstand it. But at the same time, he could not be
allowed to remain in his present state; he would simply
dwindle and die, once illness an d pain had drained the last of
his vitality . Not even the fleshly  attractions of Mrs. W oodcock
would hold him, once that happened.
No, the sur gery must be do ne, and soon. In Grey’ s
conversations with Dr . Franklin, the old gentleman had made
him acquainted with a friend, Dr . Benjamin Rush, who he
claimed was a most prodigious medical man. Dr . Franklin
ur ged G rey to visit him, should he ever find himself in the city
—had given Grey a letter of introduction, in fact. He was on
his w ay to pre sent this, in hope s that Dr . Rush might either be
practiced in sur gery or be able to refer him to someone who
was. Be cause, whether Henry wanted it or not, it had to be
done. G rey could not take He nry home to England in his
present state, and he had promis ed both Minnie and his brother
that he would b ring their youngest son back, were he still
alive.
His foot  slipped  on a muddy cobble, and he let out a whoop
and pitched sideways, arms pinwheeling for balance. He
caught himself and shook his c lothes back into order with a
good assumption of dignity , ignoring the giggles of two
milkmaids who had been watching.
Damn i t all, she was back. Claire Fraser . Why? … Of
course. The ether , as she called it. She’d asked him for a
carboy o f some sort of acid and  had told him that she requiredit to make ether . Not as in the ethereal realm but a chemical
substance that rendered people unconscious, so as to make
sur gery… painless.
He stopp ed dead  in the middle of the street. Jamie had told
him about his wife’ s experiments with the substance, with a
full acco unt of the amazing ope ration she had performed on a
young boy , he rendered completely senseless as she opened his
abdomen, removed an of fending or gan, and sewed him back
together . After which the child was right as a grig, apparently .
He walked on more slowly , thinking furiously . W ould she
come? It was a  laborious journey to almost anywhere from
Fraser ’ s Ridge. Not such a terr ible trip from the mountain to
the shore, though. It was summer , the weather was good; the
journey could be made in less than two weeks. And if she
would c ome to W ilmington, he could arrange for her to be
brought to Philadelphia on whatever naval vessel was
available—he knew people in the navy .
How long? How long might it take her—if she would
come? More sobering thought: how long did Henry have?
He was pulled from these troubling reflections by what
appeared to be a small riot proceeding down the street in his
direction. A number of people, m ost of them drunken to judge
by their behavio r , which involved a good deal of shouting and
pushing and waving of handkerchiefs. A young man was
beating a drum, with much enth usiasm and no skill, and two
children bore between them an outlandish banner , striped red
and white but with no legend upon it.
He press ed back  against a house , to give them room to pass.
They did not pa ss, however , but instead hauled up before a
house o n the opposite side o f the street and stood there
shouting slogans  in English and German. He caught the shout
of “Liberty ,” and someone blew a cavalry char ge upon a
trumpet. And then he caught the shout of “Rush! Rush! Rush!”
Good G od, it must be the house  he was seeking, that of Dr .
Rush. The mob seemed good-humored; he supposed they did
not mean to dra g the doctor out for a dose of tar and feathers,this being a notable form of public entertainment, or so he had
been told. Cautiously , he approached and tapped a young
woman on the shoulder .
“I beg your pardon.” He had to lean close and shout into her
ear to be heard ; she whirled and blinked in surprise, then
caught s ight of his butterfly wa istcoat and broke into a broad
smile. He smiled back.
“I am  seeking D r . Benjamin Rush,” he shouted. “Is this his
house?”
“Y es, it is.” A young man beside the young woman heard
him and turned, his eyebrows shooting up at sight of Grey .
“Y ou have business with Dr . Rush?”
“I have a letter of introduction to the doctor from a Dr .
Franklin, a mutual—”
The you ng man’ s face broke i nto a huge grin. Before he
could sa y anything, though, the door of the house opened and
a sle nder , well-dressed man in his thirties came out onto the
stoop. T here was a roar from the crowd, and the man, who
must sur ely be Dr . Rush himself, held out his hands to them,
laughing. The noise quieted for a  moment, the man leaning out
to talk with someone in the cro wd. Then he ducked into the
house, came out again with his coat on, came down the steps
to a  roar of applause, and the whole mob moved of f again,
banging and bugling with renewed fervor .
“Come along!” the young man bellowed in his ear . “There’ll
be free beer!”
Which i s how Lord John Grey found himself in the taproom
of a prosperous tavern, celebrat ing the first anniversary of the
publication of the Declaration of Independence. There were
political speeches of an impassioned, if not very eloquent,
variety , and it w as in the course of these that Grey learned that
Dr . Rus h was not only a w ealthy and influential rebel
sympathizer but a prominent rebel himself; in fact, as he
learned from his newfound friends, both Rush and  Dr .Franklin turned out to have sig ned the seditious document in
the first place.
W ord sp read through the people round them that Grey was a
friend of Franklin’ s, and he was  much hailed in consequence,
eventually being conveyed by insensible degrees through the
crowd until he found himself face-to-face with Benjamin
Rush.
It wa sn’ t the firs t time Grey had  been in close proximity to a
criminal, and he kept his compo sure. This was plainly not the
time to lay his nephew’ s situ ation before Rush, and Grey
contented himse lf with shaking the young doctor by the hand
and mentioning his connection with Franklin. Rush was most
cordial, and shouted over the n oise that Grey must come to
call at his house when they both should be at leisure, perhaps
in the morning.
Grey expressed his great willingness to do so and retired
gracefully through the crowd, hoping that the Crown would
not manage to h ang Rush before he had a chance to examine
Henry .
A racke t in the street outside put a momentary stop to the
festivities. There was considerable shouting and the thump of
projectiles striking the front of the building. One of these—
which p roved to  be a lar ge, muddy rock—struck and shattered
a p ane of the establishment’ s window , allowing the bellows of
“T raitors! Renegados!” to be heard more clearly .
“Shut y our face, lickspittle!” shouted someone inside the
tavern. G lobs of mud and mor e rocks were hurled, some of
these coming through the open door and broken window ,
along with patriotic shouts of “God Save the King!”
“Geld the Royal Brute!” shouted Grey’ s earlier
acquaintance in reply , and half the tavern rushed out into the
street, some pausing to break le gs from stools to assist in the
political discussion which then ensued.
Grey was somewhat concerned lest Rush be set upon by the
Loyalists in the street and attacked before he could be of use toHenry , but Rush and a few others whom he took to be
prominent rebels, as well, hung back from the fray and, after
taking brief counsel, elected to leave through the tavern’ s
kitchen.
Grey found himself left in the  company of a man from
Norfolk named  Paine, a maln ourished, ill-dressed wretch,
lar ge of nose a nd vivid of pe rsonality , possessed of strong
opinions on the subjects of liberty and democracy and a most
remarkable command of epithet regarding the King. Finding
conversation dif ficult, as he could not reasonably express any
of h is ow n cont rary opinions on these subjects, Grey excused
himself with the intention of fo llowing Rush and his friends
out the back way .
The riot outside, having reached a brief crescendo, had
proceeded to its natural concl usion with the flight of the
Loyalists, and people now had  begun to flow back into the
tavern, borne on a tide of righteous indignation and self-
congratulation. Among these was a tall, slender , dark man,
who loo ked round from his conversation, met Grey’ s eye, and
stopped dead.
Grey walked up to him, hoping that the beating of his heart
was not audible above the fading noise in the street.
“Mr . B eauchamp,” he said,  and took Perseverance
W ainwright by hand and wrist , in what might be taken for
cordial greeting but was in real ity firm detention. “A private
word with you, sir?”
 
HE WO ULD NOT bring Percy to the house he had taken
for hims elf and  Dottie. Dottie would not recognize him, for
she had not even  been born when Percy vanished from Grey’ s
life; it was mer ely the operation of the instinct which would
have prevented him giving a sm all child a venomous snake to
play with.Percy , whatever  his motive, did not suggest taking Grey to
his  lodgings, probably didn’ t want Grey knowing where he
was staying, in case he though t to abscond quietly . After a
moment’ s indecision—for Grey did not yet know the city—
Grey agreed to Percy’ s suggestion that they walk to the
common called Southeast Square.
“It’ s a potter ’ s f ield,” Percy said, leading the way . “Where
they bury strangers to the city .”
“How appropriate,” Grey said, but Percy either didn’ t hear
or af fected not t o. It was some way , and they didn’ t talk much,
the streets being full of people. Despite the holiday aspects and
the striped banners hung here a nd there—they all seemed to
have a field o f stars, though he hadn’ t seen the same
arrangement twice, and the stripes varied in size and color ,
some having red, white, and blue stripes, some only red and
white—there was a frenetic air to the gaiety , and an edged
sense of danger in the streets. Philadelphia might be the rebels’
capital, but it was far from being a stronghold.
The common was quieter , as  might be expected of a
graveyard. At that, it was surprisingly pleasant. There were
only a few wood en grave markers here and there, giving such
details as were known about the  person interred beneath them;
no one would have gone to the expense of placing gravestones,
though some charitable soul had erected a lar ge stone cross
upon a plinth in the center of the field. W ithout conference,
they headed for this object, fol lowing the course of a small
creek that ran through the common.
It had occurred to Grey that P ercy might have suggested
their des tination in order to give himself time to think on the
way . W ell enough—he’d been thinking, too. So when Percy
sat down upon the base of the pl inth and turned to him with an
air of expectatio n, he didn’ t bother with observations on the
weather .
“T ell me about the Baron Amandine’ s second sister ,” he
said, standing before Percy .
Percy blinked, startled, but then smiled.“Really , John, you amaze me. Claude didn’ t tell you about
Amelie, I’m sure.”
Grey did n’ t reply to that, but folded his hands beneath the
tail of his coat and waited. Percy thought for a moment, then
shrugged.
“All righ t. She was Claude’ s old er sister; my wife, Cecile, is
the younger .”
” ‘W as,’ ” Grey repeated. “So she’ s dead.”
“She’ s been dead for some f orty years. Why are you
interested in her?” Percy pulled a handkerchief from his sleeve
to dab at his tem ples; the day was hot, and it had been a long
walk; Grey’ s own shirt was damp.
“Where did she die?”
“In a brothel in  Paris.” That stopped Grey in his tracks.
Percy sa w it and gave a wry smile. “If you must know , John, I
am looking for her son.”
Grey stared at him for a mom ent, then slowly sat down
beside him. The gray stone of t he plinth was warm under his
buttocks.
“All righ t,” he said, after a moment. “T ell me, if you would
be so good.”
Percy gave him a sideways glance of amusement—full of
wariness, but still amused.
“There are things I cannot tell yo u, John, as you must surely
appreciate. By the way , I hear that there is a rather heated
discussion taking place between the British secretaries of state
as to  which of them shall make an approach regarding my
previous of fer— and to whom, exactly , to make it. I suppose
this is your doing? I thank you.”
“Don’ t c hange t he subject. I’m not asking you about your
previous of fer .” Not yet, anyway . “I’m asking you about
Amelie B eauchamp and her son. I cannot see how they may be
connected with the other matter , so I assume they have some
personal significance to you. Naturally , there are things youcannot tell me regarding the lar ger matter”—he bowed slightly
—”but this mystery about the baron’ s sister seems somewhat
more personal.”
“It is.” Percy wa s turning something over in his mind; Grey
could see it wor king behind his eyes. The eyes were lined and
a lit tle pouched but the same as ever; a warm, lively brown,
the c olor of sherry-sack. His fi ngers drummed briefly on the
stone, th en stopped, and he turned to Grey with an air of
decision.
“V ery well. Bulldog that you are, if I don’ t  tell you, you will
doubtless be following me all ov er Philadelphia, in an ef fort to
discover my purpose in being here.”
This wa s precis ely what Grey intended doing in any case,
but he made an indeterminate noise that might be taken as
encouragement before asking, “What is  your purpose in being
here?”
“I’m looking for a printer named Fer gus Fraser .” Grey
blinked at that; he hadn’ t been expecting any concrete answer .
“Who is … ?”
Percy held up a hand, folding down the fingers as he spoke.
“He is, first, the son of one James Fraser , a notable ex-
Jacobite and current rebel. He is, secondly , a printer , as
indicated—and, I suspect, a rebel like his father . And, thirdly , I
strongly suspect that he is the son of Amelie Beauchamp.”
There were blue and red dragonflies hovering over the
creek; Grey felt as though one of these insects had flown
suddenly up his nose.
“Y ou are telling me that James  Fraser had an illegitimate
son by a French whore? Who happened also to be the daughter
of a n ancient no ble family?” Shock did not begin to describe
his feelings, but he kept his tone light, and Percy laughed.
“No. Th e printer  is  Fraser ’ s son, but is adopted. He took the
boy from a bro thel in Paris m ore than thirty years ago.” A
trickle of sweat ran down the side of Percy’ s neck, and hewiped it  away . The warmth of the day had made his cologne
blossom on his skin; Grey cau ght the hint of amber gris and
carnation, spice and musk together .
“Amelie was, as I said, Claude’ s older sister . In her teens
she was seduced by a much old er man, a married nobleman,
and got with child. The normal thing would have been for her
simply to be ma rried hastily of f to a complaisant husband, but
the nobl eman’ s wife died quite suddenly , and Amelie made a
fuss, insisting that since he was now free, he must marry her .”
“He was not so inclined?”
“No. Claude’ s father was, though. I suppose he thought such
a m arriage would improve the f amily fortunes; the comte was
a ve ry wealthy man, and wh ile not political, did have a
certain… standing.”
The old Baron Amandine had been willing to keep things
quiet in the beginning, but as he  began to see the possibilities
of th e situation, he became bold er and threatened all kinds of
things, f rom a complaint to the King—for old Amandine was
active at court, unlike his son— to a lawsuit for damages and
an application to the Church for excommunication.
“Could he actually have done that?” Grey asked, fascinated
despite his reservations about P ercy’ s veracity . Percy smiled
briefly .
“He cou ld have complained to the King. In any case, he
didn’ t get the chance. Amelie disappeared.”
The girl  had vanished from her home in the middle of one
night, taking her jewels. It was thought that perhaps she had
intended to run away to her lover , in the hope that he would
give in and marry her , but the comte professed complete
ignorance of the matter , and no one came forward to say that
they had  seen her , either leaving T r ois Fleches  or enter ing the
Paris mansion of the Comte St. Germain.
“And yo u think she somehow ended in a Paris brothel?”
Grey said incredulously . “How ? And if so, how did you
discover this?”“I found her marriage lines.”
“What?”
“A contract of marriage, between Amelie Elise LeV igne
Beauchamp and Robert-Francoise Quesnay de St. Germain.
Signed b y both parties. And a priest. It was in the library at
T r ois Fleches , inside the family Bible. Claude and Cecile are
not very religiously inclined, I’m afraid,” Percy said, shaking
his head.
“And you are?” That made Perc y laugh; he knew that Grey
knew precisely what his feelings regarding religion were.
“I was bored,” he said without apology .
“Life at T r ois Fleches must  have been tedious indeed, if it
forced you to read the Bible. Did the sub-gardener quit?”
“Did—oh, Emile.” Percy grinne d. “No, but he had a terrible
bout of la grippe  tha t month. Co uldn’ t breathe through his
nose at all, poor man.”
Grey felt again a treacherous impulse to laugh, but
restrained it, and Percy went on without a pause.
“I actually wasn’ t r eading  it; I have all of the most
excessive damnations memorized, after all. I was interested in
the cover .”
“Heavily bejeweled, was it?” Grey asked dryly , and Percy
gave him a look of mild of fense.
“It has not always  got to do with money , John, even for
those of us not blessed with such substance as yourself.”
“My apologies,” said Grey . “Why the Bible, then?”
“I will have you know that I am a bookbinder of no mean
repute,” Percy said, preening a l ittle. “I took it up in Italy as a
means of making a living. After you so gallantly saved my
life. Tha nk you  for that, by the way ,” he said, with a direct
look whose sudden seriousness m ade Grey look down to avoid
his eyes.“Y ou’re welcom e,” he said gru f fly , and, bending, carefully
induced a small green caterpillar that was inching its way
across the polished toe of his boot to inch onto his finger .
“Anyway ,” Percy went on, not losing a beat, “I discovered
this curi ous document. I had h eard of the family scandal, of
course, and recognized the names at once.”
“Y ou asked the present baron about it?”
“I d id. What did  you think of Claude, by the way?” Percy
had alwa ys been like quicksilver , Grey thought, and he hadn’ t
lost any of his mutability with age.
“Bad ca rdplayer . A wonderfu l voice, though—does he
sing?”
“Indeed he does. And you’re ri ght about the cards. He can
keep a secret, if he likes, but he can’ t lie at all. Y ou’d be
amazed at how powerful a thin g perfect honesty is, in some
circumstances,” Percy added ref lectively . “It almost makes me
think there might be something in the Eighth Commandment.”
Grey m uttered something about “more honored in the
breach,” but then coughed and begged that Percy might
continue.
“He didn’ t know about the marr iage contract, I’m sure of it.
He was genuinely staggered. A nd after a certain amount of
hesitation—’bloody , bold, and resolute’ may be your
watchwords, Joh n, but they are  not his—he gave his consent
for me to dig into the matter .”
Grey ignored the implied flattery—if that’ s what it was, and
he thought it was—and carefully deposited the caterpillar onto
the leaves of what looked like an edible bush.
“Y ou looked for the priest,” he said with certainty .
Percy laughed with what sounded like genuine pleasure, and
it occurred to Grey with a small shock that of course he knew
Percy’ s mind, and Percy his; they had been conversing,
through the veils of statecraft an d secrecy , for many years. Ofcourse, P ercy had likely known to whom he was talking, and
Grey hadn’ t.
“Y es, I did. He was dead—murdered. Killed in the street at
night w hile hurrying to give the last rites to a dying
parishioner , such a terrible thing. A week after the
disappearance of Amelie Beauchamp.”
This wa s beginning to rouse Grey’ s professional interest,
though the private side of him was still more than wary .
“The ne xt thing would have bee n the comte—but if he was
capable of killing a priest to ke ep his secrets, it would have
been dangerous to approach him directly ,” Grey said. “His
servants, then?”
Percy nodded, mouth quirked at one corner in appreciation
of Grey’ s acuity .
“The comte was dead, too—or he disappeared, at least; he
had a reputation as a sorceror , oddly enough—and he died a
good ten  years after Amelie. But I looked for his old servants,
yes. I found a few of them. For some people, it really is  always
about money , and the assistant coachman was one of those.
T wo days after A melie disappeared, he delivered a carpet to a
brothel near the Rue Faubor g. A very heavy carpet that had
about it a smell of opium—which he recognized, because he
had at one point  transported a troupe of Chinese acrobats who
came to entertain at a fete at the mansion.”
“And so you went to the brothel. Where money…”
“They say water is the universal solvent,” Percy said,
shaking his head, “but it isn’ t. Y ou could plunge a man into a
barrel of freezing water and leave him for a week, and you
would accomplish much less than you might with a modest
quantity of gold.”
Grey silently noted the adjective “freezing,” and nodded to
Percy to continue.
“It took some time, repeated visits, dif ferent attempts—the
madam was a true professional, meaning that whoever had
paid her predecessor had done so on a staggering scale, andher door keeper , while old enough, had had his tongue torn out
at a n early age ; no help there . And of course none of the
whores had been there when the infamous carpet was
delivered, that being so long before.”
He h ad, however , patiently trace d the families of the present
whores—for som e occupations run in families—and managed
after months of work to discove r an old woman who had been
employed at the brothel and wh o recognized the miniature of
Amelie that he had brought from T r ois Fleches .
The girl  had indeed been bro ught to the brothel, in the
middle stages of pregnancy . That had not mattered
particularly; there were patrons with such tastes. A few
months later , she had been d elivered of a son. She had
survived childbi rth but died a year later , during a plague of
influenza.
“And I could not begin  t o tell y ou the dif ficulties of finding
out anyt hing about a child bor n in a Paris brothel forty-odd
years ago, my dear .” Percy sighed, employing his handkerchief
again.
“But your name is Perseverance,” Grey noted with extreme
dryness, and Percy glanced sharply at him.
“Do you know ,” he said lightly , “I believe you are the only
person in the world who knows that?” And from the
expression in his eyes, that was one too many .
“Y our secret is s afe with me,” G rey said. “That one, at least.
What about Denys Randall-Isaacs?”
It worke d. Percy’ s face shimmered like a pool of quicksilver
in th e sun. In half a heartbeat, he had the perfect blankness
back in place—but it was too late.
Grey laughed, though without humor , and stood up.
“Thank you, Perseverance,” he said, and walked away
through the grassy graves of the nameless poor .
That night, when his household was asleep, he took pen and
ink to write to Arthur Norringto n, to Harry Quarry , and to hisbrother . T oward  dawn, he began, for the first time in two
years, to write to Jamie Fraser . BA TTLE OF BENNINGT ON
 General Burgoyne’ s camp
 September 1 1, 1777
 
T HE SMOKE OF burnt and burn ing fields hung over the
camp, had done so for days . The Americans were still
withdrawing, destroying the countryside in their wake.
W illiam was with Sandy Lindsay , talking about the best way
to co ok a turkey —one of Lindsay’ s scouts having just brought
him one—when the letter arrived. It was likely W illiam’ s
imagination tha t a dreadful sil ence fell upon the camp, the
earth sho ok, and the veil of the t emple was rent in twain. But it
was ver y shortly apparent that something had happened,
nonetheless.
There was a definite change in the air , something amiss in
the rhythms of speech and movement among the men
surrounding the m. Balcarres felt it, too, and stopped in his
examination of the turkey’ s outspread wing, looking at
W illiam with eyebrows raised.
“What?” said W illiam.
“I d on’ t know , b ut it isn’ t good.” Balcarres thrust the limp
turkey into his orderly’ s hands and, snatching up his hat, made
for Bur goyne’ s tent, W illiam on his heels.
They found Bur goyne tight-lipped and white with anger , his
senior o f ficers i n clusters round him, speaking to one another
in low , shocked voices.
Captain Sir Francis Clerke, th e general’ s aide-de-camp,
emer ged from the press, head down and face shadowed.
Balcarres caught at his elbow as he passed.
“Francis—what’ s happened?”
Captain Clerke was looking not iceably agitated. He glanced
behind him into the tent, then stepped aside and moved out of
earshot, taking Balcarres and W illiam with him.
“Howe,” he said. “He’ s not coming.”“Not coming?” W illiam said stupidly . “But—is he not
leaving New Y ork after all?”
“He’ s leaving,” Clerke said, his lips so tight it was a wonder
he could speak at all. “T o invade Pennsylvania.”
“But—” Balcarres darted an appalled look toward the
entrance to the tent, then back at Clerke.
“Exactly .”
The true proportions of the disaster were revealing
themselves to W illiam. General Howe was not merely cocking
a snook at Gen eral Bur goyne by ignoring his plan, which
would be bad enough from Bur goyne’ s point of view . By
choosing to march on Philadelp hia rather than coming up the
Hudson to join Bur goyne’ s troops, Howe had left Bur goyne
essentially to his own device s, in terms of supply and
reinforcement.
In other words, t hey were on the ir own, separated from their
supply trains, with the disagreeable choice of continuing to
pursue the retreating Americans through a wilderness from
which all sustenance had been stripped—or turning round and
marching ignominiously back to  Canada, through a wilderness
from which all sustenance had been stripped.
Balcarres had been expostulating along these lines to Sir
Francis, who rubbed a hand over his face in frustration,
shaking his head.
“I know ,” he said. “If you’ll excuse me, my lords—”
“Where are you going?” W illiam asked, and Clerke glanced
at him.
“T o tell Mrs. L ind,” Clerke said. “I thought I’d best warn
her .” Mr s. Lind was the wife of the chief commisary of ficer .
She was also General Bur goyne’ s mistress.
 
WHETHER MRS. LIND had exerted her undeniable gifts
to good ef fect, or whether the general’ s natural resiliency ofcharacter had asserted itself, th e blow of Howe’ s letter was
swiftly encompassed. Whatever you want to say about him ,
W illiam wrote in his weekly letter to Lord John, he knows the
benefit o f certai n decision and swift action. W e have r esumed
our pursuit of the Americans ’ chief body of tr oops with
r edoubled effort. Most of our horses have been abandoned,
stolen, o r eaten. I have quite worn thr ough the soles of one
pair of boots .
In the meantim e, we r eceive intelligence fr om one of the
scouts to the effect that the town of Bennington, which is not
too far distant, is being used as a gathering place for the
American commissary . By r epor t, it is lightly guar ded, and so
the Gen eral is sending Colone l Baum, one of the Hessians,
with five hundr ed tr oops to captur e these much-needed
supplies. W e leave in the morning .
Whether his drunken conversa tion with Balcarres was in
part responsible, W illiam never knew , but he had discovered
that he was now  spoken of as being “good with Indians.” And
whether it was owing to this dubious capacity or to the fact
that he could speak basic German, he found himself on the
morning of August 12 deputed to accompany Colonel Baum’ s
foraging expedition, this including a number of dismounted
Brunswick cavalry , two three-pounder artillery pieces, and a
hundred Indians.
By report, the Americans were receiving cattle, funneled out
of New England, these being collected in quantity in
Bennington, as well as a considerable number of wagons,
these full of corn, flour , and other necessaries.
It w as, f or a wonder , not raining when they set out, and that
alone gave the expedition a feeling of optimism. Anticipation
of food increased this sense significantly . Rations had been
short for what seemed a very long time, though in fact it had
been onl y a week or so. Still, more than a day spent marching
without adequate food seems a l ong time, as W illiam had good
cause to know .Many o f the Indians were still mounted; they circled the
main body of so ldiers, riding ahead a little way to scout the
road, coming back to of fer guid ance through or around places
where th e road—no more than a trace at the best of times—
had given up the fight and been absorbed by the forest or
drowned by one of the rain-swollen streams that leapt
unexpectedly out of the hills. Bennington was near a river
called the W alloomsac, and as they walked, W illiam was
discussing in a desultory wa y with one of the Hessian
lieutenants whether it might be possible to load the stores onto
rafts for transport to a rendezvous downstream.
This dis cussion was entirely theoretical, since neither of
them knew where the W alloomsac went nor whether it was
navigable to any extent, but it  gave both men a chance to
practice the other ’ s language and so passed the time on a long,
hot march.
“My father spent much time in Germany ,” W illiam told
Ober -Leftenant Gruenwald, in his careful, slow German. “He
is of the food of Hanover very fond.”
Gruenwald, from Hesse-Cassel, allowed himself a derisive
twitch of the m ustache at mention of Hanover , but contented
himself with the observation that even a Hanoverian could
roast a cow and perhaps boil some potatoes to accompany it.
But his own mother made a dish from the flesh of swine and
apples, beswimm ing in red wine and spiced with nutmeg and
cinnamon, that made his mouth water only to remember .
W ater was running down Gruenwald’ s face, sweat making
tracks in  the dust and dampeni ng the collar of his light-blue
coat. He took of f his tall grenadier ’ s headdress and wiped his
head with a giant spotted kerchief, sodden from many earlier
employments.
“I th ink we will maybe not find cinnamon today ,” W illie
said. “Maybe a pig, though.”
“If we do, I will him roast for you,” Gruenwald assured
him. “A s for apples …” he tuc ked a hand into his tunic andwithdrew a handful of small red  crab apples, which he shared
out with W illiam. “I haf f a bushel of these. I haf f-“
Excited yips from an Indian rid ing back down the column
interrupted him, and W illiam looked up to see the rider throw
back an arm, gesturing behind him and shouting, “River!”
The word enlivened the sagging columns, and W illiam saw
the cavalry—who had insisted upon wearing their high boots
and their broadswords, in spite o f their lack of horses, and had
suf fered in consequence—draw themselves up, clanking
loudly with anticipation.
Another shout came from the forward line.
“Cow turds!”
That caused a g eneral cheer and much laughter among the
men, who hastened on with a quicker step. W illiam saw
Colonel Baum, who did still h ave a horse, turn out of the
column and wait on the roadside, leaning down to speak
briefly with the of ficers as they  came past. W illiam saw his
aide lean close, pointing up a small hill opposite.
“What d o you think—” he said, turning to Gruenwald, and
was star tled to find the ober -leftenant staring at him blank-
faced, his jaw ha nging open. The man’ s hand loosened and fell
to his side, and the mitred helmet fell and rolled away in the
dust. W illiam blinked and saw a thick worm of red snake its
way slowly down from under Gruenwald’ s dark hair .
Gruenwald sat down quite suddenly and fell backward in
the road, his face gone a muddy white.
“Shit!” said W illiam, and jerked suddenly to an awareness
of what had just happened. “Ambush!”  he bellowed at the top
of his lungs. “Das ist ein Uberfall!!”
There were shouts of alarm risin g from the column, and the
crack of sporadic firing from the woods. W illiam grabbed
Gruenwald unde r the arms and dragged him hastily into the
shelter of a gro up of pine trees. The ober -leftenant was still
alive, th ough his coat was wet with sweat and blood. W illiam
made sure the German’ s pistol was loaded and in his handbefore taking his own pistol an d dashing toward Baum, who
was stan ding in his stirrups, shrieking directions in high, shrill
German.
He c aught only a word here an d there and looked ur gently
round, t o see whether he could  tell what the colonel’ s orders
were fro m the actions of the Hessians. He caught sight of a
little gro up of scouts, running d own the road toward him, and
ran to meet them.
“Goddamned lot of rebels,” one scout gasped, out of breath,
pointing behind him. “Coming.”
“Where? How far?” He felt as t hough he were about to run
out o f his skin, but forced himself to stand still, speak calmly ,
breathe.
A mile, maybe two. He did bre athe then, and managed to
ask how  many there were. Maybe two hundred, maybe more.
Armed with muskets, but no artillery .
“Right. Go back and keep an eye on them.” He turned back
toward Colonel Baum, feeling t he surface of the road strange
under his feet, a s though it was n’ t quite where he expected it
to be.
 
THEY DUG IN, hastily but  ef ficiently , entrenching
themselves be hind shallow earthworks and makeshift
barricades of fallen trees. The g uns were dragged up the small
hill and aimed to  cover the road. The rebels, of course, ignored
the road, and swarmed in from both sides.
There might have been two hundred men in the first wave; it
was impossible to count them as  they darted through the heavy
wood. W illiam could see the fli cker of movement and fired at
it, b ut without any great hope of hitting anyone. The wave
hesitated, but only for a moment.
Then a strong voice bellowed, somewhere behind the rebel
front, “W e take them now , or Molly Stark’ s a widow tonight!”“What?” said W illiam, disbelieving. Whatever the man
shouting had meant, his exhortation had a marked ef fect, for
an enorm ous number of rebels came boiling out of the trees,
headed at a mad run for the guns. The soldiers minding the
guns promptly fled, and so did a good many of the others.
The rebe ls were making short w ork of the rest, and W illiam
had just settled down grimly to do what he could before they
got him , when two Indians came springing over the rolling
ground, seized him under the arms, and, yanking him to his
feet, propelled him rapidly away .
Which was how Lieutenant Ellesmere found himself once
more cast in th e role of Cassandra, reporting the debacle at
Bennington to General Bur goy ne. Men killed and wounded,
guns lost—and not a single cow to be shown for it.
And I haven’ t yet killed a single r ebel, either , he thought
tiredly , m aking his way slowly back to his tent afterward. He
thought he should regret that, but wasn’ t sure he did. Deserter Game, r ound II
 
J AMIE HAD BEEN bathing in the river , sluicing sweat
and grime from his body , wh en he heard remarkably odd
swearing in French. The words were French, but the
sentiments expressed were definitely not. Curious, he
clambered out of the water , dres sed, and went down the bank a
little wa y , where he discovered a young man waving his arms
and gesturing in an agitated attempt to make himself
understood to a bemused party of workmen. As half of them
were Germans and the rest Americans from V ir ginia, his
ef forts to communicate with them in French had so far
succeeded only in entertaining them.
Jamie had introduced himself and of fered his services as
interpreter . Whic h is how he had come to spend a good bit of
each day with the youn g Polish engineer whose
unpronounceable last name had quickly been shortened to
“Kos.”
He found Kos both intelligent and rather touching in his
enthusiasm—and was himself interested in the fortifications
Kosciuszko (for he prided himself on being able to say it
correctly) was building. Kos, for his part, was both grateful for
the linguistic assistance and interested in the occasional
observations and  suggestions that Jamie was able to make, as
the result of his conversations with Brianna.
T alking about vectors and stresses made him miss her
almost u nbearably but at the sam e time brought her somehow
nearer to him, and he found himself spending more and more
time wit h the young Pole, lear ning bits of his language and
allowing Kos to practice wha t he fondly imagined to be
English.
“What is it that brought ye here?” Jamie asked one day . In
spite of the lack of pay , a remarkable number of Europeanof ficers had come to join—or tried to join—the Continental
army , evidently feeling that even if the prospects of plunder
were limited, they could bamboozle the Congress into granting
them rank as g enerals, which they could then parlay into
further occupation back in Europe. Some of these dubious
volunteers were  actually of use, but he’d heard a good bit of
muttering about those who weren’ t. Thinking of Matthias
Fermoy , he was inclined to mutter a bit himself.
Kos wasn’ t one of these, though.
“W ell, first, money ,” he said fr ankly , when asked how he
had com e to be in America. “My brother the manor in Poland
has, but family no money , nothing for me. No girl look at me
without money .” He shrugged. “No place in Polish army , but I
know ho w to build things, I com e where things to build.” He
grinned. “Maybe girls, too. Girls with good family , good
money .”
“If ye came for money and girls , man, ye joined the wrong
army ,” Jamie said dryly , and Kosciuszko laughed.
“I say first  m oney ,” he cor rected. “I come to Philadelphia,
read there La Declaration .” He pronounce d it in French, and
bared his head in reverence at the name, clasping his sweat-
stained hat to his breast. “Thi s thing, this writing… I am
ravish.”
So ravis hed was he by the sentiments expressed in that
noble d ocument that he had a t once sought out its author .
While p robably surprised by the sudden advent of a passionate
young Pole in his midst, Thomas Jef ferson had made him
welcome, and the two men had  spent most of a day deeply
involved in the discussion of philosophy (in French), from
which they had emer ged fast friends.
“Great man,” Kos assured Jamie  solemnly , crossing himself
before putting his hat back on. “God keep him safe.”
“Dieu accor de- lui la sagesse,”  Jamie replied. God grant
him wisdom . He thought that Jef ferson would certainly be safe,
as he was no soldier . Which reminded him uncomfortably ofBenedict Arnold, but that was not a matter he could—or would
—do anything about.
Kos had  wiped a strand of string y dark hair out of his mouth
and shaken his head.
“Maybe wife, one day , if God wills. This—what we do here
—more important than wife.”
They ret urned to work, but Jamie found his mind dwelling
with interest on the conversation . The notion that it was better
to spend  one’ s life in pursuit o f a noble goal than merely to
seek safety—he agreed with that entirely . But surely such
purity of purpose was the provin ce of men without families? A
pardox t here: a man who sought his own safety was a coward;
a man who risk ed his family’ s safety was a poltroon, if not
worse.
That led on to more rambling paths of thought and further
interesting paradoxes: Do women hold back the evolution of
such things as freedom and othe r social ideals, out of fear for
themselves or their children? O r do they in fact inspire such
things—and the  risks required to reach them—by providing
the things worth fighting for? N ot merely fighting to defend,
either , but to propel forward, fo r a man wanted more for his
children than he would ever have.
He would have to ask Claire what she thought of this,
though he smiled to think of some of the things she might
think of it, particularly the part about whether women hindered
social ev olution by their nature. She’d told him something of
her o wn experiences in the Grea t W ar—he couldn’ t think of it
by any other na me, though she told him there was another ,
earlier one by that name. She said disparaging things about
heroes now and then, but only when he’d hurt himself; she
knew fine what men were for .
W ould he be her e, in fact, if it w eren’ t for her? W ould he do
this anyway , only for the sake o f the ideals of the Revolution,
if he were not assured of victory ? He had to admit that only a
madman, an idealist, or a truly desperate man would be here
now . An y sane person who knew anything about armies wouldhave shaken his head and turned away , appalled. He often felt
appalled, himself.
But he would, i n fact, do it—w ere he alone. A man’ s life
had to have mor e purpose than only to feed himself each day .
And this was a grand purpose—grander , maybe, than anyone
else fighting for it knew . And if it took his own life in the
doing… he wouldn’ t enjoy it, but he’d be comforted in the
dying, k nowing he’d helped. After all, it wasn’ t as though he
would be leaving his wife helpl ess; unlike most wives, Claire
would have a place to go if something befell him.
He was once m ore in the river , floating on his back and
thinking along these lines, whe n he heard the gasp. It was a
feminine gasp, and he put his fe et down at once and stood up,
wet hair  streaming over his fac e. He shoved it back to find
Rachel H unter s tanding on the bank, both hands pressed over
her e yes and eve ry line of her body strained in an eloquence of
distress.
“Did ye want m e, Rachel?” he asked, wiping water out of
his eyes  in an e f fort to locate j ust where on the riverbank he
had left his clothes. She gasped again and turned her face in
his direction, hands still over her eyes.
“Friend James! Thy wife said I would find thee here. I beg
pardon for—please! Come out at once!” Her anguish broke out
and her hands d ropped, though she kept her eyes tight shut as
she reached out to him, pleading.
“What—”
“Denny! The British have him!”
Cold shot through his veins, mu ch colder than the wind on
his exposed wet skin.
“Where? How? Y e can look now ,” he added, hastily
buttoning his breeches.
“He wen t with another man, posing as deserters.” He was
up the bank beside her , shirt over his arm, and saw that she
had her brother ’ s spectacles in the pocket of her apron; herhand kept going to them, clutching them. “I told him not to, I
did!”
“I told him, too,” Jamie said grimly . “Are ye sure, lass?”
She nod ded, pal e as a sheet and her eyes huge in her face,
but not—not yet—weeping.
“The other man—he came back , just now , and ran to find
me. He—it was ill-luck, he said; they were brought before a
major , and it was the same man who had threatened to hang
Denny when he did it last time! The other man ran for it and
escaped, but they caught Denn y , and this time, this time…”
She was gasping for breath and  could barely speak for dread,
he saw . He put a hand on her arm.
“Find the other man and send h im to my tent, so he can tell
me e xactly where your brother is. I’ll go to fetch Ian and we’ll
get him back.” He squeezed her arm gently to make her look at
him, and she did, though so distracted he thought she barely
saw him.
“Dinna fash yourself. W e’ll g et him back for ye,” he
repeated gently . “I swear it, by Christ and His Mother .”
“Thee must not swear—oh, the devil with it!” she cried,
then clapped a hand over her  mouth. She shut her eyes,
swallowed, and took it away again.
“Thank you,” she said.
“Y e’re welcome ,” he said, with an eye to the sinking sun.
Did the British prefer to hang people at sunset or at dawn?
“W e’ll get him back,” he said  once more, firmly . Dead or
alive .
 
THE CAMP’S commanding of ficer had built a gibbet in
the center of the camp. It was a crude af fair of unbarked logs
and rou gh timber , and from th e holes and gouges round its
nails, had been disassembled and moved several times. Itlooked ef fective , though, and the dangling noose gave Jamie a
feeling of ice in his water .
“W e’ve played the deserter game once too often,” Jamie
whispered to his nephew . “Or maybe three.”
“D’ye th ink he’ s  ever used it?” Ian murmured back, peering
down at the sinister thing through their screen of oak saplings.
“He wouldna go to that much work only to scare someone.”
It scared him , bad ly . He didn ’ t point out to Ian the spot near
the bottom of the main upright, where someone’ s—or
someones’—desperately flailing feet had kicked away chunks
of the bark. The  makeshift gibbet wasn’ t high enough for the
drop to break a m an’ s neck; a m an hanged on it would strangle
slowly .
He touched his own neck in reflexive aversion, Roger Mac’ s
mangled throat and its ugly raw  scar clear in his mind. Even
clearer was the memory of the grief that had overwhelmed
him, coming to take down Rog er Mac from the tree they’d
hanged him on, knowing him dead and the world changed
forever . It had been, too, though he hadn’ t died.
W ell, it wasn’ t going to change for Rachel Hunter . They
weren’ t too late, that was the im portant thing. He said as much
to I an, who didn’ t reply but gave him a brief glance of
surprise.
How do you know?  it said, plain as words. He lifted a
shoulder and inclined his head toward a spot a little farther
down the hill, w here an outcrop of rock covered in moss and
bearberry would give them cover . They moved of f silently ,
keeping low , making their movements in the same slow
rhythm to which the wood was m oving. It was twilight and the
world was full of shadows; it was no trick to be two more.
He knew they hadn’ t hanged Denny Hunter yet, because
he’d see n men hanged. Execution left a stain upon the air and
marked the souls of those who saw it.
The camp was quiet. Not literally—the soldiers were
making considerable racket, and a good thing, too—but interms o f its spirit. There wa s neither a sense of dread
oppression nor the sick excitement that sprang from the same
source; you could feel such things. So Denny Hunter was
either he re, alive—or had been sent elsewhere. If he was here,
where would he be?
Confined some how , and under guard. This wasn’ t a
permanent camp ; there was no stockade. It was a big camp,
though, and it to ok them some ti me to circle it, checking to see
whether Hunter might be somewhere in the open, tied to a tree
or shackled to a wagon. He was nowhere in sight, though. That
left the tents.
There w ere four lar ge ones, and  one of these plainly housed
the commissary ; it stood apart and had a small cluster of
wagons near it. It had also a constant stream of men going in
and out, emer ging with sacks of flour or dried peas. No meat,
though h e could  smell cooking rabbit and squirrel from some
of the campfires . The German deserters had been right, then;
the army was living of f the land, as well as it could.
“The commander ’ s tent?” Ian whispered softly to him. It
was plain to see, with its pennants and the knot of men who
stood about just outside its entrance.
“I ho pe not.” Pla inly they’d have taken Denny Hunter to  the
commander for interrogation. A nd if he were still in doubt as
to Hunter ’ s bona fides , he might have kept the man close at
hand for further questioning.
Had he already made up his mind on the matter , though—
and Rachel had been convinced of it—he wouldn’ t keep him.
He w ould have been sent somew here under guard to await his
reckoning. Under guard and out of sight, though Jamie
doubted the British commander feared a rescue attempt.
“Eeny-meeny-miney-mo,” he muttered under his breath,
twitching a finger back and for th between the two remaining
tents. A  guard with a musket  was standing more or less
between them; no telling whic h he was set to guard. “That
one.” He lifted his chin to the one on the right, but even as he
did so felt Ian stif fen beside him.“Nay ,” Ian said softly , eyes riveted. “The other .”
There was something strange in Ian’ s voice, and Jamie
glanced at him in surprise, then down at the tent.
At first, his only  thought was a fleeting sense of confusion.
Then the world changed.
It was twilight, but they were by now no more than fifty
yards away; there was no mistaking it. He hadn’ t seen the boy
since he  was twelve, but he had memorized every moment
they’d spent in each other ’ s presence: the way he carried
himself, the quick, graceful movement —that’ s fr om his
mother , he tho ught in a daze of shock , seeing the tall young
of ficer m ake a gesture of the hand that was Geneva Dunsany
to th e life—the shape of his back, his head and ears, though
the slender shoulders had thickened to a man’ s. Mine , he
thought, with a sur ge of pride that shocked him nearly as much
as W illiam’ s sudden appearance had. They’r e mine .
Jarring as they were, these tho ughts took less than half a
second to dash t hrough his head and out again. He breathed in,
very slowly , and out again. Had Ian remembered W illiam from
their meeting seven years earlie r? Or was the resemblance so
instantly visible to a casual eye?
It didn’ t  matter  now . The cam p was beginning its supper
preparations; wi thin minutes everyone would be engrossed in
the m eal. It was better to move t hen, even without the cover of
darkness.
“It has to be me , aye?” Ian gripp ed his wrist, compelling his
attention. “D’ye want to make the diversion before or after?”
“After .” He’d been thinking, in the back of his mind, all the
time they were creeping tow ard the camp, and now the
decision lay ready , as though so meone else had made it. “Best
if we can get h im away quiet. T ry , and if things go wrong,
screech.”
Ian nodded and, with no further conversation, dropped to his
belly and began a stealthy wor ming through the brush. The
evening was cool and pleasant after the heat of the day , butJamie’ s hands felt cold and he  cupped them round the clay
belly of the little  firepot. He’d carried it from their own camp,
feeding it bits of dry stick along the way . It was hissing softly
to it self as it fed on a chunk of dried hickory , both the sight
and the smell of it safely hidden  in the haze of campfire smoke
that drifted through the trees, dispelling the gnats and the
bloodthirsty mosquitoes, thank God and His mother .
W ondering at his own twitching—it wasn’ t like him—he
touched his sporran, checking y et again that the cork had not
come lo ose from the bottle of turpentine, even though he knew
well it hadn’ t; he’d smell it.
The arrows in hi s quiver shifted as he shifted his weight, the
fletchings rustling. He was in easy bowshot of the
commander ’ s tent, could have the canvas well alight in
seconds if Ian screeched. If he didn’ t…
He began to move again, eye s flitting over the ground,
searching for a patch that would do. Dry grass there was in
plenty , but it would go up too fast if that was all there was. He
wanted a fast flame but a big one.
The soldiers would have alre ady scavenged the nearby
forest for firewood, but he spott ed a fallen fir snag, too heavy
to carry  away . Foragers had snapped the lower branches of f,
but ther e were plenty left, thic k with dried needles that the
wind ha dn’ t taken yet. He move d back slowly , far enough out
of sight that he could move quickly again, gathering armfuls of
dry grass, bark scraped hasty from a log, anything that would
kindle.
Flaming arrows in the commander ’ s tent would compel
instant attention, to be sure, but they would also cause
widespread alar m; soldiers would boil out of the camp like
hornets, looking  for attackers. A grass fire, no. Such things
were common, and while it would certainly create diversion,
no one would be looking further once they’d seen it was
nothing.
A few minutes a nd he had his diverson ready . So busy he’d
been, he hadn’ t even taken thought to look again at his son.“God damn ye for a liar , Jamie  Fraser ,” he said under his
breath, and looked.
W illiam was gone.
 
THE SOLDIER S WERE at th eir supper; cheerful talk
and the sounds of eating covered any small noises Ian made as
he walk ed softly round the s ide of the left-hand tent. If
someone saw him, he’d speak to them in Mohawk, claim to be
a sco ut f rom Bu r goyne’ s camp, come with information. By the
time the y got him in front of the commander , he’d either have
thought of some good, pictu resque information, or he’d
scream and reckon to fight h is way out while they were
distracted by flaming arrows.
That wouldn’ t help Denny Hunter , though, and he was
careful. There were pickets posted, but he and Uncle Jamie
had watched long enough to see the pattern of them and spy
the dead spot w here a picket’ s vision was obstructed by the
trees. He knew he couldn’ t b e seen behind the tent, save
someone heading for the woods for a piss stumbled over him.
There was a gap at the bottom of the tent and a candlestick
lit in side; a spot  in the canvas glowed dim in the twilight. He
watched the gap and saw no shadow move. Right, then.
He l ay down and  inserted a cautious hand, feeling along the
dirt floo r , hoping no one insid e stamped on his hand. If he
could find a cot, he could squirm in and lie under it. If—
something touched his hand and he bit his tongue, hard.
“Is thee a friend ?” whispered Denny’ s voice. Ian could see
the Quaker ’ s shadow on the c anvas, a squatting blur , and
Denny’ s hand held his hard.
“A ye, it’ s me,” he whispered back. “Keep quiet. Stand
back.”
Denny moved, and Ian heard the clink of metal. Dammit,
the buggers had him in fetters. H e compressed his lips and slid
under the edge of the tent.Denny g reeted him silently , his face alight with hope and
alarm. T he little Quaker lifted his hands, nodded to his feet.
Full irons. Christ, they did  mean to hang him.
Ian leaned in close to whisper in Denny’ s ear .
“I go  out before  ye. Lie down there, easy as ye can, close as
ye can.”  He jerked his chin at th e back wall of the tent. “Dinna
move yourself; I’ll pull ye throu gh.” Then get Denny onto his
shoulders like a dead fawn and  head for the woods, hooting
like an owl to let Uncle Jamie know it was time to set the fire.
It w asn’ t possible to move a man in chains in total silence,
but with any luck at all, the scraping of spoons on mess kits
and the soldiers’ conversation would cover any stray clinking.
He p ulled the ca nvas out as far as he could, reached under , and
took firm hold of Denny’ s shoulders. The wee bugger was
heavier than he looked, but Ian got Denny’ s upper body mostly
clear of the tent without too much trouble. Sweating, he
scuttled to the side and reached in to take hold of Denny’ s
ankles, w rapping the chain round his own wrist to take up the
slack.
There w as no sound, but Ian’ s  head jerked up before his
mind ev en told him that the air near him had moved in a way
that meant someone was standing there.
“Hush!” he said by reflex, no t knowing whether he was
talking t o Denny  or to the tall s oldier who had stepped out of
the wood behind him.
“What the devil—” the soldier began, sounding startled. He
didn’ t finish the question, bu t took three paces fast and
grabbed Ian by the wrist.
“Who ar e you and what are you—Good God, where did you
come from?” W illiam the soldie r stared into Ian’ s face, and Ian
thanked God briefly for the fact that his other wrist was
immobilized by Denny’ s chain,  for otherwise W illiam would
be already dead. And he didn’ t want to have to tell Uncle
Jamie that .“He has come t o help me escape, Friend W illiam,” Denny
Hunter said mildly from the sh adows on the ground behind
Ian. “I would tak e it kindly if thee did not hinder him, though I
will understand if thy duty compels thee.”
W illiam’ s head jerked, looked  wildly round, then down.
Had the circums tances been less dire, Ian would have laughed
at the expression s—for there were a great number of them, run
through in the co urse of a heartbeat—on it. W illiam closed his
eyes for an instant, then opened them again.
“Don’ t tell me,” he said shortly . “I don’ t want to know .” He
squatted beside Ian and, between them, they had Denny out in
a matter  of seconds. Ian took a  deep breath, put his hands to
his mouth, and h ooted, then paused a moment and did it once
again. W illiam s tared at him in mingled puzzlement and anger .
Then Ian  ducked the point of his shoulder into Denny’ s midrif f
and, with W illiam heaving, got  the doctor onto his shoulders
with little more than a startled grunt and a slight clanking of
fetters.
W illiam’ s hand closed on Ian’ s forearm, and his head, a dark
oval in the last traces of light, jerked toward the woods.
“Left,” he whispered. “There are latrine trenches on the
right. T wo pickets, a hundred yards out.” He squeezed hard
and let go.
“May yo u be held in God’ s light, Friend W illiam.” Denny’ s
whisper came breathless by Ian’ s ear , but Ian was already
going and didn’ t know whether W illiam had heard. He
supposed it didn’ t matter .
A few moments  later , he heard  the first shouts of “Fire!”
behind him in the camp. NO BETTER COMP ANION THAN THE RIFLE
 September 15, 1777
 
B Y E ARL Y SEPTEMBER, we had reached the main
army , en -camped on the Hudson near the village of Saratoga.
General Horatio Gates was in command, and received the
ragtag and bobtail refugees and random militia with pleasure.
For once , the army was tolerab ly well supplied, and we were
equipped with clothes, decent food—and the remarkable
luxury o f a small tent, in honor  of Jamie’ s status as a colonel
of militia, in spite of the fact that he had no men.
Knowing Jamie as I did, I was reasonably sure this would
be a  tem porary s tate of af fairs. F or my part, I was delighted to
have an  actual cot to sleep on, a tiny table to eat from—and
food to put on it on a fairly regular basis.
“I’ve brought ye a present, Sassenach.” Jamie plumped the
bag down on the table with a pleasantly meaty-sounding
thump and a waft of fresh blood. My mouth began to water .
“What is it? Bir ds?” It wasn’ t ducks or geese; those had a
distinctive scent  about them, a musk of body oils, feathers, and
decaying waterweeds. But partridges, say , or grouse … I
swallowed heavily at the thought of pigeon pie.
“No, a book.” He pulled a small package wrapped in
tattered oilcloth from the bulgin g sack and proudly set it in my
hands.
“A book?” I said blankly .
He nodded encouragingly .
“A ye. W ords printed on paper , ye’ll recall the sort of thing?
I ken it’ s been a long time.”
I gave him an ey e and, attempting to ignore the rumbling of
my stom ach, op ened the package. It was a well-worn pocket-
sized copy of The Life and O pinions of T ristram Shandy ,
Gentleman—V ol. I , an d despite m y disgruntleme nt at being
presented with literature instead of food, I was interested. Ithad  b een a long time since I’d had a good book in my hands,
and this was a story I’d heard of but never read.
“The ow ner must have been fond of it,” I said, turning the
little volume over gently . The sp ine was nearly worn through,
and the edges of  the leather cov er were rubbed shiny . A rather
nasty thought struck me.
“Jamie … you didn’ t… take this from a, er , a body , did
you?” Stripping weapons, equipment, and usable clothing
from fallen enemies was not c onsidered looting; it was an
unpleasant necessity . Still …
He shook his head, though, still rummaging in the bag.
“Nay , I found it at the edge of a wee creek. Dropped in
flight, I expect.”
W ell, that was better , though I was sure the man who had
dropped it would regret the loss  of this treasured companion. I
opened the book at random and squinted at the small type.
“Sassenach.”
“Hmm?” I glanced up, jerked o ut of the text, to see Jamie
regarding me with a mixture of sympathy and amusement.
“Y e need spectacles, don’ t ye?” he said. “I hadna realized.”
“Nonsense!” I said, though my heart gave a small jump. “I
see perfectly well.”
“Oh, ay e?” He moved beside me and took the book out of
my hand . Opening it to the middle, he held it in front of me.
“Read that.”
I leaned backward, and he advanced in front of me.
“Stop that!” I said. “How do you expect me to read anything
that close?”
“Stand s till, then,” he said, and moved the book away from
my face. “Can ye see the letters clear yet?”
“No,” I said crossly . “Farther . Farther . No, bloody farther!”And at last was obliged to adm it that I could not bring the
letters into focus at a distance of nearer than about eighteen
inches.
“W ell, it’ s very  small type!” I said, flustered and
discomfited. I had, of course, be en aware that my eyesight was
not s o keen as it once had been,  but to be so rudely confronted
with the  evidenc e that I was, if not blind as a bat, definitely in
competition with  moles in the farsight sweepstakes was a trifle
upsetting.
“T welve-point Caslon,” Jamie said, giving the text a
professional glance. “I will say the leading’ s terrible,” he
added critically . “And the gutter s are half what they should be.
Even so—” He flipped the boo k shut and looked at me, one
eyebrow raised. “Y e need spectacles, a nighean ,” he repeated
gently .
“Hmph!” I said. And on imp ulse picked up the book,
opened it, and h anded it to him. “So—read it yourself, why
don’ t you?”
Looking surprised and a little w ary , he took the book and
looked into it. Then extended his arm a little. And a little
more. I watched, experiencing that same odd mix of
amusement and sympathy , as he finally held the book nearly at
arm’ s length, and read, “So that the life  of a writer , whatever
he migh t fancy to the contrary , was not so much a state of
composition, as a state of war far e; and his pr obation in it,
pr ecisely that of any other man militant upon earth—both
depending alike, not half so muc h upon the degr ees of his WIT
—as his RESIST ANCE.”
He c losed it and  looked at me, the edge of his mouth tucked
back.
“A ye, well,” he said. “I can still shoot, at least.”
“And I can tell o ne herb from another by smell, I suppose,”
I said, and laughed. “Just as w ell. I don’ t suppose there’ s a
spectacle-maker this side of Philadelphia.”“No, I suppose  not,” he said ruefully . “When we get to
Edinbur gh, tho ugh, I ken just the man. I’ll buy ye a
tortoiseshell pai r for everyday , S assenach, and a pair wi’ gold
rims for Sundays.”
“Expect me to read the Bibl e with them, do you?” I
inquired.
“Ah, no,” he s aid, “that’ s just for show . After all”—he
picked u p my hand, which smel led of dill weed and coriander ,
and, lifting it to his mouth, ran the point of his tongue
delicately down the lifeline in my palm—”the important things
ye do by touch, aye?”
 
WE WE RE INTERRUPTED by a cough from the door of
the tent,  and I t urned to see a lar ge, bearlike man with long
gray hai r loose upon his shoul ders. He had an amiable face
with a scar through the upper lip and a mild but keen eye,
which went at once to the bag on the table.
I s tif fened a littl e; there were strict prohibitions against the
looting of farms, and while Jamie had taken these particular
hens scr atching in the wild, there was no way of proving that,
and this gentleman, while dressed in casual homespun and
hunting shirt, bore himself with the unmistakable authority of
an of ficer .
“Y ou’d be Colonel Fraser?” he said, with a nod toward
Jamie, and extended a hand. “Daniel Mor gan.”
I rec ognized the name, though t he only thing I knew about
Daniel M or gan—a footnote in Brianna’ s eighth-grade history
book—was that he was a famous rifleman. This wasn’ t
particularly useful; everyone knew that, and the camp had
buzzed with interest when he ha d arrived at the end of August
with a number of men.
He n ow glanced with interest at me , and  the n at the bag of
chickens, flecked with incriminating tufts of feather .“By your leave, ma’am,” he sa id, and without waiting for
my leave, picked up the sack a nd pulled out a dead chicken.
The neck flopped limp, showing the lar ge, bloody hole
through its head where an eye—well, two eyes—had once
been. His scarred mouth pursed  in a soundless whistle and he
looked sharply up at Jamie.
“Y ou do that a-purpose?” he asked.
“I always shoot them through the eye,” Jamie replied
politely . “Dinna want to spoil the meat.”
A sl ow grin sp read over Colonel Mor gan’ s face, and he
nodded. “Come with me, Mr . Fraser . Bring your rifle.”
 
WE A TE THA T night at Danie l Mor gan’ s fire, and the
company—filled with chicken stew—raised cups of beer and
hooted to toast the addition of a new member to their elite
corps. I hadn’ t had a chance of private conversation with
Jamie since Mor gan’ s abduction of him that afternoon, and
rather wondered  what he made of his apotheosis. But he
seemed comfortable with the riflemen, though he glanced now
and then at Mor gan, with the look that meant he was still
making up his mind.
For my part, I  was extremely pleased. By their nature,
riflemen fought from a distance—and often a distance much
greater t han a musket’ s range. They were also valuable, and
commanders were not likely to risk them in close combat. No
soldier was safe, but some occupations had a much higher rate
of m ortality—an d while I accepted the fact that Jamie was a
born gambler , I liked him to have the best odds possible.
Many of  the riflemen were Long Hunters, others what they
called “over -mountain men,” an d thus had no wives with them
here. Some did, and I made i nstant acquaintance with the
women by the simple expedient of admiring one young
woman’ s baby .“Mrs. Fraser?” one older lady s aid, coming to plump down
on the log beside me. “Are you the conjure-woman?”
“I am,” I said p leasantly . “They  call me the White W itch.”
That reared them back a bit, b ut the forbidden has its own
strong a ppeal—and after all, what could I do in the middle of
military camp, surrounded by their husbands and sons, all
armed to the teeth?
W ithin minutes, I was dispensing advice on everything from
menstrual cramps to colic. I caught a glimpse of Jamie,
grinning at sight of my popula rity , and gave him a discreet
wave before turning back to my audience.
The men, of course, continued drinking, with outbreaks of
raucous laughter , then the fall of voices as one man took over
a story , only to have the cycle repeat. At one point, though, the
atmosphere changed, so abrupt ly that I broke of f an intense
discussion of diaper rash and looked over toward the fire.
Daniel Mor gan was rising laboriously to his feet, and there
was a distinct air of anticipati on among the watching men.
W as he about to make a speech, welcoming Jamie?
“Oh, dea r Lord,” said Mrs. Graham under her breath beside
me. “He’ s a-doing it again.”
I ha dn’ t time to  ask her what he  was a-doing, before he a-
did it.
He sham bled to the center of the gathering, where he stood
swaying like an old bear , his long gray hair wafting in the
wind of  the fire and his eyes creased with amiability . They
were focused on Jamie, though, I saw .
“Got so mething to show you, Mr . Fraser ,” he said, loudly
enough that the women who had still been talking stopped,
every ey e going to him. He took hold of the hem of his long
woolen hunting  shirt and pulled it of f over his head. He
dropped it on the ground, spread his arms like a ballet dancer ,
and stumped slowly round.
Everyone gasped , though from M rs. Graham’ s remark, most
of them must h ave seen it befo re. His back was ridged withscars fro m neck to waist. Old  scars, to be sure—but there
wasn’ t a  square inch of unmarked skin on his back, massive as
it was. Even I was shocked.
“The B ritish did that,” he said conversationally , turning
back and dropping his arms. “Give me four hundred and
ninety-nine lashes. I counted. ” The gathering erupted in
laughter , and he grinned. “W as supposed to give me five
hundred, but he missed one. I didn’ t point it out to him.”
More lau ghter . O bviously , this was a frequent performance,
but one that his audience loved. There were cheers and more
toasts w hen he finished and w ent to sit beside Jamie, still
naked to the waist, his shirt wadded casually in his hand.
Jamie’ s face gave nothing away—but I saw that his
shoulders had relaxed. Evidently he had made up his mind
about Dan Mor gan.
 
JAMIE LIFTED THE LID of m y small iron pot, with an
expression somewhere between caution and hope.
“Not foo d,” I informed him, rather unnecessarily , as he was
wheezing in the manner of one who has inadvertently inhaled
horseradish into the sinuses.
“I shoul d hope not,” he said, coughing and wiping his eyes.
“Christ, Sassenach, that’ s worse than usual. D’ye mean to
poison someone?”
“Y es, Plasmodium vivax . Put the lid back on.” I w as
simmering a decoction of cinchona bark and gallberries, for
the treatment of malarial cases.
“Have we got  any food?” he asked plaintively , dropping the
lid back in place.
“In fact we have.” I reached into the cloth-covered pail at
my feet and tr iumphantly pulled out a meat pie, its crust
golden and shimmering with lard.His face assumed the expression of an Israelite beholding
the p romised land, and he held out his hands, receiving the pie
with the reverence due a precious object, though this
impression was dispelled in the next instant as he took a lar ge
bite out of it.
“Where did ye get it?” he aske d, after a few moments of
blissful mastication. “Are there more?”
“There a re. A nice prostitute named Daisy brought them for
me.”
He paused, examined the pie critically for signs of its
provenance, then shrugged and took another bite.
“Do I want to know what it was ye did for her , Sassenach?”
“W ell, p robably not while you’re eating, no. Have you seen
Ian?”
“No.” The response might have been abbreviated by the
exigencies of eating pie, but I caught the slightest shiftiness in
his manner and stopped, staring at him.
“Do you know  where Ian is?”
“More o r less.” He kept his eyes fixed firmly on the meat
pie, thus confirming my suspicions.
“Do I want to know what he’ s doing?”
“No, ye don’ t,” he said definitely .
“Oh, God.”
 
IAN MURRA Y , having carefully dressed his hair with
bear grease and a pair of turkey feathers, removed his shirt,
leaving this rolled up with his tattered plaid under a log, and
told Rol lo to guard it, then walked across a small stretch of
open ground toward the British camp.
“Hold!”He turned a face of bored impassivity toward the sentry who
had hail ed him. The sentry , a bo y of fifteen or so, was holding
a musket whose barrel shook noticeably . Ian hoped the numpty
wouldn’ t shoot him by accident.
“Scout,” he said succinctly , and walked past the sentry
without a backward glance, thou gh he felt a spider strolling to
and fro between  his shoulder b lades. Scout , h e thought, and
felt a small bubble of laughter rise up. W ell, it was the truth,
after all.
He s trolled through the camp in  the same manner , ignoring
the occasional stare—though most of those who noticed him
merely glanced at him and then away .
Bur goyne’ s head quarters was easy to spot, a lar ge tent of
green ca nvas that sprouted like a toadstool among the neat
aisles of small white tents tha t housed the soldiers. It was
some distance away—and he did n’ t mean to get any closer just
now—but he could glimpse the comings and goings of staf f
of ficers, messengers … and the occasional scout, though none
of these was Indian.
The Indian camps were on the far side of the army
encampment, scattered in the forest outside the neat military
grid. He was not sure wheth er he might meet some of
Thayendanegea’ s people, who might in turn recognize him.
This wo uldn’ t be a dif ficulty , as  he had said nothing regarding
politics during his ill-fated visit to Joseph Brant’ s house; they
would likely accept him on sight without any awkward
questions.
If he  were to encounter some of the Huron and Oneida that
Bur goyne emplo yed to harass the Continentals, that might be a
wee bit touchier . He had compl ete confidence in his ability to
impress them with his identity as a Mohawk—but if they were
either too suspicious or too impressed, he wouldn’ t learn
much.
He had learned a few things sim ply from his walk through
the camp. Morale was not hig h; there was rubbish between
some of the tents, and most of the washerwomen among thecamp followers were sitting in the grass drinking gin, their
kettles c old and empty . Still, the atmosphere in general seemed
subdued but resolute; some men  were dicing and drinking, but
more were melting lead and ma king musket balls, repairing or
polishing their weapons.
Food w as short; he could sen se hunger in the air , even
without seeing the line of men w aiting outside the baker ’ s tent.
None of them lo oked at him; they were focused on the loaves
that emer ged—these broken in half before being handed out.
Half rations, then; that was good.
None of this w as important, though, and as for troop
numbers and armament—these were well established by now .
Uncle Jamie and Colonel Mor gan and General Gates would
like to know ab out the stores of powder and ammunition, but
the artillery park and powder magazine would be well
guarded, with no conceivable reason for an Indian scout to be
nosing round there.
Something tugged at the corner of his vision and he glanced
cautiously round, then hastily jerked his eyes forward, forcing
himself to walk at the same pace . Jesus, it was the Englishman
he’d saved from the swamp—th e man who’d helped him get
wee Denny free. And—
He clamped down on that thought. He kent it well enough;
no one could loo k like that and not  be. But he felt it dangerous
even to  acknowledge the thought to himself, lest it show
somehow on his face.
He forced himself to breathe as usual and walk without
concern, because a Mohawk scout would have none. Damn.
He’d meant to spend the rema ining hours of daylight with
some of the Indians, picking u p what information he could,
and then after d ark come quietly back into camp, stealing up
within earshot of Bur goyne’ s tent. If yon wee lieutenant was
wuthering round , though, it might be too dangerous to try . The
last thing he wanted was to meet the man face-to-face.
“Hey!” The shout ran into his fl esh like a sharp splinter . He
recognized the voice, knew it was aimed at him, but didn’ tturn round. Six paces, five, four , three … He reached the end
of an alley of tents and sheared of f to the right, out of sight.
“Hey!” The voice was closer , almost behind him, and he
broke in to a run, heading for th e cover of the trees. Only one
or tw o s oldiers s aw him; one sta rted to his feet but then stood,
uncertain what to do, and he pushed past the man and dived
into the trees.
“W ell, th at’ s tor n it,” he muttere d, crouched behind a brush
shelter . The tall lieutenant was questioning the man he’d
shoved past. Both of them were  looking toward the wood, the
soldier shaking his head and shrugging helplessly .
Christ, the wee l oon was coming toward him! He turned and
stepped silently through the tree s, working his way deeper into
the w ood. He could hear the Englishman behind him, crashing
and rustling like a bear just out of its den in the spring.
“Murray!” he was shouting. “Murray—is that you? W ait!”
“W olf ’ s Brother! Is that you?”
Ian said something very blasphemous under his breath in
Gaelic, and turned to see who had addressed him in Mohawk.
“It is  you! Where’ s your demon wolf? Did something finally
eat i t?” His old friend Glutton was beaming at him, adjusting
his breechclout after having a piss.
“I ho pe something eats you,” Ia n said to his friend, keeping
his voice low . “ I need to get away . There is an Englishman
following me.”
Glutton’ s face changed at once,  though it didn’ t lose either
its s mile or its eager express ion. The wide grin widened
further , and he jerked his hea d behind him, indicating the
opening to a trail. Then his face went suddenly slack, and he
staggered from one side to the other , lurching in the direction
Ian had come.
Ian barely made it out of sight before the Englishman called
W illiam came rushing into the clearing, only to run slap intoGlutton, who clutched him by the lapels of his coat, gazed up
soulfully into his eyes, and said, “Whisky?”
“I haven’ t any whisky ,” W illiam said, brusque but not
impolite, and tried to detach Glutton. This proved a dif ficult
proposition; Glutton was much more agile than his squat
appearance suggested, and the instant a hand was removed
from one spot, it clung limpetl ike to another . T o add to the
performance, Glutton began to tell the lieutenant—in Mohawk
—the st ory of the famous hunt that had given him his name,
pausing periodically to shout, “WHISHKEE!” and fling his
arms about the Englishman’ s body .
Ian spared no tim e to admire the Englishman’ s own facility
with lan guage, which was considerable, but made of f as fast as
possible, circling to the west. H e couldn’ t go back through the
camp. He might take refuge in one of the Indian camps, but it
was possible that W illiam would look for him there, once he’d
escaped from Glutton.
“What the hell does he want w ith me?” he muttered, no
longer bothering  with silence but cleaving the brush with a
minimum of breakage. W illiam the lieutenant had to know he
was a Continental, because of D enny Hunter and the deserter
game. Y et he had not raised a general alarm upon seeing him
—only called out in surprise, and then as one wanting
conversation.
W ell, ma ybe that was a trick. W ee W illiam might be young,
but he was not s tupid. Couldn’ t be, considering who his fath—
and the man was  chasing him.
He could hear voices fading behind him—he thought that
W illiam had perhaps now recog nized Glutton, in spite of the
fact that he had been half dead with fever when they met. If so,
he would know Glutton was his, Ian’ s, friend—and instantly
detect the ruse. But it didn’ t matter; he was well into the wood
by now . W illiam would never catch him.
The sme ll of smoke and fresh meat caught his nose, and he
turned, going downhill toward  the bank of a small stream.
There was a Mohawk camp there; he knew it at once.He p aused, though. The scent of  it, the knowledge of it, had
drawn h im like a moth—but h e mustn’ t enter . Not now . If
W illiam had  recognized Glutton, the first place he would look
for Ian was the Mohawks’ camp. And if she should be there…
“Y ou, again ?” s aid an unp leasant Mohaw k voice. “Y ou
don’ t learn, do you?”
Actually , he did. He’d learned e nough to hit first. He turned
on his heel and  swung from somewhere behind his knees,
continuing up with all the power in his body . “Aim to hit
through the bugger ’ s face,”  Un cle Jamie h ad instructed him
when he began to go about in Edinbur gh alone. It was, as
usual, good advice.
His knuckles burst with a crun ch that shot blue lightning
straight up his arm and into his neck and jaw—but Sun Elk
flew backward two paces and crashed into a tree.
Ian stood panting and gentl y touching his knuckles,
recalling too late that Uncle Jamie’ s advice had begun with,
“Hit them in the soft parts if ye can.”  It  didn’ t matter ; it was
worth it . Sun Elk was moaning softly , his eyelids fluttering.
Ian was  debating the merits of saying something of a
dismissive nature and walking grandly away , versus kicking
him in the balls  again before h e could get up, when W illiam
the Englishman walked out from the trees.
He looked from Ian, still brea thing as though he’d run a
mile, to Sun Elk, who had rolled onto his hands and knees but
didn’ t se em to want to get up. Blood was dripping from his
face onto the dead leaves. Splat. Splat .
“I h ave no wish  to intrude upon a private af fair ,” W illiam
said pol itely . “But I would app reciate a word with you, Mr .
Murray .” He turned, not waiting to see if Ian would come, and
walked back into the trees.
Ian nodded, having no notion what to say , and followed the
Englishman, cherishing in his heart the last faint splat!  of Sun
Elk’ s blood.The Englishman was leaning against a tree, watching the
Mohawk camp by the stream below . A woman was stripping
meat fro m a fresh deer ’ s carcass, hanging it to dry on a frame.
She wasn’ t W orks W ith Her Hands.
W illiam switche d his dark-blue gaze to Ian, giving him an
odd feeling. Ian already felt od d, though, so it didn’ t really
matter .
“I am not going to ask what you were doing in the camp.”
“Oh, aye?”
“No. I wished to thank you for the horse and money and to
ask you  whether you have see n Miss Hunter , since you so
kindly left me in the keeping of her and her brother .”
“I have, aye.” The knuckles on his right hand were already
puf fed to twice their size and starting to throb. He’d go and see
Rachel; she’d bandage them f or him. The thought was so
intoxicating tha t he didn’ t at first realize that W illiam was
waiting—not all that patiently—for him to expound on his
statement.
“Ah. A ye, the… er… the Hunte rs are wi’ the army . The…
um … other  army ,” he said, a little awkwardly . “Her brother ’ s
an army sur geon.”
W illiam’ s face didn’ t change but seemed somehow to
solidify . Ian watched it in fascination. He’d seen Uncle Jamie’ s
face do the exact same thing, many times, and knew what it
meant.
“Here?” W illiam said.
“A ye, here.” He inclined his head toward the American
camp. “There, I mean.”
“I see,” W illiam  said calmly . “W hen you see her again, will
you give her my kindest regards, then? And her brother , too, of
course.”
“Oh… aye,” Ian said, thinking, Like that, is it? W ell, ye’r e
no g oing to see her yourself, and she’d have nothing to do wi’
a soldier anyway , so think again!  “Certainly ,” he added,belatedly aware that his only value to W illiam at this point lay
in his supposed role as messenger to Rachel Hunter , and
wondering just how much that was worth.
“Thank you.” W illiam’ s face had lost that look of iron; he
was examining Ian carefully , and at last nodded.
“A life for a life, Mr . Murray ,” h e said quietly . “W e’re quits.
Don’ t let me see you next time. I may not have a choice.”
He turne d and left, the red of his uniform visible for some
time through the trees. ONE JUST MAN
 September 19, 1777
 
T HE SUN ROSE invisible, to the sound of drums.
Drums on both sides; we could  hear the British reveille, and
by th e sa me toke n they must hea r ours. The riflemen had had a
brief skirmish with British troop s two days before, and owing
to the work of Ian and the othe r scouts, General Gates knew
very well the size and disposition of Bur goyne’ s army .
Kosciuszko had chosen Bemis Heights for a defensive
position; it was a  high river bluf f, with numerous small ravines
down to the rive r , and his crews had labored like madmen for
the last week with shovels an d axes. The Americans were
ready . More or less.
The wom en were not, of course , admitted to the councils of
the generals. Jamie was, though , and thus I heard all about the
ar gument between General Gates, who was in command, and
General Arnold, who thought he should be. General Gates,
who wanted to sit tight on Be mis Heights and wait for the
British a ttack, versus General Arnold, who ar gued vehemently
that the Americans must make  the first move, forcing the
British regulars to fight through the thickly wooded ravines,
ruining their formations and making them vulnerable to the
riflemen’ s snip er fire, falling back—if necessary—to the
breastworks and entrenchments on the Heights.
“Arnold’ s won,” Ian reported, popping briefly up out of the
fog to snag a piece of toasted bread. “Uncle Jamie’ s away wi’
the riflemen already . He says he’ll see ye this evening, and in
the m eantime …” He bent and gently kissed my cheek, then
grinned impudently and vanished.
My own stomach was knotted, though with the pervasive
excitement as much as with fear . The Americans were a
ragged, motley lot, but they had had time to prepare, they
knew what was coming, and t hey knew what was at stake.
This battle would decide the campaign in the north. Either
Bur goyne woul d overcome and march on, trapping Geor geW ashington’ s army near Philad elphia between his forces and
General Howe’ s —or his army o f invasion would be brought to
a halt and knocked out of the war , in which case Gates’ s army
could move south to reinforce W ashington. The men all knew
it, and the fog seemed electric with their anticipation.
By t he s un, it was near ten o’clo ck when the fog lifted. The
shots ha d begun some time earl ier , brief, distant pings of rifle
fire. Daniel Mor gan’ s men w ere taking out the pickets, I
thought—and knew from what Jamie had said the night before
that the y were meant to aim for the of ficers, to kill those
soldiers wearing silver gor gets. I hadn’ t slept the night before,
envisioning Lieutenant Ransom and the silver gor get at his
throat. In fog, in the dust of battle, at a distance… I
swallowed, but my throat stayed stubbornly closed; I couldn’ t
even drink water .
Jamie had slept, with the stubborn concentration of a
soldier , but had waked in the de ep hours of the night, his shirt
soaked with sweat in spite of th e chill, trembling. I didn’ t ask
what he had bee n dreaming about; I knew . I had got him a dry
shirt and  made him lie down a gain with his head in my lap,
then stroked his head until he c losed his eyes—but I thought
he hadn’ t slept again.
It wasn’ t chilly now; the fog had burned away , and we heard
sustained rattles of gunfire, patchy , but repeated volleys. Faint,
distant s houting, but impossible to make out who was shouting
what at whom. Then the sudden crash of a British fieldpiece, a
resounding boom  that struck the camp silent. A lull, and then
full-scale battle broke out, shooting and screaming and the
intermittent thud of cannon. W omen huddled together or set
about grimly packing up their b elongings, in case we should
have to flee.
About midday , a relative silence fell. W as it over? W e
waited. After a little, children began whining to be fed and a
sort of tense normality descende d—but nothing happened. W e
could he ar moan ing and calls f or help from men wounded—
but no wounded were brought in.I w as ready . I had a small mule-drawn wagon, equipped
with bandages and medical equipment, and a small tent as
well, wh ich I could set up in case I needed to perform sur gery
in th e rain. The mule was staked nearby , grazing placidly and
ignoring both the tension and the occasional burst of musketry .
In th e middle of the afternoon,  hostilities broke out again,
and this time the camp followe rs and cook wagons actually
began to retreat. There was artill ery on both sides, enough of it
that the continuous cannonading  rolled like thunder , and I saw
a huge cloud of black powder smoke rise up from the bluf f. It
was not quite mushroom-shaped, but made me think
nonetheless of Nagasaki and Hiroshima. I sharpened my knife
and scalpels for the dozenth time.
 
IT W AS NEAR evening; the sun sank invisibly , staining
the fog with a dull and sullen orange. The evening wind of f the
river was rising, lifting the fog f rom the ground and sending it
scudding in billows and swirls.
Clouds of black powder smoke  lay heavy in the hollows,
lifting more slowly than the ligh ter shreds of mist and lending
a sui table stink o f brimstone to a scene that was—if not hellish
—at least bloody eerie.
Here and there a space would suddenly be cleared, like a
curtain pulled back to show the aftermath of battle. Small dark
figures moved in the distance, darting and stooping, stopping
suddenly , heads uplifted like baboons keeping watch for a
leopard. Camp followers; the wives and whores of the soldiers,
come like crows to scavenge the dead.
Children, too. Under a bush, a b oy of nine or ten straddled
the b ody of a red-coated soldier , smashing at the face with a
heavy ro ck. I stopped, paralyzed at the sight, and saw the boy
reach in to the gaping, bloodied mouth and wrench out a tooth.
He slipped the bloody prize into a bag that hung by his side,
groped farther , tugging, and, finding no more teeth loose,picked up his r ock in a busine sslike way and went back to
work.
I f elt bile rise i n my throat and hurried on, swallowing. I
was no stranger to war , to death and wounds. But I had never
been so near a battle before; I  had never before come on a
battlefield where the dead and wounded still lay , before the
ministrations of medics and burial details.
There w ere calls for help and occasional moans or screams,
ringing disembodied out of the mist, reminding me
uncomfortably o f Highland stories of the urisge , the doomed
spirits o f the glen. Like the hero es of such stories, I didn’ t stop
to heed their call but pressed on, stumbling over small rises,
slipping on damp grass.
I ha d seen photographs of the great battlefields, from the
American Civil W ar to the bea ches of Normandy . This was
nothing like that—no churned earth, no heaps of tangled
limbs. It was stil l, save for the noises of the scattered wounded
and the voices of those calling, l ike me, for a missing friend or
husband.
Shattered trees lay toppled by ar tillery; in this light, I might
have thought the bodies turned into logs themselves, dark
shapes lying long in the grass— save for the fact that some of
them still moved. Here and ther e, a form stirred feebly , victim
of war ’ s sorcery , struggling against the enchantment of death.
I paused  and shouted into the m ist, calling his name. I heard
answering calls , but none in his voice. Ahead of me lay a
young man, arms outflung, a look of blank astonishment on
his face, blood p ooled round his upper body like a great halo.
His lower half lay six feet away . I walked between the pieces,
keeping my skirts close, nostrils pinched tight against the thick
iron smell of blood.
The ligh t was fading now , but I s aw Jamie as soon as I came
over the edge of the next rise. H e was lying on his face in the
hollow , one arm flung out, the other curled beneath him. The
shoulders of his dark blue coat were nearly black with damp,
and his legs thrown wide, booted heels askew .The breath caught in my throat, and I ran down the slope
toward h im, heedless of grass clumps, mud, and brambles. As
I got close, tho ugh, I saw a scuttling figure dart out from
behind a  nearby  bush and dash toward him. It fell to its knees
beside him and, without hesitation, grasped his hair and
yanked his head to one side. So mething glinted in the figure’ s
hand, bright even in the dull light.
“Stop!” I shouted. “Drop it, you bastard!”
Startled, the figure looked up as I flung myself over the last
yards of space. Narrow red-rimmed eyes glared up at me out
of a round face streaked with soot and grime.
“Get of f!” she snarled. “I found ‘im first!” It was a knife in
her hand; she made little jabbing motions at me, in an ef fort to
drive me away .
I wa s too furious—and too afra id for Jamie—to be scared
for myself.
“Let go of him! T ouch him an d I’ll kill you!” I said. My
fists wer e clench ed, and I must have looked as though I meant
it, fo r the woma n flinched back, loosing her hold on Jamie’ s
hair .
“He’ s mine,” she said, thrusting her chin pugnaciously at
me. “Go find yourself another .”
Another form slipped out of th e mist and materialized by
her s ide. It was the boy I had seen earlier , filthy and scruf fy as
the w oman herself. He had no k nife but clutched a crude metal
strip, cu t from a canteen. The ed ge of it was dark, with rust or
blood.
He glare d at me. “He’ s ours, Mum said! Get on wi’ yer!
Scat!”
Not wai ting to see whether I w ould or not, he flung a leg
over Jamie’ s back, sat on him, and began to grope in the side
pockets of his coat.
” ‘E ’ s still alive , Mum,” he advised. “I can feel ‘is ‘eart
beatin’. Best slit his throat quick; I don’ t think ‘e’ s bad hurt.”I g rabbe d the boy by the collar and jerked him of f Jamie’ s
body , making him drop his weapon. He squealed and flailed at
me with arms and elbows, but I kneed him in the rump, hard
enough to jar his backbone, the n got my elbow locked about
his neck in a stranglehold, his skinny wrist vised in my other
hand.
“Leave him go!” The woman’ s eyes narrowed like a
weasel’ s, and her eye-teeth shone in a snarl.
I d idn’ t dare ta ke my eyes aw ay from the woman’ s long
enough to look at Jamie. I coul d see him, though, at the edge
of m y vision, he ad turned to the side, his neck gleaming white,
exposed and vulnerable.
“Stand u p and step back,” I said , “or I’ll choke him to death,
I swear I will!”
She cro uched over Jamie’ s body , knife in hand, as she
measured me, trying to make up her mind whether I meant it. I
did.
The bo y strugg led and twisted in my grasp, his feet
hammering agai nst my shins. He was small for his age, and
thin as a stick, b ut strong nonetheless; it was like wrestling an
eel. I tightened my hold on h is neck; he gur gled and quit
struggling. His hair was thick w ith rancid grease and dirt, the
smell of it rank in my nostrils.
Slowly , the woman stood up. Sh e was much smaller than I,
and scra wny with it—bony wrists stuck out of the ragged
sleeves. I couldn’ t guess her age—under the filth and the
puf finess of malnutrition, she might have been anything from
twenty to fifty .
“My ma n lies yonder , dead on the ground,” she said, jerking
her head  at the fog behind her . ” ‘E hadn’ t nothing but his
musket, and the ser geant’ll take that back.”
Her eye s slid toward the distant wood, where the British
troops had retreated. “I’ll find a man soon, but I’ve children to
feed in the mea ntime—two besides the boy .” She licked her
lips, and a coaxing note entered her voice. “Y ou’re alone; youcan manage better than we can. Let me have this one—there’ s
more over there.” She pointed w ith her chin toward the slope
behind me, where the rebel dead and wounded lay .
My gras p must have loosened s lightly as I listened, for the
boy , who had h ung quiescent in my grasp, made a sudden
lunge an d burst free, diving over Jamie’ s body to roll at his
mother ’ s feet.
He got up besid e her , watching me with rat’ s eyes, beady-
bright and watchful. He bent and groped about in the grass,
coming up with the makeshift dagger .
“Hold ‘er of f, Mum,” he said , his voice raspy from the
choking. “I’ll take ‘im.”
From th e corner  of my eye, I had  caught the gleam of metal,
half buried in the grass.
“W ait!” I said, and took a step back. “Don’ t kill him.
Don’ t.” A step to the side, anot her back. “I’ll go, I’ll let you
have him, but…” I lunged to th e side and got my hand on the
cold metal hilt.
I had picked up Jamie’ s sword before. It was a cavalry
sword, l ar ger and heavier than the usual, but I didn’ t notice
now .
I snatched it up and swung it in a two-handed arc that ripped
the air and left the metal ringing in my hands.
Mother and son jumped back, identical looks of ludicrous
surprise on their round, grimy faces.
“Get away!” I said.
Her mouth opened, but she didn’ t say anything.
“I’m sorry for your man,” I said. “But my man lies here. Get
away , I said!” I raised the sword, and the woman stepped back
hastily , dragging the boy by the arm.
She turned and went, muttering curses at me over her
shoulder , but I paid no attentio n to what she said. The boy’ seyes stayed fixed on me as he went, dark coals in the dim
light. He would know me again—and I him.
They vanished in the mist, and I lowered the sword, which
suddenly weighe d too much to hold. I dropped it on the grass
and fell to my knees beside Jamie.
My own  heart was pounding in my ears and my hands were
shaking with reaction, as I groped for the pulse in his neck. I
turned his head and could see it, throbbing steadily just below
his jaw .
“Thank God!” I whispered to myself. “Oh, thank God!”
I ran  my hands over him quickly , searching for injury before
I mo ved him. I didn’ t think the scavengers would come back; I
could he ar the voices of a grou p of men, distant on the ridge
behind me—a rebel detail coming to fetch the wounded.
There w as a lar ge knot on his b row , already turning purple.
Nothing else that I could see . The boy had been right, I
thought, with gratitude; he was n’ t badly hurt. Then I rolled
him onto his back and saw his hand.
Highlanders were accustomed to fight with sword in one
hand, tar ge in the other , the sma ll leather shield used to deflect
an opponent’ s blow . He hadn’ t had a tar ge.
The blade had struck him bet ween the third and fourth
fingers of his right hand and sliced through the hand itself, a
deep, ug ly woun d that split his palm and the body of his hand,
halfway to the wrist.
Despite the horrid look of the wound, there wasn’ t much
blood; the hand had been curled under him, his weight acting
as a pressure bandage. The front of his shirt was smeared with
red, dee ply stained over his heart. I ripped open his shirt and
felt insid e, to be sure that the blood was from his hand, but it
was. His chest was cool and  damp from the grass but
unscathed, his nipples shrunken and stif f with chill.
“That… tickles,” he said in a  drowsy voice. He pawed
awkwardly at his chest with his left hand, trying to brush my
hand away .“Sorry ,” I said, repressing the u r ge to laugh with the joy of
seeing him alive and consciou s. I got an arm behind his
shoulders and helped him to sit up. He looked drunk, with one
eye swo llen half shut and grass in his hair . He acted drunk,
too, swaying alarmingly from side to side.
“How do you feel?” I asked.
“Sick,” he said succinctly . He l eaned to the side and threw
up.
I eas ed h im back  on the grass and wiped his mouth, then set
about bandaging his hand.
“Someone will be here soon,” I assured him. “W e’ll get you
back to the wagon, and I can take care of this.”
“Mmphm.” He grunted slightly as I pulled the bandage
tight. “What happened?”
“What happened ?” I stopped what I was doing and stared at
him. “Y ou’r e  asking me ?”
“What h appened in the battle, I mean,” he said patiently ,
regarding me with his one good  eye. “I know what happened
to me—roughly ,” he added, wincing as he touched his
forehead.
“Y es, roughly ,” I said rudely . “Y ou got yourself chopped
like a butchered hog, and your  head half caved in. Being a
sodding bloody hero again, that’ s what happened to you!”
“I wasna—” he began, but I interrupted, my relief over
seeing him alive being rapidly succeeded by rage.
“Y ou didn’ t have to go to T iconderoga! Y ou shouldn’ t  have
gone! Stick to the writing and  the printing, you said. Y ou
weren’ t going to fight unless you had to, you said. W ell, you
didn’ t  h ave to, but y ou did it anyw ay , you vain glorious,
pigheaded, grandstanding Scot!”
“Grandstanding?” he inquired.
“Y ou know just what I mean, be cause it’ s just what you did!
Y ou might have been killed!”“A ye,” he agreed ruefully . “I thought I was, when the
dragoon came down on me. I s creeched and scairt his horse,
though,” he added more cheerfu lly . “It reared up and got me in
the face with its knee.”
“Don’ t change the subject!” I snapped.
“Is the subject n ot that I’m not killed?” he asked, trying to
raise one brow and failing, with another wince.
“No! The subject is your stupidity , your bloody selfish
stubbornness!”
“Oh, that.”
“Y es, that! Y ou—you—oaf! Ho w dare you do that to me?
Y ou think I haven’ t got anything better to do with my life than
trot round after you, sticking p ieces back on?” I was frankly
shrieking at him by this time.
T o my increased fury , he grinned at me, his expression made
the more rakish by the half-closed eye.
“Y e’d have been a good fishwife, Sassenach,” he observed.
“Y e’ve the tongue for it.”
“Y ou shut up, you fucking bloody—”
“They’ll hear you,” he said mildly , with a wave toward the
party of Continental soldiers making their way down the slope
toward us.
“I don’ t care wh o hears me! If you weren’ t already hurt, I’d
—I’d—”
“Be careful, Sassenach,” he said, still grinning. “Y e dinna
want to knock o f f any more pieces; ye’ll only have to stick
them back on, aye?”
“Don’ t bloody tempt me,” I said through my teeth, with a
glance at the sword I had dropped.
He saw it and reached for it, but couldn’ t quite manage.
W ith an explosive snort, I leane d across his body and grabbed
the h ilt, putting it in his hand. I heard a shout from the men
coming down the hill and turned to wave at them.“Anyone hearin g ye just now would likely think ye didna
care for me owermuch, Sassenach,” he said, behind me.
I t urned to look down at him. T he impudent grin was gone,
but he was still smiling.
“Y e’ve the tongue of a venem ous shrew ,” he said, “but
you’re a bonnie wee swordsman, Sassenach.”
My mouth opened, but the word s that had been so abundant
a moment before had all evaporated like the rising mist.
He laid his goo d hand on my arm. “For now , a nighean
donn— thank ye for my life.”
I closed my mouth. The men had nearly reached us, rustling
through the grass, their exclamations and chatter drowning out
the ever -fainter moans of the wounded.
“Y ou’re welcome,” I said.
 
“HAMBURGER,” I SAID under my breath, but not far
enough under . He raised an eyebrow at me.
“Chopped meat,” I elaborated, and the eyebrow fell.
“Oh, aye, it is. Stopped a sword stroke wi’ my hand. T oo
bad I didna have a tar ge; I could have turned the stroke, easy .”
“Right.” I swallowed. It wasn’ t the worst injury I’d seen, by
a lon g shot, but  it still made me slightly sick. The tip of his
fourth finger had been sheared of f cleanly , at an angle just
below th e nail. The stroke had s liced a strip of flesh from the
inside of the fin ger and ripped down between the third and
fourth fingers.
“Y ou must have caught it near the hilt,” I said, trying for
calm. “Or it would have taken of f the outside half of your
hand.”
“Mmphm.” The hand didn’ t move as I prodded and poked,
but there was s weat on his up per lip, and he couldn’ t keep
back a brief grunt of pain.“Sorry ,” I murmured automatically .
“It’ s all right,” h e said, just as automatically . He closed his
eyes, then opened them.
“T ake it of f,” he said suddenly .
“What?” I drew back and looked at him, startled.
He nodded at his hand.
“The finger . T ake it of f, Sassenach.”
“I can’ t do that!” Even as I spoke, though, I knew that he
was right. Aside from the inj uries to the finger itself, the
tendon w as badly damaged; the chances of his ever being able
to move the finger , let alone move it without pain, were
infinitesimal.
“It’ s don e me little good in the last twenty years,” he said,
looking at the mangled stump dispassionately , “and likely to
do no better now . I’ve broken the damned thing half a dozen
times, from its sticking out like it does. If ye take it of f, it
willna trouble me anymore, at least.”
I wanted to ar gue, but there was no time; wounded men
were beginning to drift up the slope toward the wagon. The
men we re militia, not regular a rmy; if there was a regiment
near , there might be a sur geon with them, but I was closer .
“Once a  frigging hero, always a frigging hero,” I muttered
under my breath. I thrust a wad of lint into Jamie’ s bloody
palm and wrapped a linen bandage swiftly around the hand.
“Y es, I’ll have to take it of f, but later . Hold still.”
“Ouch,” he said mildly . “I did say I wasna a hero.”
“If y ou a ren’ t, it  isn’ t for lack of trying,” I said, yanking the
linen knot tight with my teeth. “There, that will have to do for
now; I’l l see to it when I have time.” I grabbed the wrapped
hand and plunged it into the small basin of alcohol and water .
He went  white as the alcohol seeped through the cloth and
struck raw flesh. He inhaled s harply through his teeth, but
didn’ t say anything more. I poin ted peremptorily at the blanketI h ad spread on the ground, and he lay back obediently , curling
up under the s helter of the wagon, bandaged fist cradled
against his breast.
I ros e from my knees, but hesitated for a moment. Then I
knelt again and hastily kissed t he back of his neck, brushing
aside th e queue of his hair , matted with half-dried mud and
dead leaves. I could just see the curve of his cheek; it tightened
briefly as he smiled and then relaxed.
W ord had spread that the hospital wagon was there; there
was already a straggling group of walking wounded awaiting
attention, and I could see men c arrying or half-dragging their
injured companions toward the light of my lantern. It was
going to be a busy evening.
Colonel Everett had promised me two assistants, but God
knew where the colonel was at the moment. I took a moment
to survey the gathering crowd and picked out a young man
who had just deposited a wounded friend beneath a tree.
“Y ou,” I said, t ugging on his sleeve. “Are you afraid of
blood?”
He looked momentarily startled, then grinned at me through
a m ask of mud and powder sm oke. He was about my height,
broad-shouldered and stocky , wi th a face that might have been
called cherubic had it been less filthy .
“Only i f it’ s mine, ma’am, an d so far it ain’ t, Lord be
praised.”
“Then come with me,” I said, s miling back. “Y ou’re now a
triage aide.”
“Say what? Hey , Harry!” he y elled to his friend. “I been
promoted. T ell your mama next time you write, Lester done
amounted to something, after all!” He swaggered after me, still
grinning.
The grin rapidly faded into a loo k of frowning absorption as
I led him quickly among the wounded, pointing out degrees of
severity .“Men p ouring blood are the f irst priority ,” I told him. I
thrust an  armful  of linen banda ges and a sack of lint into his
hands. “Give them these—tell their friends to press the lint
hard on the wounds or put a tourniquet round the limb above
the wound. Y ou know what a tourniquet is?”
“Oh, yes , ma’am,” he assured me. “Put one on, too, when a
panther clawed up my cousin Jess, down to Caroline County .”
“Good. Don’ t spend time doing  it yourself here unless you
have to, though—let their friends do it. Now , broken bones can
wait a bit—put them over the re under that big beech tree.
Head injuries and internal injuries that aren’ t bleeding, back
there, by the che stnut tree, if the y can be moved. If not, I’ll go
to th em.” I pointed behind me , then turned in a half circle,
surveying the ground.
“If you see a couple of whole m en, send them up to put up
the h ospital tent; it’ s to go in that flattish spot, there. And then
a couple more, to dig a latrine trench … over there, I think.”
“Y es, sir ! Ma’am, I mean!” Lest er bobbed his head and took
a firm grip on his sack of lint. “I be right after it, ma’am.
Though I wouldn’ t worry none about the latrines for a while,”
he a dded. “Most of these boys a lready done had the shit scairt
out of ‘em.” He  grinned and bobbed once more, then set out
on his rounds.
He was right; the faint stink of feces hung in the air as it
always did on battlefields, a low note amid the pungencies of
blood and smoke.
W ith Le ster sorting the wounded, I settled down to the work
of r epair , with my medicine b ox, suture bag, and bowl of
alcohol set on the wagon’ s tailboard and a keg of alcohol for
the patients to sit on—provided they could sit.
The worst of the casualties were bayonet wounds; luckily
there had been n o grapeshot, and the men hit by cannonballs
were long past the point where I could help them. As I
worked, I listened with half an ear to the conversation of the
men awaiting attention.“W asn’ t that the damnedest thing ye ever saw? How many
o’ the buggers were there?” one man was asking his neighbor .
“Damned if I know ,” his friend replied, shaking his head.
“For a space there, ever ’ thing I saw was red, and nothin’ but.
Then a cannon went of f right c lose, and I didn’ t see nothin’
but s moke for a  good long time .” He rubbed at his face; tears
from watering eyes had made long streaks in the black soot
that covered him from chest to forehead.
I g lance d back at the wagon but couldn’ t see under it. I
hoped shock and fatigue had enabled Jamie to sleep, in spite of
his hand, but I doubted it.
Despite the fact that nearly ever yone near me was wounded
in some fashion, their spirits were high and the general mood
was one  of exuberant relief and exultation. Farther down the
hill, in the mists near the river , I could hear whoops and shouts
of v ictory and the undisciplined racket of fifes and drums,
rattling and screeching in random exhilaration.
Among the noise, a nearer voice called out: a uniformed
of ficer , on a bay horse.
“Anybody seen that big redheaded bastard who broke the
char ge?”
There was a murmur and a general looking around, but no
one answered. The horseman dismounted and, wrapping his
reins over a br anch, made his way through the throng of
wounded toward me.
“Whoever he is, I tell you, he’ s got balls the size of ten-
pound shot,” remarked the man whose cheek I was stitching.
“And a head of the same consistency ,” I murmured.
“Eh?” He glanced sideways at me in bewilderment.
“Nothing,” I said. “Hold still just a moment longer; I’m
nearly done.”
 IT W AS A HEL LISH night. Some of the wounded still
lay i n th e ravine s and hollows, a s did all the dead. The wolves
that cam e silently out of the wood did not distinguish between
them, judging from the distant screams.
It was nearly d awn before I ca me back to the tent where
Jamie la y . I lifted the flap quietly , so as not to disturb him, but
he was already awake, lying curled on his side facing the flap,
head resting on a folded blanket.
He smiled faintly when he saw me.
“A hard night, Sassenach?” he asked, his voice slightly
hoarse f rom cold  air and disuse.  Mist seeped under the edge of
the flap, tinted yellow by the lantern light.
“I’ve ha d worse.” I smoothed th e hair of f his face, looking
him over carefully . He was pale  but not clammy . His face was
drawn with pain, but his skin w as cool to the touch—no trace
of fever . “Y ou haven’ t slept, have you? How do you feel?”
“A bit scairt,” he said. “And a bit sick. But better now
you’re h ere.” He gave me a one-sided grimace that was almost
a smile.
I pu t a hand under his jaw , fingers pressed against the pulse
in h is neck. His heart bumped  steadily under my fingertips,
and I shivered briefly , remembering the woman in the field.
“Y ou’re chilled, Sassenach,” he said, feeling it. “And tired,
too. Go and sleep, aye? I’ll do a bit longer .”
I was  t ired . The adren aline of the battle and the night’ s work
was fad ing fast; fatigue was creeping down my spine and
loosening my joints. But I had a good idea of what the hours
of waiting had cost him already .
“It won’ t take long,” I reassured him. “And it will be better
to have it over . Then you can sleep easy .”
He nodded, though he didn’ t look noticeably reassured. I
unfolded the small worktable I had carried in from the
operating tent and set it up in easy reach. Then I took out theprecious bottle of laudanum an d poured an inch of the dark,
odorous liquid into a cup.
“Sip it slowly ,” I said, putting it into his left hand. I began to
lay out the ins truments I would need, making sure that
everything lay orderly and to h and. I had thought of asking
Lester to come and assist me, but he had been asleep on his
feet, swaying drunkenly under the dim lanterns in the
operating tent, and I had sent him of f to find a blanket and a
spot by the fire.
A small scalpel, freshly sharpen ed. The jar of alcohol, with
the wet ligature s coiled inside like a nest of tiny vipers, each
toothed with a small, curved needle. Another with the waxed
dry ligatures for arterial compression. A bouquet of probes,
their en ds soaking in alcohol. Forceps. Long-handled
retractors. The hooked tenaculum, for catching the ends of
severed arteries.
The sur gical scissors with their short, curved blades and the
handles shaped to fit my grasp, made to my order by the
silversmith Step hen Moray . Or almost to my order . I had
insisted that the scissors be as plain as possible, to make them
easy to clean an d disinfect. Stephen had obliged with a chaste
and elegant design, but had not been able to resist one small
flourish—one h andle boasted a hooklike extension against
which I could b race my little finger in order to exert more
force, and this extrusion formed a smooth, lithe curve,
flowering at the tip into a slend er rosebud against a spray of
leaves. T he con trast between the heavy , vicious blades at one
end and this delicate conceit at the other always made me
smile when I lifted the scissors from their case.
Strips o f cotton gauze and heavy linen, pads of lint,
adhesive plasters stained red with the dragon’ s-blood juice that
made them sticky . An open bow l of alcohol for disinfection as
I wo rked, and th e jars of cinchona bark, mashed garlic paste,
and yarrow for dressing.
“There we are,” I said with satisfaction, checking the array
one last time. E verything must be ready , since I was workingby m yself; if I for got something , no one would be at hand to
fetch it for me.
“It seems a great deal o’ preparation, for one measly finger ,”
Jamie observed behind me.
I s wung  around to find him leaning on one elbow , watching,
the cup of laudanum undrunk in his hand.
“Could ye not just whack it of f wi’ a wee knife and seal the
wound with hot iron, like the regimental sur geons do?”
“I co uld, yes,” I said dryly . “But fortunately I don’ t have to;
we have enough time to do th e job properly . That’ s why I
made you wait.”
“Mmphm.” He surveyed the row of gleaming instruments
without enthusiasm, and it was clear that he would much
rather ha ve had the business over and done with as quickly as
possible. I realized that to him  this looked like slow and
ritualized torture, rather than sophisticated sur gery .
“I m ean to leave you with a working hand,” I told him
firmly . “No infection, no suppurating stump, no clumsy
mutilation, and—God willing—no pain, once it heals.”
His eyebrows went up at that. He had never mentioned it,
but I was well aware that his r ight hand and its troublesome
fourth finger had caused him in termittent pain for years, ever
since it had bee n crushed at W entworth Prison, when he was
held prisoner there in the days before the Stuart Rising.
“A bar g ain’ s a bar gain,” I said, with a nod at the cup in his
hand. “Drink it.”
He l ifted the cup and poked a lo ng nose reluctantly over the
rim, nostrils twitching at the s ickly-sweet scent. He let the
dark liquid touch the end of his tongue and made a face.
“It will make me sick.”
“It will make you sleep.”
“It gives me terrible dreams.”“As long as you  don’ t chase rabbits in your sleep, it won’ t
matter ,” I assured him. He laughed despite himself, but had
one final try .
“It tastes like the stuf f ye scrape out of horses’ hooves.”
“And when was the last time yo u licked a horse’ s hoof?” I
demanded, hand s on my hips. I gave him a medium-intensity
glare, suitable for the intimidation of petty bureaucrats and
low-level army of ficials.
He sighed.
“Y e mean it, aye?”
“I do.”
“All right, then.” W ith a reproachful look of long-suf fering
resignation, he threw back his h ead and tossed the contents of
the cup down in one gulp.
A convulsive shudder racked him, and he made small
choking noises.
“I did say to sip it,” I observed mildly . “V omit, and I’ll
make you lick it up of f the floor .”
Given the scuf fled dirt and trampled grass underfoot, this
was plai nly an idle threat, but he  pressed his lips and eyes tight
shut an d lay back on the pillow , breathing heavily and
swallowing convulsively every few seconds. I brought up a
low stool and sat down by the camp bed to wait.
“How do you feel?” I asked, a few minutes later .
“Dizzy ,” he replied. He cracked one eye open and viewed
me thro ugh the narrow blue sli t, then groaned and closed it.
“As if I’m falling of f a clif f. It’ s a verra unpleasant sensation,
Sassenach.”
“T ry to think of  something else for a minute,” I suggested.
“Something pleasant, to take your mind of f it.”
His brow furrowed for a moment, then relaxed.“Stand up a moment, will ye?” he said. I obligingly stood,
wondering what  he wanted. He  opened his eyes, reached out
with his good hand, and took a firm grip of my buttock.
“There,” he said. “That’ s the best thing I can think of.
Having a good hold on your arse always makes me feel
steady .”
I lau ghed and m oved a few inches closer to him, so his
forehead pressed against my thighs.
“W ell, it’ s a portable remedy , at least.”
He close d his eyes then and held on tight, breathing slowly
and deeply . The harsh lines of p ain and exhaustion in his face
began to soften as the drug took ef fect.
“Jamie,” I said softly , after a minute. “I’m sorry about it.”
He o pened his e yes, looked upward, and smiled, giving me
a slight squeeze.
“A ye, well,” he said. His pupi ls had begun to shrink; his
eyes were sea-deep and fathoml ess, as though he looked into a
great distance.
“T ell me, Sassenach,” he said, a  moment later . “If someone
stood a man before ye and told ye that if ye were to cut of f
your finger , the man would live, and if ye did not, he would
die—would ye do it?”
“I don’ t know ,” I said, slightly startled. “If that was the
choice, a nd no doubt about it, an d he was a good man … yes, I
suppose I would. I wouldn’ t like it a bit, though,” I added
practically , and his mouth curved in a smile.
“No,” he  said. His expression was growing soft and dreamy .
“Did ye know ,” he said after a moment, “a colonel came to see
me, wh ilst ye were at work wi’ the wounded? Colonel
Johnson; Micah Johnson, his name was.”
“No; what did he say?”
His grip on my bottom was beginning to slacken; I put my
own hand over his, to hold it in place.“It was his com pany—in the fight. Part of Mor gan’ s, and
the rest of the regiment just ov er the hill, in the path of the
British. If the c har ge had gone through, they’d ha’ lost the
company surely , he said, and God knows what might have
become o’ the rest.” His soft  Highland burr was growing
broader , his eyes fixed on my skirt.
“So you saved them,” I said g ently . “How many men are
there in a company?”
“Fifty ,” he said. “Though they wouldna all have been killed,
I dinna suppose.” His hand slipped; he caught it and took a
fresh grip, chuckling slightly . I could feel his breath through
my skirt, warm on my thighs.
“I was thinking it was like the Bible, aye?”
“Y es?” I pressed his hand aga inst the curve of my hip,
keeping it in place.
“That bi t where Abraham is bar gaining wi’ the Lord for the
Cities o f the Plain. ‘W ilt thou  not destroy the city ,’ ” he
quoted, ” ‘for th e sake of fifty just men?’ And then Abraham
does Him  down,  a bit at a time, from fifty to forty , and then to
thirty , and twenty and ten.”
His eyes were half closed, an d his voice peaceful and
unconcerned.
“I didna have time to inquire into the moral state of any o’
the men in that company . But ye’d think there might be ten
just men among them—good men?”
“I’m su re there are.” His hand  was heavy , his arm gone
nearly limp.
“Or five. Or even one. One would be enough.”
“I’m sure there’ s one.”
“The apple-faced laddie that helped ye wi’ the wounded—
he’ s one?”
“Y es, he’ s one.”
He sighed deeply , his eyes nearly shut.“T ell him I dinna grudge him the finger , then,” he said.
I held his good hand tightly for a minute. He was breathing
slowly a nd deeply , his mouth g one slack in utter relaxation. I
rolled him gently onto his back and laid the hand across his
chest.
“Bloody man,” I whispered. “I knew you’d make me cry .”
 
THE CAMP OUTSIDE lay quie t, in the last moments of
slumber before  the rising su n should stir the men to
movement. I could hear the occ asional call of a picket and the
murmur of conversation as two  foragers passed close by my
tent, bou nd for the woods to hunt. The campfires outside had
burned to embers, but I had three lanterns, arranged to cast
light without shadow .
I l aid a thin square of soft pine across my lap as a working
surface. Jamie lay facedown on the camp bed, head turned
toward me so I could keep an ey e on his color . He was solidly
asleep; his breath came slow and he didn’ t flinch when I
pressed the sharp tip of a probe  against the back of his hand.
All ready .
The hand was swollen, puf fy , and discolored, the sword
wound a thick black line against the sun-gold skin. I closed my
eyes for a mome nt, holding his wrist, counting his pulse. One-
and-two-and-thr ee-and-four…
I s eldom prayed consciously w hen preparing for sur gery ,
but I did look for something—s omething I could not describe
but always recognized: a certain quietness of soul, the
detachment of mind in which I could balance on that knife-
edge between ruthlessness and compassion, at once engaged in
utmost intimacy  with the body under my hands and capable of
destroying what I touched in the name of healing.
One-and-two-and-thr ee-and-four…
I rea lized with a  start that my own heartbeat had slowed; the
pulse in  my fingertip matched that in Jamie’ s wrist, beat forbeat, slo w and strong. If I was waiting for a sign, I supposed
that would do. Ready , steady , go , I thought, and picked up the
scalpel.
A short horizontal incision over the fourth and fifth
knuckles, then down, cutting the skin nearly to the wrist. I
undermined the skin carefully with the scissors’ tips, then
pinned back the loose flap of skin with one of the long steel
probes, digging it into the soft wood of the board.
I had a s mall bu lb atomizer filled with a solution of distilled
water an d alcohol; sterility being impossible, I used this to lay
a fine mist over  the operating field and wash away the first
welling of blood. Not too much; the vasoconstrictor I had
given him was working, but the ef fect wouldn’ t last long.
I gently nudged apart the muscle fibers—those that were
still whole—to expose the bone and its overlying tendon,
gleaming silver among the vivid colors of the body . The sword
had cut the tend on nearly through, an inch above the carpal
bones. I  severed the few remaining fibers, and the hand
twitched disconcertingly in reflex.
I b it my lip, bu t it was all right; aside from the hand, he
hadn’ t m oved. He felt dif ferent; his flesh had more life than
that of a man  under ether or Pentothal. He was not
anesthetized but  only drugged into stupor; the feel of his flesh
was resilient, not the pliant flaccidity I had been accustomed to
in m y days at the hospital in m y own time. Still, it was a far
cry—and an immeasurable relief—from the live and panicked
convulsions that I had felt und er my hands in the sur geon’ s
tent.
I bru shed the cu t tendon aside with the forceps. There was
the deep branch of the ulnar ne rve, a delicate thread of white
myelin, with its tiny branches spreading into invisibility , deep
in th e tissues. Good, it was far enough toward the fifth finger
that I could work without damage to the main nerve trunk.
Y ou never knew; textbook illustrations were one thing, but
the first thing any sur geon le arned was that bodies were
unnervingly unique. A stomach would be roughly where youexpected it to be, but the nerves and blood vessels that
supplied it might be anywhere in the general vicinity , and quite
possibly varying in shape and number , as well.
But now I knew the secrets of this hand. I could see the
engineering of it, the structu res that gave it form and
movement. The re was the beautiful strong arch of the third
metacarpal, and  the delicacy of the web of blood vessels that
supplied it. Blood welled, slow and vivid: deep red in the tiny
pool of the open field; brilliant scarlet where it stained the
chopped bone; a dark and roy al blue in the tiny vein that
pulsed below the joint; a crusty black at the edge of the
original wound, where it had clotted.
I had known, without asking m yself how , that the fourth
metacarpal was shattered. It was; the blade had struck near the
proximal end of the bone, spli ntering its tiny head near the
center of the hand.
I wo uld take that, too, then; the free chunks of bone would
have to be remo ved in any case , to prevent them irritating the
adjoining tissues. Removing the metacarpal would let the third
and fifth fingers lie close toge ther , in ef fect narrowing the
hand and eliminating the awkw ard gap that would be left by
the missing finger .
I p ulled  hard on the mangled finger , to open the articular
space between the joints, then used the tip of the scalpel to
sever the ligament. The cartila ges separated with a tiny but
audible pop!  and Jamie jerked and groaned, his hand twisting
in my grasp.
“Hush,” I whispered to him, h olding tight. “Hush, it’ s all
right. I’m here, it’ s all right.”
I cou ld d o nothi ng for the boys dying on the field, but here,
for him,  I could of fer magic and know the spell would hold.
He h eard me, de ep in troubled opium dreams; he frowned and
muttered somet hing unintelligi ble, then sighed deeply and
relaxed, his wrist going once more limp under my hand.Somewhere near at hand, a roos ter crowed, and I glanced at
the wall of the tent. It was noticeably lighter , and a faint dawn
wind drifted through the slit be hind me, cool on the back of
my neck.
Detach t he unde rlying muscle with as little damage as could
be m anaged. T ie of f the small  digital artery and two other
vessels t hat seemed lar ge enough to bother with, sever the last
few fibe rs and shreds of skin th at held the finger , then lift it
free, the dangling metacarpal s urprisingly white and naked,
like a rat’ s tail.
It w as a clean, n eat job, but I felt a brief sense of sadness as
I set the mangled  piece of flesh aside. I had a fleeting vision of
him hold ing newly born Jemmy , counting the tiny fingers and
toes, delight and wonder on his face. His father had counted
his fingers, too.
“It’ s all right,” I whispered, as much to myself as to him.
“It’ s all right. It will heal.”
The rest  was quick. Forceps to pluck out the tiny pieces of
shattered bone. I debrided the w ound as best I could, removing
bits of grass and dirt, even a tiny swatch of fabric that had
been dri ven into the flesh. Th en no more than a matter of
cleaning the ragged edge of the wound, snipping a small
excess o f skin, and suturing the incisions. A paste of garlic and
white-oak leaves, mixed with alcohol and spread thickly over
the hand, a padding of lint and gauze, and a tight bandage of
linen and adhesive plasters, to reduce the swelling and
encourage the third and fifth fingers to draw close together .
The sun  was nearly up; the lan tern overhead seemed dim
and feeb le. My eyes were burning from the close work and the
smoke of fires. There were v oices outside, the voices of
of ficers moving among the men, rousing them to face the day
—and the enemy?
I l aid Jamie’ s hand on the cot, near his face. He was pale,
but n ot e xcessively so, and his l ips were a light rosy color , not
blue. I dropped the instruments  into a bucket of alcohol and
water , su ddenly too tired to clea n them properly . I wrapped thediscarded finger in a linen band age, not quite sure what to do
with it, and left it on the table.
“Rise and shine! Rise and shine!” came the ser geants’
rhythmic cry from outside, punctuated by witty variations and
crude responses from reluctant risers.
I did n’ t bother to undress; if there was fighting today , I
would be roused soon enough. Not Jamie, though. I had
nothing to worry about; no matter what happened, he wouldn’ t
fight today .
I u npinn ed my hair and shook it down over my shoulders,
sighing with relief at its looseness. Then I lay down on the cot
beside him, close against him. He lay on his stomach; I could
see the small, muscular swell o f his buttocks, smooth under
the blan ket that covered him. On impulse, I laid my hand on
his rump and squeezed.
“Sweet dreams,” I said, and let the tiredness take me. SEP ARA TED FOREVER FROM MY FRIENDS
AND KIN
 
L IEUTENANT L ORD ELLESMERE had finally killed
a rebel. Several , he thought, though he could not be sure of
those he’d shot at; some of them fell but might be only
wounded. He was sure of the man who had attacked one of the
British cannon, with a party of other rebels. He’d hacked that
man hal f throug h the body with  a cavalry saber , and he felt a
strange n umbness in his sword arm for several days after , this
making him flex his left hand every few minutes to be sure he
could still use it.
The numbness was not limited to his arm.
The day s after the battle in the British camp were spent
partially in the o rderly retrieval of the wounded, the burial of
the dead, and in regathering their forces. What forces remained
to be  gathered. D esertion was rife; there was a constant small
stream of furtive departures—one day a whole company of
Brunswickers defected.
He oversaw more than one burial detail, watching with set
face as men—an d boys—he knew were consigned to the earth.
On t he first couple of days, they hadn’ t buried the bodies deep
enough, and were obliged to listen all night to the howling and
snarling of wolves fighting over the carcasses they had
dragged from the shallow graves. They reburied what was left
the next day , deeper .
Fires burned every hundred yard s around the camp at night,
for Ame rican sharpshooters came close in the dark, taking out
the pickets.
The days were blazingly hot, the nights miserably cold—
and no one res ted. Bur goyne had issued an order that no
officer nor soldier should ever sleep without his cloaths , andW illiam had not changed his linen in more than a week. It
didn’ t m atter what he smelled like; his own reek was
undetectable. Th e men were obliged to be in the lines, with
their arms, an ho ur before dawn, and to remain there until the
sun had burned away the fog, t o be sure the fog did not hide
Americans ready to attack.
The dail y bread allowance was c ut. Salt pork and flour were
running out, and the sutlers lack ed tobacco and brandy , to the
disgruntlement of the German troops. On the good side, the
British defenses were in splendid order , with two lar ge
redoubts built and a thousand men sent out to cut trees to open
fields of fire for the artillery . And Bur goyne had announced
that General Clinton was expe cted within ten days, with a
supporting force—and food, it was to be hoped. All they had
to do was wait.
“The Jew s wait the Messiah not  more than we wait General
Clinton,” joked Ober -Leftenant Gruenwald, who had by some
miracle survived his wound at Bennington.
“Ha-ha,” said W illiam.
 
THE AMERICAN CAMP was in good spirits, more than
ready to finish the job they had started. Unfortunately , while
the British camp was short of  rations, the Americans were
short of ammunition and powder . The result was a period of
restless stasis, during which the  Americans picked constantly
at the periphery  of the British camp but could make no real
progress.
Ian Mur ray found this tedious in the extreme, and after a
token foray in t he fog had resulted in a careless companion’ s
stepping on a di scarded gun spike and puncturing his foot, he
decided this was adequate excuse to pay a visit to the hospital
tent where Rachel Hunter was assisting her brother .
The prospect so animated him, though, that he paid
inadequate attention to his own footing in the fog and plungedheadfirst into a ravine, striking his head a glancing blow on a
rock. T hus it was that the two men limped into camp,
supporting each other , and made their halting way to the
hospital tent.
It was busy in  the tent; this was not where the battle-
wounded lay but where those w ith trivial af flictions came for
treatment. Ian’ s head was not br oken, but he was seeing two of
everything, and closed one eye in hopes that this might help
him spot Rachel.
“Ho ro,” someone behind him said in open approval, “mo
nighean donn boidheach!”  For  one head-s pinning instant, he
thought it was his uncle speaking and blinked stupidly ,
wondering why Uncle Jamie should be making flirtatious
remarks to his aunt while she was working—but Auntie Claire
wasn’ t here at all, his slow wits reminded him, so what…
One hand over his eye to keep it from falling out of his
head, he turned carefully and saw a man in the opening of the
tent.
The morning sun struck sparks  from the man’ s hair , and
Ian’ s mouth fell open, feeling that he had been struck in the pit
of the stomach.
It w asn’ t Uncle Jamie, he could see that at once as the man
came in,  also helping a limping comrade. The face was wrong:
red and weather -beaten, with cheerful, snub features; the hair
was gin ger , not  rufous, and rec eded sharply from the man’ s
temples. He was solidly built, not terribly tall, but the way he
moved… like a catamount, even burdened with his friend, and
for some reason Ian could not re move the lingering impression
of Jamie Fraser .
The re d-haired man was kilted; they both were.
Highlanders , he thought, thoroughly fuddled. But he’d known
that from the moment the man spoke.
“Co thu?”  Ian asked abruptly . Who ar e you?
Hearing the Gaelic, the man looked at him, startled. He gave
Ian a  qu ick up-a nd-down, taking  in his Mohawk dress, beforeanswering.
“Is mise Seaumais Mac Choinnich a Boisdale,”  he
answered, courteously enough. “Co tha faighneachd?” I am
Hamish MacKenzie, of Boisdale. Who asks?
“Ian Murray ,” he replied, trying to focus his addled wits.
The name sounded faintly familiar—but why would it not? He
knew hundreds of MacKenzie s. “My grandmother was a
MacKenzie,” he of fered, in the usual way of establishing
relations among strangers. “Ellen MacKenzie, of Leoch.”
The man’ s eyes sprang wide
“Ellen, of Leoch?” cried the man, very excited. “Daughter
of him they called Jacob Ruaidh?”
In his excitement, Hamish’ s grip had tightened on his friend,
and the man ga ve a yelp. This  attracted the attention of the
young woman—the one Hamish had greeted as “O, beautiful
nut-brown maiden”—and she came hurrying to see the matter .
She was  n ut brown, Ian saw; Rachel Hunter , tanned by the
sun to the exact soft shade of a hickory nut, what showed of
her hair beneath  her kerchief the  shade of walnut hulls, and he
smiled at the thought. She saw him and narrowed her eyes.
“W ell, and if th ee is able to grin like an ape, thee is not
much hu rt. Why—” She stopped, astonished at the sight of Ian
Murray locked in embrace with a kilted Highlander , who was
weeping with joy . Ian was not weeping, but was undeniably
pleased.
“Y e’ll want to meet my uncle Jamie,” he said, adroitly
disentangling himself. “ Seaumais Ruaidh , I think ye called
him.”
 
JAMIE FRASER HAD his eyes shut, cautiously
exploring the pain in his hand. It was sharp-edged, strong
enough to make him queasy , bu t with that deep, grinding ache
common to broken bones. Still, it was a healing ache. Clairespoke of bones knitting—and he’d often thought this was more
than a metaphor ; it sometimes felt that someone was indeed
stabbing steel needles into the bone and forcing the shattered
ends back into s ome pattern, heedless of how the flesh around
them felt about it.
He should look at his hand, he knew that. He had to get used
to it, after all. He’d had the one quick glance, and it had left
him diz zy and on the point  of vomiting out of sheer
confoundment. He could not reconcile the sight, the feel of it,
with the strong memory of how his hand ought to  be.
He’d do ne it before, though, he reminded himself. He’d got
used to the sc ars and the stif fness. And yet… he could
remember how his young hand  had felt, had looked, so easy ,
limber and painless, folded roun d the handle of a hoe, the hilt
of a swo rd. Clut ching a quill—well, no. He smiled ruefully to
himself. That hadn’ t been either  easy or limber , even with his
fingers at their unmarred best.
W ould he be ab le to write at all with his hand now? he
wondered suddenly , and in curiosity flexed his hand a little.
The pain made him gasp, but…  his eyes were open, fixed on
his hand . The disconcerting sig ht of his little finger pressed
close to  the middle one did make his belly clench, but… his
fingers curled. It hurt like Christ crucified, but it was just pain;
there was no pull, no stubbor n hindrance from the frozen
finger . It… worked.
“I mean to leave you with a working hand,”  He cou ld hear
Claire’ s voice, breathless but sure.
He s miled a littl e. It didn’ t do to ar gue with the woman over
any matter medical.
 
I C AME  INT O the tent to fetch my small cautery iron
and foun d Jamie sitting on the cot, slowly flexing his injured
hand and contemplating his seve red finger , which lay on a boxbeside h im. I had wrapped it ha stily in a plaster bandage, and
it looked like a mummified worm.
“Er ,” I said delicately . “I’ll, um, dispose of that, shall I?”
“How?” He put out a tentative forefinger , touched it, then
snatched back his hand as though the detached finger had
moved suddenly . He made a small, nervous sound that wasn’ t
quite a laugh.
“Burn it?” I suggested. That was the usual method for
disposing of amputated limbs on battlefields, though I had
never personally done it. The notion of building a funeral pyre
for t he cremation of a single finger seemed suddenly absurd—
though n o more  so than the idea of simply tossing it into one
of the cookfires and hoping no one noticed.
Jamie made a du bious noise in his throat, indicating that he
wasn’ t keen on the idea.
“W ell… I suppose you could sm oke it,” I said, with equal
dubiety . “And keep it in your  sporran as a souvenir . Like
Y oung I an did with Neil Forbes’ s ear . Has he still got that, do
you know?”
“A ye, he does.” Jamie’ s color w as beginning to come back,
as h e regained his self-possess ion. “But, no, I dinna think I
want to do that.”
“I could pickle it in spirits of wine,” I of fered. That got the
ghost of a smile.
“T en to one, som eone would drink it before the day was out,
Sassenach.” I thought that was generous odds, myself. More
like a thousand  to one. I managed to keep my medicinal
alcohol mostly intact only by virtue of having one of Ian’ s
more ferocious Indian acquaintances guard it, when I wasn’ t
using it—and sleeping with the keg next to me at night.
“W ell, I think that leaves burial as the only other option.”
“Mmphm.” Th at sound indicated agreement, but with
reservations, and I glanced up at him.
“What?”“A ye, well,” he said, rather dif fidently . “When wee Fer gus
lost his hand, we  … well, it was Jenny’ s notion. But we held a
bit of a funeral, ken?”
I b it my lip. “W ell, why not? W ill it be a family af fair , or
shall we invite everyone?”
Before h e could answer this, I heard Ian’ s voice outside,
talking to someone, and an ins tant later his disheveled head
pushed through the flap. One of his eyes was black and
swollen and there was a sizable lump on his head, but he was
grinning from ear to ear .
“Uncle Jamie?” he said. “There’ s someone here to see ye.”
 
“HOW I S IT that ye come to be here, a charaid?”  Jamie
asked, somewhere after the third bottle. W e had had supper
long since, and the campfire was burning low .
Hamish wiped his mouth and handed the new bottle back.
“Here,” he repeated. “Here in the wilderness, d’ye mean?
Or here, fighting against the King?” He gave Jamie a direct
blue loo k, so like one of Jamie’ s own that Jamie smiled,
recognizing it.
“Is t he second o f those questions the answer to the first?” he
said, and Hamish gave him the shadow of a smile in return.
“A ye, th at would be it. Y e were always quick as the
hummingbird, a Sheaumais . In body and  mind.” Seeing from
my expression that I was perhaps not quite so swift in my
perceptions, he turned to me.
“It was the Kin g’ s troops who killed my uncle, the King’ s
soldiers who killed the fighting men of the clan, who
destroyed the land, who left t he women and the bairns to
starve—who battered down my home and exiled me, who
killed ha lf the people left to me  with cold and hunger and the
plagues of the wilderness.” He spoke quietly , but with a
passion that burned in his eyes.“I was eleven years old when t hey came to the castle and
put us out. I turned twelve on the day that they made me swear
my oath  to the King—they said  I was a man. And by the time
we reached Nova Scotia… I was.”
He turned to Jamie.
“They made ye swear , too, a Sheaumais ?”
“They d id,” Jamie said softly . “ A forced oath canna bind a
man, though, or keep him from his knowledge of right.”
Hamish put out a hand, and Ja mie gripped it, though they
did not look at each other .
“No,” he said, with certainty . “That it cannot.”
Perhaps not; but I knew they w ere both thinking, as I was,
of the language  of that oath: May I lie in an  unconsecrated
grave, separated for ever fr om my friends and kin . And both
thinking—as I was—how great the odds were that that fate
was exactly what would happen to them.
And to me.
I cleared my throat.
“But the  others,” I said, impelled by the memory of so many
I h ad known in  North Carolina, and knowing the same was
true of many in Canada. “The Highlanders who are
Loyalists?”
“A ye, well,” Hamish said softly ,  and looked into the fire, the
lines of his face cut deep by it s glow . “They fought bravely ,
but the heart of them was kille d. They want only peace now
and to be left alo ne. But war do esna leave any alone, does it?”
He l ooked suddenly at me, and  for a startling instant I saw
Dougal MacKenzie looking out of his eyes, that impatient,
violent man who had hungered for war . Not waiting for an
answer , he shrugged and went on.
“W ar ’ s found them again; they’ve nay choice but to fight.
But anyone can see what a pitif ul rabble the Continental army
is—or was.” He lifted his head, nodding a little, as though to
himself, at sight of the campfires, the tents, the vast cloud ofstarlit ha ze that hung above us, full of smoke and dust and the
scent of guns an d ordure. “They thought the rebels would be
crushed, and quickly . Oath notwithstanding, who but a fool
would join such risky business?”
A man who had had no chance to fight befor e , I thought.
He smiled crookedly at Jamie.
“I am surprised we were not cru shed,” he said, sounding in
fact faintly surprised. “Are ye not surprised as well, a
Sheaumais ?”
“Amazed,” Jami e said, a faint smile on his own face. “Glad
of it, though. And glad of you … a Sheaumais.”
They tal ked through most of the night. When they lapsed
into Gae lic, I got up, put a hand on Jamie’ s shoulder in token
of g ood night, an d crawled into my blankets. Exhausted by the
day’ s work, I drifted into sleep at once, soothed by the sound
of their quiet talk, like the soun d of bees in the heather . The
last thing I saw  before sleep took me was Y oung Ian’ s face
across t he fire, rapt at hearin g of the Scotland that had
vanished just as he himself was born. A GENTLEMAN CALLER
 
M RS. FRASER?”  A pleasant m asculine voice spoke
behind me, and I turned to se e a stocky , broad-shouldered
of ficer in the doorway of my tent, in shirtsleeves and
waistcoat, a box cradled in one arm.
“I am. May I help you?”
He d idn’ t look sick; in fact, he was healthier -looking than
most of the army , his face very weathered but well-fleshed and
ruddy . He smiled, a sudden, charming smile that quite
transformed his big beaky nose and heavy brows.
“I was in hopes that we might tr ansact a little business, Mrs.
Fraser .” He raised one of the bushy brows and, at my gesture
of invitation, came into the tent, ducking only a little.
“I su ppose that depends what you’re looking for ,” I said,
with a curious look at his box. “ If it’ s whisky , I can’ t give you
that, I’m  afraid.”  There was in fact a small keg of this valuable
substance hidden under the table at the moment, along with a
lar ger ke g of my raw medicinal  alcohol—and the smell of the
latter was strong in the air , as I was steeping herbs in it. This
gentleman was not the first to have been drawn by the scent—
it attracted soldiers of all ranks like flies.
“Oh, no ,” he assured me, though casting an interested look
at the table behind me, where I had several lar ge jars in which
I was growing what I hoped was penicillin. “I’m told, though,
that you possess a stock of cinchona bark. Is that so?”
“W ell, yes. Please, sit.” I waved  him to my patient stool and
sat d own myself, knee to knee. “ Do you suf fer from malaria?”
I did n’ t think so —the whites of his eyes were clear; he wasn’ t
jaundiced.“No, may the L ord be thanked for His mercy . I have a
gentleman in my command—a particular friend—who does,
though, very badly , and our s ur geon has no Jesuit bark. I
hoped th at you might be induced, perhaps, to make a trade …
?”
He had laid the  box on the table beside us, and at this
flipped it open. It was divided into small compartments and
contained a remarkable assortment of things: lace edging, silk
ribbon, a  pair of tortoiseshell hair combs, a small bag of salt, a
pepperbox, an enameled snuf fbox, a pewter brooch in the
shape of a lily , several bright hanks of embroidery silk, a
bundle of cinnamon sticks, and  a number of small jars filled
apparently with herbs. And a glass bottle, whose label read…
“Laudanum!” I exclaimed, reaching for it involuntarily . I
stopped myself, but the of ficer gestured to me to go ahead, and
I pu lled it carefully from its resting place, drew the cork, and
moved t he bottl e warily past m y nose. The pungent, sickly-
sweet scent of opium drifted out, a genie in a bottle. I cleared
my throat and put the cork back in.
He was watching me with interest.
“I was not sure what might bes t suit you,” he said, waving
at th e bo x’ s con tents. “I used to  run a store, you see—a great
deal of apothecary’ s stuf f, but lu xurious dry goods in general. I
learnt in the course of my business that it is always best to give
the ladie s a good deal of choic e; they tend to be much more
discriminating than do the gentlemen.”
I gave him a s harp glance, but it wasn’ t flummery; he
smiled a t me again, and I thou ght that he was one of those
unusual men—li ke Jamie—who  actually liked women, beyond
the obvious.
“I im agine we can accommodate each other , then,” I said,
returning the smile. “I ought not to ask, I suppose—I don’ t
intend to  hold you up; I’ll give  you what you need for your
friend—but with thought of possible future trade, have you got
more laudanum?”He continued to smile, but his gaze sharpened—he had
rather unusual eyes, that pale g ray often described as “spit-
colored.”
“Why , yes,” he said slowly . “I have quite a bit. Do you…
require it regularly?”
It occurr ed to me that he was wondering whether I was an
addict; it wasn’ t at all uncomm on, in circles where laudanum
was easily obtainable.
“I don’ t  use it myself, no,” I replied equably . “And I
administer it to those in need w ith considerable caution. But
relief of pain is one of the more important things I can of fer
some of  the people who come to  me—God knows I can’ t of fer
many of them cure.”
His brows went up at that. “That’ s a rather remarkable
statement. Most persons in your profession seem to promise
cure to nearly everyone.”
“How d oes that saying go? ‘If w ishes were horses, beggars
might ride’?” I smiled, but without much humor . “Everyone
wants a cure, and certainly the re’ s no physician who doesn’ t
want to give the m one. But there are a lot of things beyond the
power of any ph ysician, and while you might not tell a patient
that, it’ s as well to know your own limits.”
“Y ou thi nk so?”  He tilted his head, regarding me curiously .
“Do you not think that the admission of such limits, a priori—
and I do not mean only in the medical way , but in any arena of
endeavor—that such an admissi on in itself establishes limits?
That i s, might that expectation prevent one from
accomplishing all that is possible, because one assumes that
something is not  possible and therefore does not strive with all
one’ s power to achieve it?”
I blinked at him, rather surprised.
“W ell… yes,” I said slowly . “If you put it that way , I rather
think I agree wi th you. After all”—I waved a hand toward the
tent flap, indicating the surrou nding army—”if I didn’ t —wedidn’ t—believe that one can accomplish things beyond all
reasonable expectation, would my husband and I be her e ?”
He laughed at that.
“Brava, ma’am! Y es, an impartial observer would, I think,
call this venture sheer madness.  And they might be right,” he
added, w ith a rueful tilt of the head. “But they’ll have to defeat
us, nonetheless. W e shan’ t give up.”
I heard  voices  outside: Jamie, talking casually with
someone, and in the next mom ent he had ducked inside the
tent.
“Sassenach,” he began, “can ye come and—” He stopped
dead, se eing my  visitor , and dre w up a bit, with a formal bow .
“Sir .”
I glanced back at the visitor , surprised; Jamie’ s manner
made it clear that this was a superior of ficer of some sort; I’d
thought him perhaps a captain or a major . As for the of ficer
himself, he nodded, friendly but reserved.
“Colonel. Y our wife and I have been discussing the
philosophy of endeavor . What d o you say—does a wise man
know his limits, or a bold one deny them? And which way do
you declare yourself?”
Jamie looked mildly startled and  glanced at me; I lifted one
shoulder an inch.
“Ah, well,” he said, switching  his attention back to my
visitor . “ I’ve he ard it said that a man’ s reach must exceed his
grasp—or what’ s a heaven for?”
The of fi cer stared at him for an instant, mouth open, then
laughed with delight and slapped his knee.
“Y ou and your w ife are two of a kind, sir! My  kind. That’ s
splendid; do you recall where you heard it?”
Jamie did; he’d heard it from m e, more than once over the
years. He merely smiled and shrugged, though.
“A poet, I believe, but I’ve for got the name.”“W ell, a perfectly expressed se ntiment, nonetheless, and I
mean to go and  try it on Granny directly—though I imagine
he’ll just blink stupidly at me through his spectacles and bleat
about supplies. Ther e’ s  a man who knows his limit s,” he
remarked to me, still good-humo red but with a distinct edge in
his voice. “Knows his own damnably low limits and won’ t let
anyone else exceed them. A heaven’ s not for the likes of him.”
That las t remark went beyond edgy; the smile had faded
from his face, and I glimpsed a hot anger at the back of his
pale eye s. I had a moment of disquiet; “Granny” could only be
General Gates, and this man wa s plainly a disaf fected member
of the high com mand. I sincerely hoped Robert Browning and
I hadn’ t just landed Jamie in the middle of something.
“W ell,” I said, t rying to make li ght of it, “they can’ t defeat
you if you won’ t give up.”
The shadow that had rested o n his brow cleared and he
smiled at me, merry-eyed once more.
“Oh, they’ll never defeat me, Mrs. Fraser . T rust me!”
“I w ill,” I assur ed him, turning to open one of my boxes.
“Let me  get the Jesuit bark for you… er…” I hesitated, not
knowing his rank, and he not iced, clapping a hand to his
forehead in apology .
“My apologies, Mrs. Fraser! What can you think of a man
who bursts into your pr esence, rudely demanding
medicaments and failing even to introduce himself properly?”
He took the small package of shredded bark from my hand,
retaining the hand itself, and bowed low over it, gently kissing
my knuckles.
“Major General Benedict Arnold. Y our servant, ma’am.”
 
JAMIE LOOKE D AFTER the departing general, a slight
frown on his face. Then he glanced back at me and the frown
disappeared instantly .“Are ye all rig ht, Sassenach? Y e look as though you’re
about to fall over .”
“I migh t, at that,” I said rather faintly , and groped for my
stool. I sat on it and discovered the new bottle of laudanum on
the table beside me. I picked it up, finding the solid weight of
it a reassurance  that I hadn’ t imagined the gentleman who’d
just left us.
“I was mentally prepared to run into Geor ge W ashington or
Benjamin Franklin in person at some point,” I said. “Even
John Ad ams. Bu t I didn’ t really expect him…  and  I liked  him,”
I added ruefully .
Jamie’ s brows were still up, and  he glanced at the bottle in
my lap as though wondering whether I’d been having a nip.
“Why sh ould ye  not like—oh.” His face changed. “Y e know
something about him?”
“Y es, I do. And it’ s not som ething I want to know .” I
swallowed, feeli ng a little ill. “He’ s not a traitor yet—but he
will be.”
Jamie glanced back over his sh oulder , to be sure we were
not overheard, then came and sat on the patient’ s stool, taking
my hands in his.
“T ell me,” he said, low-voiced.
There w ere limi ts to what I could  te ll him—and, n ot for the
first tim e, I regretted not having  paid more attention to Bree’ s
history h omework, as that formed the nucleus of my specific
knowledge regarding the American Revolution.
“He fought on our—on the American side for some time,
and was  a brilliant soldier , tho ugh I don’ t know any of the
details o f that. But at some point, he became disillusioned,
decided to switch sides, and b egan making overtures to the
British, using a man called Joh n Andre as his go-between—
Andre w as captured and hanged, I know that much. But I think
Arnold got away to England. For an American general  to turn
his coat … it was such a spectacular act of treason that the
name ‘Benedict Arnold’ became a synonym for traitor . W illbecome, I mean. If someone commits some horrible act of
betrayal, you call them ‘a Benedict Arnold.’ “
The sick feeling hadn’ t gone away . Somewhere—right this
minute—one Major John Andre was happily going about his
business, presumably without the slightest notion of what lay
in his future.
“When?” Jamie’ s fingers pressi ng mine drew my attention
away from Major Andre’ s imp ending doom and back to the
more ur gent matter .
“That’ s the problem,” I said helplessly . “I don’ t know . Not
yet—I think  not yet.”
Jamie thought for a moment, brows drawn down.
“I’ll watch him, then,” he said quietly .
“Don’ t,” I said, by reflex. W e stared at each other for a long
moment, recalling Charles Stuart. It hadn’ t escaped either of
us th at attempting to interfere w ith history could have serious
unintended cons equences—if in  fact it could be done at all.
W e had no notion what it was that might turn Arnold from
patriot—which he certainly was at the moment—to the traitor
he woul d be. W as his fight with Gates the niggling grain of
sand that would form the heart of a treacherous pearl?
“Y ou don’ t know what small thing might af fect someone’ s
mind,” I pointed out. “Look a t Robert the Bruce and that
spider .”
That made him smile.
“I’ll gang warily , Sassenach,” he said. “But I’ll watch him.” HA T TRICK
 October 7, 1777
 
… W ell, then, or der on Mor gan to begin the Game.
General Horatio Gates
 
O N A QUIET autumn morning, crisp and golden, a
British deserter entered the American camp. Bur goyne was
sending out a reconnaissance force, he said. T wo thousand
men, to test the strength of the American right wing.
“Granny Gates ’ s eyes nearly popped through his
spectacles,” Jamie told me, hastily reloading his cartridge box.
“And nay wonder .”
General Arnold, present when the news came, ur ged Gates
to send out a s trong force against this foray . Gates, true to
form, had been cautious, and when Arnold requested
permission to go out and see for himself what the British were
about, had given his subordinat e a cold look and said, “I am
afraid to trust you, Arnold.”
“Matters rather went downhill  from there,” Jamie said,
grimacing slightly . “The end of it all was that Gates said to
him—and I quote ye exactly , S assenach—’General Arnold, I
have nothing for you to do. Y ou have no business here.’ “
I fel t a chill tha t had nothing to  do with the temperature of
the morn ing air . W as this the moment? The thing that had—or
would—turn Benedict Arnold against the cause he had fought
for? Jamie saw w hat I was thinking, for he lifted one shoulder
and said simply , “At least it’ s nothing to do wi’ us this time.”
“That is  a  comfort,” I s aid, and meant it. “T ake care, will
you?”
“I will,” he said, taking up his rifle.
This time, he was able to kiss me goodbye in person.
 
THE BRITISH reconnaissance had a double purpose: not
only to see exactly where the Americans were—for General
Bur goyne had no real idea; American deserters had stopped
coming in long since—but also to acquire much-needed forage
for the remaining animals. Consequently , the leading
companies stopped in a promising wheat field.
W illiam sent his infantrymen t o sit down in double rows
among the standing grain, while the foragers began cutting the
grain and loading it on horses. A lieutenant of dragoons, a
black-headed W elshman name d Absolute, waved from the
other sid e of the field and called him to a game of hazard in
his tent in the e vening. He had just taken breath to call back
when th e man beside him let o ut a gasp and crumpled to the
ground. He never heard the bul let, but ducked to the ground,
calling out to his men.
Nothing further happened, though, and after a few moments
they rose cautiously and went about their work. They began to
see small parties of rebels, thou gh, stealing through the trees,
and W illiam became conscious of a growing conviction that
they wer e being surrounded. When he spoke of this to another
of ficer , though,  the man assured him that the rebels had
decided to remain behind their defenses to be attacked.
They were soon undeceived o n this point when, in mid-
afternoon, a lar ge body of Ame ricans appeared in the woods
on their left and heavy cannon opened up, slamming six-and
twelve-pound balls that would have done great damage, were
it not for the intervening trees.
The infantrymen scattered like quail, despite the calls of
their of ficers. W illiam caught sight of Absolute, pelting down
the field through the wheat af ter a group of his men, and,
turning, seized a corporal of one of his own companies.
“Gather them!”  he said, and, not waiting for an answer ,
grabbed the bridle of one of the foragers’ horses, a surprised-
looking bay gelding. It was his intent to ride for the main campfor reinforcements, for plainly the Americans were out in
force.
He never got the re, for as he pulled the horse’ s head around,
the brigadier rode onto the field.
 
JAMIE FRASER CROUCHED in the grove at the base
of the wheat fie ld with a group of Mor gan’ s men, taking aim
as he could. It w as as hot a battle as he’d seen, and the smoke
from the cannon in the wood drifted through the field in heavy ,
choking clouds. He saw the man on the horse, a high-ranking
British of ficer , to judge from h is braid. T wo or three others,
juniors, were near him, also on  horseback, but he had eyes
only for the one.
Grasshoppers flew out of the field like hailstones, panicked
by the trampling  feet; one struc k him in the cheek, buzzing,
and he slapped at it, heart thumping as though it had been a
musket ball.
He knew the man, though only by his general’ s uniform. He
had met Simon Fraser of Balnai n two or three times, but when
they bot h were lads in the Highlands—Simon was a few years
younger , and Jamie’ s vague memories of a small, round,
cheerful wee lad who trotted a fter the older boys, waving a
shinty s tick talle r than himself, had nothing in common with
the stout, solid man who rose now in his stirrups, calling out
and brandishing his sword, attempting to rally his panicked
troops by sheer force of personality .
The aides were ur ging their m ounts round his, trying to
shield h im, plainly ur ging him to come away , but he ignored
them. Ja mie caught a white gli mpse of a face turned toward
the wood, then away—plainly they knew the trees were full of
riflemen, or could be, and were trying to keep out of range.
“There he is!” It  was Arnold, crashing his small brown mare
regardless throu gh the heavy brush, his face alight with savage
glee. “The generals!” he bellowed, rising in his own stirrupsand thro wing out an arm. “Shoot the generals, boys! Five
dollars to the man who shoo ts yon fat bastard from his
saddle!”
The random crack of rifle fire a nswered him at once. Jamie
saw Dan iel Mor gan’ s head turn sharp, eyes fierce at Arnold’ s
voice, an d the rifleman started toward him, moving as fast as
his rheumatism-crippled limbs would let him.
“Again! T ry again!” Arnold smo te a fist on his thigh, caught
sight of Jamie watching him. “Y ou—shoot him, can’ t you?”
Jamie shrugged and, lifting the rifle to his shoulder , aimed
deliberately hig h and wide. The wind had turned and the
smoke o f the shot stung his eyes, but he saw one of the junior
of ficers near Simon jump and cl ap a hand to his head, twisting
in the saddle to see his hat roll away into the wheat.
He want ed to laugh, though his wame curled a bit, realizing
that he had near ly shot the man  through the head, entirely by
accident. The young man—yes, he was young, tall, and thin—
rose in his stirrups and shook a fist at the wood.
“Y ou owe me a hat, sir!” he shouted.
Arnold’ s high, piercing laugh echoed through the wood,
clear over the s houting, and the men with him hooted and
screamed like crows.
“Come over here, younker , and I’ll buy you two!” Arnold
shouted back, then reined his horse in a restless circle,
bellowing at the riflemen. “Damn your eyes for a crew of
blind men, will nobody kill me that frigging general?”
One or two sho ts spattered through the branches, but most
of the men had seen Daniel Mo r gan stumping toward Arnold
like an animated  tree, gnarled a nd implacable, and held their
fire.
Arnold m ust have seen him, too , but ignored him. He jerked
a pistol from hi s belt and fired  sideways across his body at
Fraser , though he could not hope to hit anything at that
distance, and his horse startled at the noise, ears flat back.Mor gan, who had nearly reached him, was obliged to jerk back
to avoid being trampled; he stumbled, and fell flat.
W ithout an instant’ s hesitation, Arnold leapt of f his horse
and bent to raise the older man, apologizing with a completely
sincere solicitude. Which, Jamie saw , was unappreciated by
Mor gan. He thought old Dan might just give Arnold one in the
stones, rank and rheumatism notwithstanding.
The general’ s horse was trained to stand, but the unexpected
shot over her ears had spoo ked her; she was dancing
nervously , feet a-rattle in the d rifts of dead leaves and eyes
showing white.
Jamie se ized the reins and pulled the mare’ s nose down,
blowing into her nostrils to d istract her . She whuf fed and
shook h er head, but ceased to  dance. He stroked her neck,
clicking his tongue, and her ears rose a bit; his hand was
bleeding again, he saw , but it was a slow seep through the
bandage, not important. Over the solid curve of the mare’ s
neck, he could see Mor gan, upright now and violently
rejecting Arnol d’ s ef forts to dust the leaf mold from his
clothes.
“Y ou are relieved of command,  sir! How dare you to order
my men?”
“Oh, fuck that for a game of soldiers!” Arnold said,
impatient. “I’m a general. He’ s a  general”—he jerked his head
toward the distant figure on horseback—”and I want him dead.
T ime enough for politics whe n it’ s over—this is a fight,
dammit!” Jamie  caught a sudden strong whif f of rum, sweet
and fierce under the smell of sm oke and trampled wheat. A ye,
well, pe rhaps th at had somewhat to do with it—though from
what he  knew of Arnold, there  was little enough to choose
between the man stone sober and another raving with drink.
The wind came in gusts, hot pas t his ears, thick with smoke
and random sounds: the rattle of muskets punctuated by the
crash of artillery to the left, and through it the shouting of
Simon Fraser and his juniors, ca lling the Hessians and English
to rally , the grun ts of impact an d shrieks of pain from fartheraway , where the Hessians fought to break through General
Enoch Poor ’ s advancing men.
General Ebenez er Learned’ s column was pressing the
Hessians from above; Jamie could see the knot of green
German uniforms, struggling amid a sur ge of Continentals but
being forced back from the edge of the field. Some were trying
to b reak away , to head downfi eld toward General Fraser . A
glimpse of motion drew his eye; the young man he had
deprived of a hat was galloping up the field, bent low over his
horse’ s neck, saber drawn.
The gen eral had moved a little , away from the wood. He
was nearly out of range for most of Mor gan’ s men—but Jamie
was wel l placed; he had a clear shot from here. He glanced
down. He had dropped his rifle when he took the horse, but the
gun was loaded; he had reloade d by reflex after his first shot.
The half-empty cartridge was st ill folded in the hand that held
the reins; priming would take but an instant.
“Sheas, a nighean,”  he murmured to the horse, and took a
deep breath, trying to will hims elf to calm, will that calmness
into the mare, though his hand was throbbing with the rush of
his blood. “Cha chluinn thu an corr a chuir eas eagal ort,”  he
said, under his breath. No mor e. Y e’ll h ear nay mor e t o fright
ye .
He h ad not even thought about  it when he’d fired to miss
Fraser . He would kill any other man on the field—but not that
one. Then he ca ught sight of th e young soldier on the horse,
coat bright red among the thrashing sea of green and blue and
homespun, layin g about him with his saber , and felt his mouth
twitch. Not that one, either .
It seemed the y oung man was h aving a lucky day . He had
cut through Learned’ s column at the gallop, taking most of the
Continentals unaware, and those who saw him were too much
occupied with fighting or unable to shoot him because they
had dischar ged their weapons and were fixing bayonets.
Jamie stroked the horse absentl y , whistling gently through
his teeth and watching. The y oung of ficer had reached theHessians, had got the attention o f some, and was now fighting
his way back down the field, a stream of dark green coats in
his wake , Hessians at the trot, making for the narrowing gap as
Poor ’ s men rushed in from the left.
Jamie was so much occupied by this entertaining spectacle
that he had igno red the shouting match taking place between
Dan Mo r gan and General Arnold. The sound of a whoop from
overhead interrupted both.
“I got him, by Jaysus!”
Jamie looked up, startled, and s aw T im Murphy perched in
the branches of an oak, grinning like a goblin, the barrel of his
rifle snu g in a fork. Jamie jerked his head round and saw
Simon Fraser , slumped and swaying in his saddle, arms folded
round his body .
Arnold let out a matching whoop, and Mor gan glanced up at
Murphy , nodding grudging approval.
“Good shot,” he called.
Simon Fraser was wobbling, about to fall—one of his aides
reached for him, shouting desperately for help, another reined
his h orse to and fro, undecided where to go, what to do. Jamie
clenched his fist, felt a jolt of pain shoot through his maimed
hand, and stopped, palm flat on the saddle. W as Simon dead?
He could n’ t tell. The aides had overcome their panic; two of
them rod e close on either side, s upporting the slumping figure,
fighting to keep him in the saddle, heedless of the cheering
from the wood.
He g lanced up t he field, searching for the young man with
the s aber . He co uldn’ t find him and felt a small stab of loss—
then picked him up, engaged  in a hand-to-hand with a
mounted militia captain. No kind of finesse in that sort of
fight; it was as much the horse a s the man, and as he watched,
the horses were forced apart b y the crush of bodies round
them. The British of ficer didn’ t try to force his mount back; he
had a goal in m ind and shouted and gestured, ur ging on the
small company of Hessians he had extracted from the meleeabove. Then he turned back toward the wood and saw what
was happening, General Fraser ’ s horse being ur ged away , the
general’ s swayin g body a splotch of red against the trampled
wheat.
The young man stood in his stir rups for an instant, dropped,
and spurred his horse toward the  general, leaving his Hessians
to follow as they might.
Jamie was close enough to see the darker crimson of the
blood that soaked the middle of Simon Fraser ’ s body . If Simon
wasn’ t d ead already , he thought, it wouldn’ t be long. Grief and
fury at the waste of it burned in his throat. T ears from the
smoke w ere alre ady running down his cheeks; he blinked and
shook his head violently to clear his eyes.
A hand jerked the reins unceremoniously from his fingers,
and Arn old’ s stocky body brushed him away from the mare in
a g ust of rum. A rnold swung up into the saddle, face red as the
scarlet maple leaves with excitement and victory .
“Follow me, boys!” he shouted, and Jamie saw that the
wood was aswarm with mil itia, companies Arnold had
collected on his mad dash for the battlefield. “T o the redoubt!”
The men cheered and rushed after him, breaking branches
and stumbling in their eagerness.
“Follow that goddamned fool,”  Mor gan said shortly , and
Jamie gl anced at him in surprise. Mor gan scowled at Arnold’ s
back.
“He’ll be court-martialed, mark my words,” the old rifleman
said. “He’d best have a good witness. Y ou’re it, James. Go!”
W ithout a word, Jamie seized h is rifle from the ground and
set of f at a run, leaving the wood with its gentle rain of gold
and brown. Following Arnold’ s broad-shouldered whooping
form, his waving hat. Into the wheat.
 THEY DID FOLLOW him. A bellowing horde, an armed
rabble. Arnold was mounted, but his horse found it heavy
going, and the men were not hard-pressed to keep up. Jamie
saw the back of Arnold’ s blue coat blotched black with sweat,
molded like a ri nd to the burly  shoulders. One shot from the
rear , the confusion of battle … But it was no more than a
passing thought, gone in an instant.
Arnold w as gone, too, with a whoop, spurring his mare up
and aro und, past the redoubt. Jamie assumed he must be
meaning to ride in from the rear—suicide, as the place was
crawling with German grenadiers; he could see their mitred
hats poking up above the walls of the redoubt. Perhaps Arnold
meant to commit suicide—perhaps only to create a diversion
for the men atta cking the redoubt from the front, with his own
death an acceptable price to be paid for it.
The redo ubt itself stood fifteen feet high, a packed earthen
wall wit h a palisade of logs built atop it—and between earth
and palisade were abatis, logs s harpened to a point and flung
down pointing outward.
Balls were spattering the field b efore the redoubt, and Jamie
ran, dodging bullets he couldn’ t see.
He scrabbled with his feet, clawing for purchase on the logs
of the abatis, go t one hand through a gap and onto a log, but
lost his grip on the flaking bark and fell back, landing
bruisingly on his rifle and kno cking out his wind. The man
beside him fired up through the gap, and white smoke spurted
over him, hiding him momentarily from the Hessian he’d
glimpsed above. He rolled over and crawled fast away before
the smoke could drift of f or the fellow decide to drop a
grenade through it.
“Get clear!” he shouted over his shoulder , but the man
who’d fired was trying his own luck with a running jump. The
grenade fell through the gap ju st as the man leapt upward. It
caught him in the chest and went of f.
Jamie ru bbed h is hand on his shirt, swallowing bile. The
skin of his palm stung, scraped and full of bark splinters.Shards of metal and wood chips had exploded outward;
something had struck Jamie in the face, and he felt the sting of
his swea t and the warmth of blood running down his cheek.
He coul d see the grenadier , a glimpse of green coat through
the gap in the abatis. Quick, before he moved.
He grab bed a cartridge from his bag and ripped it with his
teeth, counting. He could load a rifle in twelve seconds, he
knew it,  had timed it. Nine…  eight…  What was it Br ee taught
the we ans, counting second s? Hippopotami, aye. Six
hippopotami… five hippopotami…  H e had an insa ne ur ge to
laugh, se eing in his mind’ s eye a group of several hippopotami
solemnly watchi ng him and making critical remarks regarding
his progress. T wo hippopotami…  He wasn’ t dead yet, so he
pressed himself close up under the abatis, aimed the barrel
through the gap, and fired at the smear of green that might be a
fir tree but wasn’ t, since it screamed.
He slung the ri fle onto his back and once more leaped,
fingers digging  desperately into the unpeeled log. They
slipped, splinter s running up under his nails, and pain shot
through his hand like lightning but now he had his other hand
up, grabbed his right wrist with his sound left hand, and locked
his grip round t he log. His feet slid on the loose-packed dirt,
and for an instant he swung free , like a squirrel hanging from a
tree branch. He pulled upward  against his weight and felt
something tear in his shoulder , but couldn’ t stop to favor it. A
foot, he had his foot braced on t he underside of the log now . A
wild sw ing with  his free leg and he was clinging like a sloth.
Something chunked into the log he clung to; he felt the shiver
through the wood.
“Hold on, Red!” someone screamed below him, and he
froze. Another chunking sound and something came down on
the wood an in ch from his fingers—an ax? He didn’ t have
time to be scare d; the man below fired past his shoulder—he
heard th e ball whiz past, buzzing  like an angry hornet—and he
pulled h imself to ward the base of the log in a rush, hand over
hand as fast as he could, worming his way between the logs,
clothes ripping, and his joints, too.There were two Hessians lying just above his gap, dead or
wounded. Another , ten feet away , saw his head pop through
and reached into his sack, te eth bared beneath a waxed
mustache. A bloodcurdling yell came from behind the
Hessian, though , and one of Mor gan’ s men brought down a
tomahawk on his skull.
He heard  a noise and turned in ti me to see a corporal step on
one of the Hessi an bodies, which abruptly came to life, rolling
up w ith musket in hand. The H essian struck up with all his
force, the blade of the bayo net ripping up through the
corporal’ s breeches as he stumbled, tearing free in a spray of
blood.
By r eflex, Jamie seized his rifle  by the barrel and swung it,
the motion snapping through his  shoulders, arms, and wrists as
he tried to drive the butt throug h the man’ s head. The jolt of
collision wrenched his arms, and he felt the bones of his neck
pop and his sight go white. He shook his head to clear it and
smeared sweat and blood from his eye sockets with the heel of
his hand. Shit, he’d bent the rifle.
The Hes sian wa s dead for good , a look of surprise on what
was left of his face. The wounded corporal was crawling away ,
one leg of his breeches soaked with blood, his musket slung
onto his  back, his own bayonet blade in his hand. He glanced
over his shoulder and, seeing Jamie, shouted, “Rifleman! Y our
back!”
He didn’ t turn to see what it was but dived headlong and to
the s ide, rolling into leaves and trampled earth. Several bodies
rolled over him in a grunting t angle and crashed against the
palisades. He got up slowly , took one of the pistols from his
belt, coc ked it, and blew out the brains of a grenadier poised to
throw one of his grenades over the edge.
A few more shots, groans, and thumps, and as quickly as
that, the fight di ed down. The redoubt was littered with bodies
—most of them green-clad. He caught a glimpse of Arnold’ s
little mare, white-eyed and limping, riderless. Arnold was on
the ground, struggling to stand.Jamie felt nearly unable to stand himself; his knees had
gone to water and his right hand was paralyzed, but he
wobbled over to Arnold and half-fell down beside him. The
general had been shot; his leg w as all-over blood, and his face
was white and clammy , his eyes half-closing from the shock.
Jamie reached out and gripped Arnold’ s hand, calling his name
to pull him back, thinking even as he did so that this was
madness; he should slip his dirk into the man’ s ribs and spare
both him and the victims of his treachery . But the choice was
made and past b efore he had time to think about it. Arnold’ s
hand tightened on his.
“Where?” Arno ld whispered. His lips were blanched.
“Where am I hit?”
“It’ s your leg, si r ,” Jamie said. “ The same where ye were hit
before.”
Arnold’ s eyes opened and fixed upon his face.
“I wish it had been my heart,”  he whispered, and closed
them again. DEA THBED
 
A  BRITISH ENSIGN came just after nightfall, under a
flag of truce. G eneral Gates sent him to our tent; Brigadier
Simon Fraser had learned of Ja mie’ s presence and wished to
see h im. “Before it’ s too late, sir ,” the ensign said, low-voiced.
He was very young and looked shattered. “W ill you come?”
Jamie was already rising, though it took him two tries to get
up. He wasn’ t h urt, beyond a number of spectacular bruises
and a sprained shoulder , but he hadn’ t had the strength even to
eat whe n he staggered back af ter the battle. I’d washed his
face for him an d given him a  glass of beer . He was still
holding it, undrunk, and now set it down.
“My wife and I will come,” he said hoarsely .
I reached for my cloak—and, just in case, my kit.
 
I NEEDN’T HA VE bothered with the kit. General Fraser
lay on a long dining table in t he main room of a lar ge log
cabin—the Baroness von Ried esel’ s house, the little ensign
had mur mured—and it was apparent from a glance that he was
beyond any aid I could of fer .  His broad face was almost
bloodless in the candlelight, a nd his body was wrapped in
bandages, these soaked with blo od. Fresh blood, too; I saw the
wet patches slowly spreading, d arker than the patches of dried
blood already there.
Absorbed by the dying man, I’ d only dimly registered the
presence of several other people in the room and had
consciously noti ced only two: th e sur geons who stood near the
bed, bloodstained and white-faced with fatigue. One of them
darted a  glance at me, then stif fened a little. His eyes
narrowed, and he nudged his fe llow , who looked up from hiscontemplation of General Fraser , frowning. He looked at me
with no particular comprehension and went back to his
fruitless meditation.
I gav e the first sur geon a straight look, but without any hint
of c onfrontation . I did not mean to intrude on his territory .
There w as nothing I could do here, nothing anyone could do,
as t he sur geons’ exhausted attitudes clearly showed. The
second m an had n’ t given up, an d I admired him for it, but the
scent of putrefaction in the air w as unmistakable, and I could
hear the general’ s breathing—long, stertorous sighs, with a
nerve-wringing silence between them.
There was nothing I could do fo r General Fraser as a doctor ,
and there were people here wh o could of fer better comfort
than I could. Jamie, perhaps, among them.
“He has n’ t long,” I whispered to Jamie. “If there’ s anything
you want to say to him…”
He nodded, swallowing, and went forward. A British
colonel at the s ide of the impromptu deathbed narrowed his
eyes bu t, at a murmur from another of ficer , stepped back a
little so that Jamie could approach.
The roo m was small and very crowded. I kept back, trying
to stay out of the way .
Jamie and the British of ficer murmured together for a
moment. A young of ficer , no do ubt the general’ s aide, knelt in
the shadow on the far side of the table, holding the general’ s
hand, his own head bowed in obvious distress. I pushed the
cloak back over my shoulders. Cold as it was outside, the air
inside was beastly hot, unhealthy and suf focating, as though
the fever that w as devouring General Fraser before our eyes
had rise n from  the bed and  spread through the cabin,
unsatisfied with its meager prey . It was a miasma, thick with
decaying bowel s, stale sweat, and the taste of black powder
that hung in the men’ s clothes.
Jamie b ent, then knelt himself, to come closer to Fraser ’ s
ear . The general’ s eyes were cl osed, but he was conscious; Isaw his face tw itch at the sound of Jamie’ s voice. His head
turned and his e yes opened, the dullness in them brightening
momentarily in recognition.
“Ciamar a tha thu, a charaid? ”  Jamie asked softly . How
ar e you, cousin?
The general’ s mouth twitched a little.
“Tha ana-cnamhadh an Diabhail orm,”  he repli ed hoars ely .
“Feumaidh gun  do dh’ith mi rudegin nach r obh dol leam.” I
have the devil o f an indigestion. I must have eaten something
that disagr eed with me .
The Brit ish of fi cers stirred a lit tle, hearing the Gaelic, and
the young of ficer on the far side of the bed looked up, startled.
Not nearly as startled as I was.
The shad owed room seemed to shift around me, and I half-
fell agai nst the wall, pressing m y hands against the wood in
hopes of finding something solid to hold on to.
Sleeplessness and grief lined his face, and it was still grimed
with smoke and blood, smeared racoonlike across his brow
and che ekbones by a careless s leeve. None of that made the
slightest dif feren ce. His hair was dark, his face narrower , but I
would have known that long, s traight nose and those slanted
blue cat-eyes anywhere. He and  Jamie knelt on either side of
the gene ral’ s deathbed, no more than five feet apart. Surely , no
one could fail to see the resemblance, if…
“Ellesmere.” A captain of infantry stepped forward and
touched the young man’ s should er with a murmured word and
a small jerk of the head, plai nly telling him to leave the
general’ s side, in order to giv e General Fraser a moment’ s
privacy , should he desire it.
Don’ t look up!  I th ought as fiercely as I could in Jamie’ s
direction. For God’ s sake, don’ t look up!
He didn ’ t. Whether he had recognized the name or had
caught a glimpse of that soot-smeared face across the bed, hekept his own head bent, his features hid in shadow , and leaned
nearer , speaking very low to his cousin Simon.
The you ng man  rose to his feet, slow as Dan Mor gan on a
cold morning. His shadow wavered on the rough-cut logs
behind h im, tall and spindly . H e was paying no attention to
Jamie; e very fiber of his bein g was focused on the dying
general.
“It is gladness to be seeing you once more on earth,
Seaumais mac Brian ,” Frase r whispered, bringing both his
hands ac ross wi th an ef fort to clasp Jamie’ s. “I am content to
die a mong my c omrades, whom  I love. But you will tell this to
those of our blood in Scotland? T ell them…”
One of the othe r of ficers spoke to W illiam, and he turned
reluctantly away from the bedside, answering low-voiced. My
fingers were damp with sweat, and I could feel beads of
perspiration running down my neck. I wanted desperately to
take of f my cloak but feared to make any movement that might
draw W illiam’ s attention to me and thus toward Jamie.
Jamie w as still as a rabbit und er a bush. I could see his
shoulders tight under the damp-dark coat, his hands gripping
the gene ral’ s, and only the flicker of the firelight on the ruddy
crown of his head gave any illusion of movement.
“It shall be as you say , Shimi mac Shimi.”  I could barely
hear his whisper . “Lay your wish upon me; I will bear it.”
I h eard a loud s nif f beside me and glanced aside to see a
small woman, dainty as a porcelain doll despite the hour and
the circumstance. Her eyes shone with unshed tears; she
turned h er head to dab at them, saw me watching, and gave me
a tremulous attempt at a smile.
“I am so glad that your husba nd is come, madam,” she
whispered to me in a soft German accent. “It—it is a comfort,
perhaps. That our dear friend  shall have the solace of a
kinsman by his side.”
T wo of them , I thought, biting my tongue, and by an ef fort
of will didn’ t look in W illiam’ s direction. The awful thoughtcame suddenly to me that W illiam might recognize me , and
make so me ef fort to come and speak with me. Which might
well mean disaster , if…
The baroness—for she must be von Riedesel’ s wife—
seemed to sway a little, though it might be only an ef fect of
the shifting firelight and the press of bodies. I touched her arm.
“I need air ,” I whispered to her . “Come outside with me.”
The sur geons were drifting bac k toward the bed, intent as
vultures, and the Gaelic murmurings were broken suddenly by
a terrible groan from Simon Fraser .
“Bring a  candle !” one of the sur geons said sharply , moving
quickly toward the bedside.
The baroness’ s eyes shut tight, a nd I saw her throat move as
she swallowed. I took her hand and led her quickly out.
 
IT W ASN’T LONG but seemed an age before the men
came out, heads bowed.
There was a short, sharp ar gument outside the cabin,
conducted in low voices by reas on of respect for the dead, but
nonetheless heated. Jamie kept  to one side, with his hat on,
pulled w ell dow n, but one of the British of ficers turned to him
now and then, obviously requesting his opinion.
Lieutenant W illiam Ransom, aka Lord Ellesmere, kept to
himself, too, as befitted his relatively lowly rank in this
company . He didn’ t join in the ar gument, seeming too much
shocked by the death. I wondered whether he had seen anyone
he knew die before—and then realized how idiotic that
thought was.
But batt lefield d eaths, however violent, are not the same as
the deat h of a friend. And from the looks of young W illiam,
Simon Fraser had been friend as well as commander to him.
Occupied by these surreptitious  observations, I hadn’ t been
paying more than the most cursory attention to the main pointof ar gument—that being the immediate disposition of General
Fraser ’ s body— and none at all to the two medical men, who
had com e out of the cabin and now stood a little apart,
murmuring to each other . From  the corner of my eye, I saw
one reach into his pocket and hand the other a twist of tobacco,
wave of f the ot her ’ s thanks, then turn away . What he said,
though, seized my attention as ef fectively as though his head
had burst into flame.
“See you a bit later , then, Dr . Rawlings,”  he’d said.
“Dr . Rawlings?”  I said by reflex, and the second doctor
turned.
“Y es, ma’am?” he said politely , but with the air of an
exhausted man struggling against an overwhelming ur ge to tell
the world to g o to hell. I recognized the impulse and
sympathized—but having spoken, had no choice but to
continue.
“I beg your pard on,” I said, flushing a little. “I just caught
your name and was struck b y it—I used to know a Dr .
Rawlings.”
The ef fect of this casual remark was unexpected. His
shoulders drew back abuptly and his dull gaze sharpened into
eagerness.
“Y ou did? Where?”
“Er …” I floundered for a moment, as in fact I had never
actually met Daniel Rawlings—though I certainly felt I knew
him—and temp orized by saying, “His name was Daniel
Rawlings. W ould that perhaps be a relative of yours?”
His face lighted up and he seized me by the arm.
“Y es! Y es, he is my brother . Pray tell me, ma’am, do you
know where he is?”
I had a nasty sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach. I did
in fact know exa ctly where Daniel Rawlings was, but the news
wasn’ t going to be welcome t o his brother . There was no
choice, though; I had to tell him.“I’m ter ribly sor ry to have to tell you that he’ s dead,” I said,
as gently  as I co uld. I put my own hand over his and squeezed,
my throat constricting again as the light in his eyes died.
He stood unmoving for the space of several breaths, his eyes
focused somewhere beyond me. Slowly , they refocused on me
and he took one more deep breath and firmed his mouth.
“I se e. I… had feared that. How did he—how did it happen,
do you know?”
“I do,” I said hurriedly , seein g Colonel Grant shift his
weight in a manner indicating imminent departure. “But it’ s—
a long story .”
“Ah.” H e caught the direction o f my glance and turned his
head. All the me n were moving now , straightening their coats,
putting on their hats as they exchanged a few final words.
“I’ll find you,” he said abruptly , turning back to me. “Y our
husband—he is the tall Scottish  rebel, I think they said he is
kin to the general?”
I saw his gaze flick momentarily toward something beyond
me, and  alarm pricked like needles in my skin. Rawlings’ s
brows were slightly knitted, and I knew , as clearly as if he had
spoken, that the word “kin” had triggered some connection in
his mind—and that he was looking at W illiam.
“Y es. Co lonel Fraser ,” I said hurriedly , grasping him by the
sleeve before he could look at Ja mie and complete the thought
that was forming.
I h ad been groping in my kit as  we spoke and at this point
found the folded square of paper I’d been looking for . I pulled
it ou t and, unfolding it quickly , handed it to him. There was
still room for doubt, after all.
“Is this your brother ’ s hand?”
He seized the paper from me and devoured the small, neat
script with an expression in which eagerness, hope, and
despair were mingled. He close d his eyes for an instant, thenopened them, reading and rereading the receipt for Bowel-
Bind as if it were Holy W rit.
“The page is bu rnt,” he said, touching the singed edge. His
voice was husky . “Did Daniel… die in a fire?”
“No,” I said. Th ere was no time ; one of the British of ficers
stood im patiently behind him, waiting. I touched the hand that
held the page. “ Keep that, please. And if you can manage to
cross the  lines—I suppose you can now—you’ll find me most
easily in  my tent, near the artille ry park. They… er… they call
me the White W itch,” I added dif fidently . “Ask anyone.”
His bloo dshot eyes widened at that, then narrowed as he
examined me closely . But there was no time for further
questions; the of ficer stepped forward and muttered something
in Rawl ings’ s ear , with no more than a cursory glance in my
direction.
“Y es,” Rawlings said. “Y es, certainly .” He bowed to me,
deeply . “Y our servant, madam. I  am very much obliged to you.
May I… ?” He lifted the paper , and I nodded.
“Y es, of course, please keep it.”
The of ficer had turned, obviously intent on chivvying
another errant member of his party , and with a brief glance at
his back, Dr . Rawlings stepped close and touched my hand.
“I’ll com e,” he said, low-voiced. “As soon as I may . Thank
you.” He looked up then at someone behind me, and I realized
that Jamie had finished his business and come to fetch me.
He s tepped forward and, with a brief nod to the doctor , took
my hand.
“Where is your hat, Lieutenant Ransom?” The colonel
spoke be hind me, quietly reproving, and for the second time in
five min utes I felt the hair stand up on the back of my neck.
Not at the colonel’ s words but at the murmured reply .
“… rebe l whore son shot it of f my head,” said a voice. It was
an English voice, young, hoarse with suppressed grief, and
tinged with anger . Other than th at—it was Jamie’ s voice, andJamie’ s hand tightened so abru ptly on mine that he nearly
crushed my fingers.
W e w ere at the trailhead that led upward from the river; two
more steps would see us safely into the shelter of the fog-
veiled tr ees. Instead of taking those two steps, Jamie stopped
dead for the sp ace of a heartbeat, then dropped my hand,
turned on his heel, and, taking the hat of f his head, strode over
and thrust it into Lieutenant Ransom’ s hands.
“I believ e I owe ye a hat, sir ,” he said politely , and turned
away at once, le aving the young man blinking at the battered
tricorne in his hands. Glancing back, I caught a glimpse of
W illiam’ s baf fled face as he looked after Jamie, but Jamie was
propelling me up the path as though Red Indians were at our
heels, and a stand of fir saplings hid the lieutenant from view
within seconds.
I cou ld feel Jam ie vibrating like a plucked violin string, and
his breath was coming fast.
“Have you quite lost yo ur mind?” I inquired
conversationally .
“V ery likely .”
“What on earth—” I began, but he only shook his head and
pulled me along, until we were well out of both sight and
hearing of the c abin. A fallen l og that had so far escaped the
woodcutters lay half across the path, and Jamie sat down
suddenly on this and put a shaking hand to his face.
“Are you all right? What on earth is the matter?” I sat
beside h im and put a hand on his back, beginning to be
worried.
“I dinna  ken whether to laugh or to weep, Sassenach,” he
said. He  took his hand away from his face, and I saw that, in
fact, he appeared to be doing both. His lashes were wet, but
the corners of his mouth were twitching.
“I’ve los t a kinsman and found o ne, all in the same moment
—and a moment later realize that for the second time in his
life, I’ve  come within an inch of  shooting my son.” He lookedat me and shook  his head, quite helpless between laughter and
dismay .
“I shoul dna have done it, I ken that. It’ s only—I thought all
at once, What if I dinna miss, a thir d time? And —and I thought
I mu st ju st… speak to him. As a  man. In case it should be the
only time, aye?”
 
COLONEL GRANT cast a curious look at the trailhead,
where a tremblin g branch marked the passage of the rebel and
his wife, then turned his gaze on the hat in W illiam’ s hands.
“What the devil was that about?”
W illiam cleared his throat. “Evidently , Colonel Fraser was
the, um, rebel whoreson who deprived me of my hat during the
battle ye sterday ,” he said, hoping for a tone of dry detachment.
“He has … recompensed me.”
A hint of humor came into Grant’ s strained face.
“Really? Decent of him.” He peered dubiously at the object
in question. “Has it got lice, do you think?”
In a nother man, at another time, this might have been
interpreted as calumny . But Gr ant, while more than ready to
denigrate the Colonials’ courage, abilities, and dispositions,
clearly intended  the question only as a practical discovery of
fact; most of the English and Hessian troops were crawling
with lice, and so were the of ficers.
W illiam tilted the hat, scrutinizin g it as well as the dim light
allowed. The thing was warm in  his hands, but nothing moved
along the seams.
“Don’ t think so.”
“W ell, p ut it on, then, Captain Ransom. W e must show a
good example to the men, you know .”
W illiam had in fact assumed the object, feeling slightly
queer at  the warmth of it on his head, before properly hearingwhat Grant had said.
“Captain… ?” he said faintly .
“Congratulations,” Grant said, the ghost of a smile
lightening the exhaustion on his face. “The brigadier…” He
glanced back at the reeking, sile nt cabin, and the smile faded.
“He wanted you made captain after T iconderoga—should have
been done then, but… well.” His lips thinned, but then
relaxed. “General Bur goyne signed the order last night, after
hearing several  accounts of t he battle. I gather that you
distinguished yourself.”
W illiam ducked his head awkwardly . His throat was thick
and his eyes bur ned. He couldn’ t remember what he’d done—
only that he’d failed to save the brigadier .
“Thank you,” he managed, and could not keep from
glancing back himself. They had left the door open. “Do you
know—did he—no, it doesn’ t matter .”
“Did he know?” Grant said gent ly . “I told him. I brought the
order .”
Unable to speak, W illiam bobbed his head. The hat, for a
wonder , fit him, and stayed in place.
“God, it’ s cold,” Grant said softly . He tugged his coat closer ,
glancing round at the dripping trees and the fog that lay thick
among them. The others had go ne back to their duties, leaving
them alone. “What a desolate place. T errible time of day , too.”
“Y es.” W illiam felt a momentary relief at being able to
admit hi s own sense of desolation—though the hour and the
place had little to do with it. H e swallowed, glancing back at
the cabin. The open door both ered him; while the fog lay
heavy a s a feather bed on the forest, the mist near the cabin
was rising, drifting around th e windows, and he had the
uneasy fancy that it was somehow … coming  for the brigadier .
“I’ll jus t… close that door , sha ll I?” He’d started for the
cabin, but was arrested by Grant’ s gesture.
“No, don’ t.”W illiam glanced at him in surprise, and the captain
shrugged, trying to make light of it.
“The donor of your hat said we must leave it open. Some
Highland fancy—something about the, um, soul requiring an
exit,” he  said delicately . “And at least it’ s too bloody cold for
the flies,” he added, with no delicacy at all.
W illiam’ s shriveled stomach clenched, and he swallowed
the b itterness that rose in the ba ck of his throat at the vision of
swarming maggots.
“But surely we can’ t… How long?” he demanded.
“Not long,” Grant assured him . “W e’re only waiting for a
burial detail.”
W illiam stifled the protest that rose to his lips. Of course.
What else could be done? And yet the memory of the trenches
they had  dug by the Heights, the dirt freckling his corporal’ s
cold rou nd cheeks… After the last ten days, he would have
thought himself beyond sensitivity to such things. But the
sounds o f the wolves that came to eat the dying and the dead
echoed suddenly in the hollow pit of his stomach.
W ith a muttere d excuse, he stepped aside into the wet
shrubbery and threw up, as quietly as he could. W ept a little,
silent, then wiped his face with  a handful of wet leaves and
came back.
Grant tactfully af fected to believe W illiam had simply gone
to relieve himself, and made no inquiries.
“An impressive  gentleman,” he remarked casually . “The
general’ s kinsman, I mean. W ouldn’ t think they were related to
look at, would you?”
Caught up in dying hope and tearing grief, W illiam had
barely noticed Colonel Fraser be fore the latter had so suddenly
given him the ha t—and been too startled to notice much about
him then. He sh ook his head in agreement, though, having a
vague re collection of a tall figu re kneeling down by the bed,
the firelight touching the crown of his head briefly with red.“Looks more like you than like the brigadier ,” Grant added
of fhandedly , then laughed, a painful creak. “Sure you haven’ t
a Scottish branch in your family?”
“No, Y o rkshiremen back to the Flood on both sides, save
one Fren ch grea t-grandmother ,” W illiam replied, grateful for
the mo mentary distraction o f light conversation. “My
stepfather ’ s mother is half Scotch—that count, do you think?”
Whatever Grant might have said in reply was lost, as the
sound of a doomed soul came down to them through the
gloom. Both men froze, listening. The brigadier ’ s piper was
coming, with Balcarres and some of his rangers. The burial
detail.
The sun had ris en but was invisible, blocked by cloud and
the canopy of trees. Grant’ s face was the same color as the fog,
pale, sheened with moisture.
The sound seemed to come from a great distance and yet
from the forest itself. Then wai ls and ululating shrieks joined
the piper ’ s lament—Balcarres and his Indians. Despite the
chilling sounds, W illiam was a little comforted; it would not
be just a hasty field burial, u ndertaken without regard or
respect.
“Sound like howling wolves, don’ t they?” muttered Grant.
He ran a hand d own his face, th en fastidiously wiped his wet
palm on his thigh.
“Y es, they do,” said W illiam. He took a firm stance and
waited t o receive the mourners, conscious all the time of the
cabin at his back, its door standing silent, open to the mist. GREASIER THAN GREASE
 
I  HAD AL W A YS assumed that surrender was a fairly
simple t hing. Ha nd over your s word, shake hands, and march
of f—to parole, prison, or the n ext battle. I was disabused of
this simplemind ed assumption  by Dr . Rawlings, who did
indeed make his way across the lines two days later to speak to
me abo ut his brother . I’d told him everything I could,
expressing my particular attachm ent to his brother ’ s casebook,
through which I felt I’d known Daniel Rawlings. The second
Dr . R awlings—his name was David, he said—was easy to talk
to and lingered for a while, the conversation moving on to
other subjects.
“Gracious, no,” he said, when I’d mentioned my surprise
that the ceremon y of surrender h ad not occurred at once. “The
terms of surrender must be negotiated first, you know—and
that’ s a prickly business.”
“Negotiated?” I said. “Does General Bur goyne have a
choice  in the matter?”
He seemed to find that funny .
“Oh, indeed he does,” he assu red me. “I happen to have
seen the proposals which Major Kingston brought over this
morning for General Gates’ s perusal. They begin with the
rather firm statement, that having fought Gates twice, General
Bur goyne is quite prepared to do it a third time. He’ s not, of
course,” the doctor added, “but it saves his face by allowing
him to then no te that he has of course noticed the rebels’
superiority in numbers and thus feels justified in accepting
surrender in order to save th e lives of brave men upon
honorable terms . By the way , the battle is not of ficially over
yet,” he added, w ith a faint air of apology . “General Bur goyne
proposes a cessation of hostilities while negotiations are under
way .”“Oh, rea lly ,” I said, amused. “I wonder if General Gates is
disposed to accept this at face value.”
“No, he’ s not,” said a dry Scotti sh voice, and Jamie ducked
his head and came into the tent, followed by his cousin
Hamish. “He read Bur goyne’ s proposal, then reached into his
pocket and whipped out his own. He demands an
unconditional surrender and requires both British and German
troops t o ground their arms in camp and march out as
prisoners. The truce will last  ‘til sunset, at which time
Bur goyne must make his reply . I thought Major Kingston
would have an apoplexy on the spot.”
“Is he bluf fing, do you think?” I  asked. Jamie made a small
Scottish noise in his throat and cut his eyes at Dr . Rawlings,
indicating that he thought this an improper thing to be
discussing in front of the enem y . And given Dr . Rawlings’ s
evident access to the British high command, perhaps he was
right.
David Rawlings tactfully chang ed the subject, opening the
lid of the case he had brought with him.
“Is this the same as the case you had, Mrs. Fraser?”
“Y es, it is.” I had noticed it immediately but hadn’ t liked to
stare at it. It wa s somewhat more battered than my case, and
had a small bras s nameplate attached to it, but was otherwise
just the same.
“W ell, I  was in no real doubt as to my brother ’ s fate,” he
said, with a small sigh, “but that settles the matter entirely . The
cases w ere given to us by our father , himself a physician,
when we entered practice.”
I glanced at him, startled.
“Y ou don’ t mean to tell me—were you twins?”
“W e were, yes.” He looked surprised that I hadn’ t known
that.
“Identical?”
He smiled.“Our mother could invariably tell us apart, but few other
people could.”
I st ared at him, feeling an  unusual warmth—almost
embarrassment. I had, of course, built up a mental picture of
Daniel Rawlings as I read his casebook entries. Suddenly
meeting him face-to-face, as it were, gave me something of a
turn.
Jamie was staring at me in bem usement, eyebrows raised. I
coughed, blushing, and he shook his head slightly and, with
another Scottish noise, picked up the deck of cards he’d come
for and led Hamish out.
“I wond er—are you in need o f anything particular in the
medical line?” David Rawlings asked, blushing in turn. “I am
quite short of m edicinals, but I do have duplicates of some
instruments—and quite a good selection of scalpels. I should
be most honored if you would…”
“Oh.” T hat was a gallant of fer , and my embarrassment was
at o nce submer ged in a tide of acquisitiveness. “W ould you
perhaps have an extra pair of tweezers? Small forceps, I
mean?”
“Oh, yes, of course.” He pul led out the lower drawer ,
pushing a clutter of small instr uments aside in search of the
tweezers. As he did so, I caug ht sight of something unusual
and pointed at it.
“What on earth is that?”
“It is called a ju gum penis,” Dr . Rawlings explained to me,
his color increasing noticeably .
“It looks like a bear trap. What i s it—it can’ t be a device for
performing circumcision, surely?” I picked up the object,
which caused Dr . Rawlings to gasp, and I eyed him curiously .
“It—er , please, dear lady…” He almost snatched the thing
out of my hands, thrusting it back into his chest.
“What o n earth is it for?” I asked, more amused than
of fended by his reaction. “Given the name, obviously—”“It prevents nocturnal… er… tumescence.” His face by this
time was a dark , unhealthy sort of red, and he wouldn’ t meet
my eye.
“Y es, I imagine  it would do that.” The object in question
consisted of two concentric ci rcles of metal, the outer one
flexible, with overlapping ends,  and a sort of key mechanism
that enabled it t o be tightened. The inner one was sawtoothed
—much like a b ear trap, as I’d said. Rather obviously , it was
meant to be fast ened round a limp penis—which would stay in
that condition, if it knew what was good for it.
I coughed. “Um … why , precisely , is that desirable?”
His embarrassment faded slightly into shock.
“Why… it… the… the loss of  the male essence is most
debilitating. It drains the vitality and exposes a man to all
manner of sickness, as well as grossly impairing his mental
and spiritual faculties.”
“Just as well n o one’ s thought of mentioning that to my
husband,” I said.
Rawlings gave me a completely scandalized look, but
before t he discussion could assume even more improper
proportions, we were fortunately interrupted by a stir outside,
and he took the opportunity to shut his case and tuck it hastily
back under his arm before coming to join me at the tent’ s
entrance.
There w as a small parade crossi ng the camp, a hundred feet
away . A  British major in dress uniform, blindfolded, and so
red in the face I  thought he might pop. He was being led by
two Continental soldiers, and a fife player was following them
at a semi-discreet distance, play ing “Y ankee Doodle.” Bearing
in mind  what Jamie had said a bout an apoplexy , I was in no
doubt that this was the unfortu nate Major Kingston who had
been selected to deliver Bur goyne’ s surrender proposals.
“Dear me,” murmured Dr . Rawl ings, shaking his head at the
sight. “I am afraid this process could take some time.”
 
IT DID. A wee k later , we were  all still sitting there, as
letters made their stately way on ce or twice a day between the
two camps. There was a general air of relaxation in the
American camp ; I thought thin gs were probably still a little
tense across the way , but Dr . Ra wlings had not come back, so
general gossip was the only way of judging the progress—or
lack of it—of the surrender negotiations. Evidently General
Gates had  b een bluf fing, and Bur goyn e had been astute
enough to realize it.
I w as pleased to be in one place long enough to wash my
clothes without risk of being shot, scalped, or otherwise
molested. Beyond that, there were a good many casualties
from the two battles who still required nursing.
I ha d been awar e, in a vague sort of way , of a man lurking
round th e edges of our encampment. I’d seen him several
times, but he had never come close enough to speak to me, and
I’d p ut him down as likely suf fering from some embarrassing
ailment like clap or piles. It often took such men a good while
to muster either the courage or t he desperation to ask for help,
and once they did, they’d still wait to speak to me privately .
The thir d or fourth time I notic ed him, I tried to catch his
eye, to induce him to come c lose enough so that I could
arrange to examine him privatel y , but each time he slid away ,
eyes downcast, and disappeared into the anthill of seething
militia, Continentals, and camp followers.
He r eappeared quite suddenly to ward sunset of the next day ,
while I  was making a sort of pottage, using a bone—
unidentifiable as to animal, but reasonably fresh, and with
shreds of meat s till clinging to it—given me by a patient, two
wizened yams, a handful of gr ain, another handful of beans,
and some stale bread.
“Y ou are  Mrs. Fraser?” he asked, in a surprisingly educated
Lowland Scottis h accent. Edinbur gh, I thought, and had a faint
pang at the mem ory of T om Ch ristie’ s similar speech. He hadalways insisted upon calling me “Mrs. Fraser ,” spoken in just
that clipped, formal way .
Thoughts of T om Christie vanished in the next instant,
though.
“They call you the White W itch, do they not?” the man said,
and smiled. It wasn’ t in any way a pleasant expression.
“Some do. What of it?” I said, taking a good grip on my
spurtle a nd staring him down. He was tall and thin, narrow-
faced and dark, dressed in the uniform of a Continental. Why
had he not gone  to his regimental sur geon, in preference to a
witch? I wondered. Did he want a love philter? He scarcely
seemed the type.
He laughed a little, and bowed.
“I wished only to be sure I had come to the right place,
madam,” he said. “I intended no of fense.”
“None taken.” He was not doing anything noticeably
threatening, other than perhaps standing too close to me, but I
didn’ t like him. And my heart was beating faster than it ought.
“Y ou evidently know my name,” I said, striving for
coolness. “What’ s yours, then?”
He smil ed again, looking me o ver with a careful air that
struck m e as one inch short of insolence—and a short inch, at
that.
“My name doesn’ t matter . Y our husband is James Fraser?”
I ha d a sudden strong ur ge to dot him one with the spurtle
but didn ’ t; it might annoy him but wouldn’ t get rid of him. I
didn’ t want to a dmit to Jamie’ s name and didn’ t bother asking
myself why not. I simply said, “Excuse me,” and, taking the
camp kettle of f the fire, set it on the ground and walked of f.
He hadn ’ t expected that and d idn’ t follow me at once. I
walked away fast, whisked round behind a small tent
belonging to the New Hampshire militia and into a group of
people gathered  round another fire—militiamen, some with
their wives. One or two loo ked surprised by my abruptappearance, but  all of them knew me and cordially made
room, nodding and murmuring greetings.
I lo oked back from this refug e and could see the man,
silhouetted by the sinking sun, standing by my own abandoned
fire, the evening wind lifting wisps of his hair . It was no doubt
my imagination that made me think he looked sinister .
“Who’ s that, Auntie? One of your rejected suitors?” Y oung
Ian spoke by my ear , a grin in his voice.
“Certainly rejected,” I said, keeping an eye on the man. I’d
thought he might follow me, bu t he remained where he was,
face turned in my direction. His face was a black oval, but I
knew he  was staring at me. “Where’ s your uncle, do you
know?”
“Oh, aye. He and Cousin Hamish are takin’ Colonel
Martin’ s money at loo, over there.” He jerked his chin in the
direction of the V ermont militia encampment, where Colonel
Martin’ s tent rose, recognizabl e by a lar ge tear in the top,
which had been patched with a piece of yellow calico.
“Is Hamish good at cards?” I asked curiously , glancing
toward the tent.
“No, bu t Uncle Jamie is, and he kens when Hamish will do
the wrong thing, which is alm ost as good as him doing the
right thing, aye?”
“I’ll take your word for it. Do you know who that man is?
The one standing by my fire?”
Ian squinted against the low sun, then suddenly frowned.
“No, but he’ s just spat in your soup.”
“He what ?!” I spun on  my heel, in time to see the
anonymous gen tleman stalk away , back stif f. “Why , that
bloody filthy arsehole !”
Ian c leared his t hroat and nudged me, indicating one of the
militia wives, who was vie wing me with considerable
disapproval. I cleared my own throat, swallowed my further
remarks on the subject, and ga ve her what I hoped was anapologetic smile. W e were, after all, probably going to be
obliged to beg her hospitality , if we were to get any supper
now .
When I looked back at our own fire, the man was gone.
“Shall I tell ye something, Auntie?” Ian said, frowning
thoughtfully at the empty shadows lengthening beneath the
trees. “He’ll be back.”
 
JAMIE AND HAMISH did not return for supper , leading
me to suppose that the loo m ust be going well for them.
Things w ere going reasonably well for me, too; Mrs. Kebbits,
the milit ia wife, did feed Ian and myself, and very hospitably ,
with fre sh corn dodgers and rab bit stew with onions. Best of
all, my sinister visitor didn’ t return.
Ian had gone of f about his own business, Rollo at heel, so I
banked the fire and prepared to set of f for the hospital tents for
evening rounds. Most of the severely injured had died within
the first two or three days after the battle; of the rest, those
who had wives, friends, or relatives to care for them had been
taken of f to their own camps. There were three dozen or so
left, men on their own, with lingering but not immediately life-
threatening injuries or illnesses.
I p ut on a secon d pair of stockings, wrapped my thick wool
cloak around myself, and thanke d God for the cold weather . A
chill had struck in late September , setting the woods afire with
a gl ory of red and gold, but also helpfully killing of f the
insects. The relief of camp life without flies was marvelous in
itself—no surpr ise to me that flies had been one of the T en
Plagues of Egypt. The lice, alas, were still with us, but without
flies, fle as, and mosquitoes, the threat of epidemic illness was
tremendously decreased.
Still, ev ery time I came near the hospital tent, I found
myself snif fing the air , alert fo r the telltale fecal stench that
might portend a sudden irruption of cholera, typhus, or thelesser evils of a salmonella outbreak. T onight, though, I
smelled nothing beyond the usual cesspit smell of the latrines,
overlaid by the funk of unwashed bodies, filthy linens, and a
lingering tang of old blood. Reassuringly familiar .
Three orderlies were playing cards under a canvas lean-to
next to the biggest tent, their g ame lit by a rush dip whose
flame rose and flickered in the evening wind. Their shadows
swelled and shrank on the pale c anvas, and I caught the sound
of t heir laughter as I passed . That meant none of the
regimental sur geons was about; just as well.
Most of  them were simply grateful for whatever help was
of fered and thus left me to d o what I would. There were
always o ne or two who’d stand on their dignity and insist on
their aut hority , though. Usually no more than a nuisance, but
very dangerous in case of emer gency .
No emer gencies tonight, thank God. There were a number
of t in candlesticks and stubs o f varying lengths in a bowl
outside the tent; I lit a candle from the fire and, ducking inside,
made my way through the two lar ge tents, checking vital
signs, chatting with the men wh o were awake, and evaluating
their condition.
Nothing very bad, but I had some concern for Corporal
Jebediah Shoreditch, who had suf fered three separate bayonet
wounds during the storming of the great redoubt. By some
miracle, none had hit any vital or gans, and while the corporal
was rather uncomfortable—one thrust having plowed upward
through his left buttock—he wasn’ t displaying any major signs
of fever . There was some sign  of infection in the buttock
wound, though.
“I’m go ing to irrigate this,” I told him, eyeing my half-full
bottle of  tincture  of gentian. Th is was nearly the last of it, but
with luc k, there shouldn’ t be great need again until I was in a
position to make more. “W ash i t out, I mean, to rid you of the
pus. Ho w did it happen?” The irrigation wasn’ t going to be
comfortable; better if he could be distracted a little by telling
me the details.“W asn’ t retreatin’, ma’am, and don’ t you think it,” he
assured me, taking a good grip  on the edge of his pallet as I
turned b ack the blanket and pe eled away the crusty bits of a
tar -and-turpentine dressing. “One o’ them sneaky Hessian sons
of bitch es was a-playin’ dead, and when I went to step over
him, he come to  life and reared  up like a copperhead, bay’net
in hand.”
“Bayonet in your  hand, you mean, Jeb,” joked a friend who
lay nearby .
“Nah, that was another un.” Shoreditch shrugged of f the
joke with a casual glance at his right hand, wrapped in
bandages. One of the Hessians  had pinned his hand to the
ground with a bayonet blade, he told me—whereupon
Shoreditch had snatched up his fallen knife with his left hand
and swiped it murderously across the Hessian’ s calves, felling
him, and then had cut the Hessian’ s throat—disregarding a
third atta cker , whose thrust had removed the top part of his left
ear .
“Somebody shot that un, Lord be praised, afore he could
improve his aim. Speak of hands , Ma’am, is the colonel’ s hand
a-doing well?” His forehead sh one with sweat in the lantern
light, and the tendons stood out  in his forearms, but he spoke
courteously .
“I think it must be,” I said, pre ssing slowly on the plunger
of m y irrigating syringe. “He’ s been at cards with Colonel
Martin s ince this afternoon—and if his hand was poor , he’d
have come back by now .”
Shoreditch and his friend both chuckled at this feeble pun,
but he let go a long sigh when I took my hands away from the
new dressing, and rested his forehead on the pallet for a
moment before rolling painfully onto his good side.
“Thank you kindly , ma’am,” he said. His eyes passed with
apparent casualness over the figures that moved to and fro in
the dark ness. “If you was to see Friend Hunter or Doc T olliver ,
might you ask ‘em to stop a moment?”I raised a brow at this, but nodded and poured him a cup of
ale; there was p lenty now that the supply lines from the south
had caught up, and it would do him no harm.
I di d the same for his friend, a man from Pennsylvania
named Neph Brewster , who was suf fering from dysentery ,
though I added a small handful  of Dr . Rawling’ s Bowel-Bind
mixture before handing over the cup.
“Jeb ain’ t meanin’ no disrespect to you, ma’am,” Neph
whispered, leaning confidentially close as he took the drink.
“It’ s only as he can’ t shit ‘thout help, and that ain’ t somethin’
he wants to ask a lady . Mr . Denzell or the Doc don’ t come by
soon, I’ll help him, though.”
“Shall I fetch one of the orderlies?” I asked, surprised.
“They’re just outside.”
“Oh, no, ma’am. Once the sun  goes down, they figure as
how the y’re of f duty . W on’ t come in, save there’ s a fight or the
tent catches fire.”
“Hmm,” I said. Plainly attitudes among medical orderlies
weren’ t that dif ferent from one time to another .
“I’ll find one of  the sur geons,” I assured him; Mr . Brewster
was thin  and yellow , and his hand shook so badly that I had to
put my own fingers round his to help him drink. I doubted he
could stand long enough to ma nage his own necessities, let
alone help Corporal Shoreditch with his. Mr . Brewster was
game, though.
“Shittin’ is somethin’ I can clai m to have some skill at by
now ,” he said, grinning at me . He wiped his face with a
trembling hand and paused between swallows to breathe
heavily . “Ah … might you have a bit o’ cooking grease to
hand, m a’am? M y arsehole’ s raw as a fresh-skinned rabbit. I
can put it on myself—unless you’d like  to help, o’ course.”
“I’ll mention it to Dr . Hunter ,”  I replied dryly . “I’m sure
he’d be delighted.”
I fin ished my rounds quickly—most of the men were asleep
—and went in search of Denny Hunter , who I found outsidehis o wn tent, bundled up agains t the cold with a muf fler round
his neck , dreamily listening to a ballad being sung at a nearby
campfire.
“Who?” He came out of his trance at my appearance,
though it took him a moment to return fully to earth. “Oh,
Friend Jebediah, to be sure. Of course—I’ll go at once.”
“Have you got any goose or bear grease?”
Denny settled his spectacles mo re firmly on his nose, giving
me a quizzical look.
“Friend Jebediah is not constipated, is he? I understood his
dif ficulty to be more one of engineering than of physiology .”
I laughed, and explained.
“Oh. W ell. I do have  some ointment ,” he said doub tfully .
“But it is mentholated—for the treatment of grippe and
pleurisy , thee knows. I fear that will do Friend Brewster ’ s arse
no favors.”
“I fear not,” I agreed. “Why don’ t you go and help Mr .
Shoreditch, and  I’ll find a bit of plain grease and bring it
along?”
Grease—any kind of grease—was a staple of cooking, and
it to ok o nly two inquiries at campfires to procure a cup of it. It
was, the donor informed me, rendered possum fat. “Greasier
than gre ase,” the lady assured me. “T asty , too.” This last
characteristic was unlikely to be of much interest to Mr .
Brewster—or at least I hoped not—but I thanked her
ef fusively and set of f through the darkness, back toward the
small hospital tent.
At le ast I intended  to head in that direction. The moon had
not y et risen, though, and within  a few minutes I found myself
on a  thickly wooded hillside tha t I didn’ t remember , stumbling
over roots and fallen branches.
Muttering to myself, I turned left—surely that was… No, it
wasn’ t. I stopped, cursing silently . I couldn’ t be lost; I was in
the middle of a campground containing at least half theContinental army , to say nothing of dozens of militia
companies. Exactly where I was on said campground,
though… I could see the glimmer of several fires through the
trees, but the configuration of them seemed unfamiliar .
Disoriented, I turned the other way , straining my eyes in
search of the pa tched roof of Colonel Martin’ s lar ge tent, that
being the biggest landmark likely to be visible in the darkness.
Something ran over my foot, and  I jerked in reflex, slopping
liquefied possum  fat over my hand. I gritted my teeth and
wiped it gingerly on my apron. Possum fat is  extremely
greasy , its major drawback as a general-purpose lubricant
being that it smells like dead possum.
My hea rt was beating fast fro m the shock and gave a
convulsive leap  when an owl came out of the copse to my
right, a piece of the night taking sudden silent flight a few feet
from my face. Then a branch cracked suddenly , and I heard the
movements of several men, murmuring together as they
pushed through the under growth nearby .
I stood quite still, teeth set in my lower lip, and felt a wave
of sudden, irrational terror .
It’ s all right!  I  told m yself, fu rious. It’ s o nly soldiers looking
for a shortcut. No thr eat, no thr eat at all!
T ell that to the Marines , my nervous system replied, at the
sound of a muf fled curse, the scuf fle and crunch of dry leaves
and breaking branches, and the sudden kicked-melon thump of
a solid object m eeting someone ’ s head. A cry , the crash of a
falling body , and hurried rustli ng as the thieves rifled their
victim’ s pockets.
I c ouldn ’ t move. I wanted despe rately to run but was rooted
to the spot; my legs simply wo uldn’ t respond. It was exactly
like a nightmare, with something terrible coming my way but
no ability to move.
My mou th was open, and I was  exerting all my strength to
keep from screaming, while at the same time terrified that I
couldn’ t  scream. My own breathing was loud, echoing insidemy head, and a ll of a sudden  I felt my throat harsh with
swallowed blood, my breath labored, nostrils blocked. And the
weight on me, heavy , amorphous, crushing me into ground
rough with stones and fallen pinecones. I felt hot breath in my
ear .
Ther e, now . I’m sorry , Martha, but you got to take it. I got to
give it to you. Y eah, ther e… oh, Christ, ther e… ther e…
I did n’ t remember falling to the  ground. I was curled into a
ball, face pressed to my knees, shaking with rage and terror .
Crashing in the brush nearby , several men passed within a few
feet of me, laughing and joking.
And then some small fragment o f my sanity spoke up in the
recesses of my brain, cool as dammit, dispassionately
remarking, Oh, so  that’ s a flashback. How inter esting .
“I’ll show you interesting,” I wh ispered—or thought I did. I
don’ t be lieve I made a sound. I was fully dressed—swaddled
against the cold—I could feel  the cold on my face, but it made
no d if ference. I was naked, fel t cool air on my breasts, my
thighs—between my thighs …
I clamped my legs together as tightly as I could and bit my
lip as hard as I could. Now I really did taste blood. But the
next thing didn’ t happen. I remembered it vividly . But it was  a
memory . It didn’ t happen again.
V ery slo wly , I came back. My lip hurt, and I was drooling
blood; I could feel the gouge, a loose flap of flesh in my inner
lip, and taste silver and copper , a s though my mouth was filled
with pennies.
I w as breathing as though I’d  run a mile, but I could
breathe; my nose was clear , m y throat soft and open, not
bruised, not abraded. I was dren ched in sweat, and my muscles
hurt from being clenched so hard.
I cou ld hear moa ning in the brush to my left. They didn’ t kill
him, then , I  thought dim ly . I supposed I  should go and see,
help him. I didn’ t want to, didn’ t want to touch a man, see aman, be anywhere near one. It d idn’ t matter , though; I couldn’ t
move.
I was no longer frozen in the grip of terror; I knew where I
was, that I was  safe—safe enough. But I couldn’ t move. I
stayed crouched, sweating and trembling, and listened.
The man groaned a few times, then rolled slowly over ,
branches rustling.
“Oh, shit,” he mumbled. He lay still, breathing heavily , then
sat up abruptly , exclaiming, “O h, shit !”—whether at the pain
of the movemen t or the memory  of the robbery , I didn’ t know .
There was mumbled cursing, a s igh, silence… then a shriek of
pure terror that hit my spinal cord like a jolt of electricity .
Mad scr ambling sounds as the man scuf fled to his feet—
why , why , what was going on? Crashing and rattling of flight.
T error was infectious; I wanted to run, too, was on my feet, my
heart in my mouth, but didn’ t know where to go. I couldn’ t
hear anything above that idiot’ s crashing. What was bloody
out there?
A faint rustle of  dry leaves made me jerk my head round—
and saved me b y a split second from having a heart attack
when Rollo thrust his wet nose into my hand.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” I exclaimed, relieved at the
sound of my ow n voice. The sound of rustling footsteps came
toward me through the leaves.
“Oh, there ye are, Auntie.” A tall presence loomed up, no
more than a shadow in the dark, and Y oung Ian touched my
arm. “A re ye all right, Auntie?” There was an anxious tone in
his voice, bless him.
“Y es,” I said rather faintly , then with more conviction, “Y es.
I am. I got turned about, in the dark.”
“Oh.” T he tall figure relaxed. “ I thought ye must have lost
your way . Denny Hunter came and said ye’d gone of f to find
some grease but ye’d no come back, and he was worrit for ye.
So Rollo and I came to find ye. Who was yon fellow that
Rollo scared the bejesus out of?”“I don’ t know .” The mention of grease made me look for the
cup of possum grease. It was on the ground, empty and clean.
From the lapping noises, I dedu ced that Rollo, having finished
of f w hat was in the cup, was now  tidily licking the dead leaves
on w hich grease had spilled w hen I dropped it. Under the
circumstances, I didn’ t feel I could really complain.
Ian bent and scooped up the cup.
“Come back to the fire, Auntie. I’ll find some more grease.”
I ma de no dem ur at this and followed him down of f the
hillside, paying no real attention to my surroundings. I was too
occupied in rearranging my mental state, settling my feelings,
and trying to regain some kind of equilibrium.
I’d heard  the word “flashback” o nly briefly , in Boston in the
sixties. W e didn’ t call it flashback earlier , but I’d heard about
it. And I’d seen it. Shell shock, they said in the First W orld
W ar . Ba ttle fatigue, in the Secon d. It’ s what happens when you
live through things you shouldn’ t have been able to live
through and can’ t reconcile that knowledge with the fact that
you did.
W ell, I did , I  said defiantly to myself. So you can just get
used to it . I wond ered for an instant who I was talking to and
—quite seriously—whether I was losing my mind.
I certain ly remembered what had happened to me during my
abduction years before. I’d hav e strongly preferred not to but
knew enough about psychology not to try to suppress the
memories. Whe n they showed up, I looked carefully at them,
doing deep-breathing exercises, then stuf fed them back where
they’d c ome from and went to  find Jamie. After a time, I
found that only certain details sh owed up vividly: the cup of a
dead ea r , purple in the dawn light, looking like an exotic
fungus; the brilliant burst of ligh t I’d seen when Harley Boble
had brok en my nose; the smell of corn on the breath of the
teenaged idiot who’d tried to ra pe me. The soft, heavy weight
of the man who did. The rest was a merciful blur .I h ad nightmares, too, though Ja mie generally woke at once
when I began t o make whimpering noises and grabbed me
hard enough to shatter the dream, holding me against him and
stroking my hair , my back, humming to me, half asleep
himself, until I sank back into his peace and slept again. This
was dif ferent.
 
IAN WENT FROM fire to fire in search of grease and at
length obtained a small tin containing half an inch of goose
grease mixed with comfrey . It w as more than a bit rancid, but
Denny Hunter had told him w hat it was for , and he didn’ t
suppose the state of it mattered so much.
The state of his  aunt concerned him somewhat more. He
knew fine well why she sometimes twitched like a wee cricket
or m oaned in he r sleep. He’d see n the state of her when they’d
got h er b ack fro m the bastards, and he knew the sort of things
they’d done to her . Blood rose in him and the vessels at his
temples swelled at memory of th e fight when they’d taken her
back.
She hadn’ t wished to take her own revenge, when they’d
rescued her; he thought perha ps that had been a mistake,
though he understood the part about her being a healer and
sworn not to ki ll. The thing was, some men needed killing.
The Chu rch didn’ t admit that, s ave it was war . The Mohawk
understood it fine. So did Uncle Jamie.
And the Quakers…
He groaned.
Out of the frying pan, into the f ir e . T he instant he’ d got the
grease, h is steps had turned, not toward the hospital tent where
Denny almost surely was—but toward the Hunters’ tent. He
could pretend he was going to the hospital tent; the two were
near enough together . But he’d never seen any point in lying to
himself.Not for the firs t time, he mis sed Brianna. He could say
anything to her , and she to him—more, he thought, than she
could sometimes say to Roger Mac.
Mechanically , he crossed himse lf, muttering, “Gum biodh
iad sabhailte, a Dhia.” That they might be safe, O God .
For that  matter , he wondered what Roger Mac might have
counseled were he here. He was a quiet man, and a godly one,
if a Presbyterian . But he’d been  on that night’ s ride and joined
in the work, and not a word said about it after .
Ian spared a moment’ s contemplation of Roger Mac’ s future
congregation and what they’d think of that picture of their
minister , but shook his hea d and went on. All these
wonderings wer e only means to  keep him from thinking what
he’d say when he saw her , and that was pointless. He wanted
only to say one thing to her , a nd that was the one thing he
couldn’ t say , ever .
The tent flap was closed, but there was a candle burning
within. He coughed politely outside, and Rollo, seeing where
they were, wagged his tail and uttered a cordial woof !
The flap  was thrust back at once, and Rachel stood there,
mending in one hand, squintin g into the dark but already
smiling; she’d heard the dog. She’d taken of f her cap, and her
hair was messed, coming down from its pins.
“Rollo!” she said, bending down to scratch his ears. “And I
see thee’ve brought thy friend along, too.”
Ian smiled, lifting the little tin.
“I broug ht some grease. My aun t said your brother needed it
for his arsehole. ” An instant too late, he re-collected himself.
“I mean—for an  arse hole.” Mortification flamed up his chest,
but h e was spea king to perhaps the only woman in camp who
might ta ke arseh oles as a comm on topic of conversation. W ell,
the only one sa ve his auntie, he amended. Or the whores,
maybe.
“Oh, he’ll be pleased; I thank thee.”She rea ched to take the tin from him, and her fingers
brushed his. The tin box was smeared with the grease and
slippery; it fell and both of t hem bent to retrieve it. She
straightened first; her hair brushed his cheek, warm and
smelling of her .
W ithout even thinking, he put both hands on her face and
bent to her . Saw the flash and darkening of her eyes, and had
one heartbeat, two, of perfect warm happiness, as his lips
rested on hers, as his heart rested in her hands.
Then on e of those hands cracke d against his cheek, and he
staggered back like a drunkard startled out of sleep.
“What does thee do?” she whispered. Her eyes wide as
saucers, she had backed away , w as pressed against the wall of
the tent as though to fall through it. “Thee must not!”
He couldn’ t find the words to say . His languages boiled in
his m ind like ste w , and he was mute. The first word to surface
through the moil in his mind was the Gaidhlig , though.
“Mo chridhe,”  he said, and breathed for the first time since
he’d touched her . Mohawk cam e next, deep and visceral. I
need you . And tagging belatedly , English, the one best suited
to apology . “I—I’m sorry .”
She nodded, jerky as a puppet.
“Y es. I—yes.”
He should leave; she was afraid. He knew that. But he knew
something else, too. It wasn’ t h im she was afraid of. Slowly ,
slowly , he put out a hand to he r , the fingers moving without
his will, slowly , as though to guddle a trout.
And by an expected miracle, but miracle nonetheless, her
hand stole out t oward his, trembling. He touched the tips of
her fing ers, found them cold. H is own were warm, he would
warm he r…. In his mind, he fe lt the chill of her flesh against
his o wn, noted t he nipples hard against the cloth of her dress
and felt the small round weig ht of her breasts, cold in his
hands, the press of her thighs, chill and hard against his heat.He was gripping  her hand, draw ing her back. And she was
coming, boneless, helpless, drawn to his heat.
“Thee must not,” she whispered, barely audible. “W e must
not.”
It came to him dimly that of course he could not simply
draw her  to him, sink to the eart h, push her garments out of the
way , and  have her , though ever y fiber of his being demanded
that he do just th at. Some faint m emory of civilization asserted
itself, th ough, an d he grabbed f or it. At the same time, with a
terrible reluctance, he released her hand.
“No, of course,” he said, in perfect English. “Of course we
mustn’ t.”
“I—thee—” She  swallowed and ran the back of her hand
across her lips. Not as though to wipe away his kiss, but in
astonishment, he thought. “Doe s thee know—” She stopped
dead, helpless, and stared at him.
“I’m not worried about whethe r ye love me,” he said, and
knew he  spoke the truth. “Not now . I’m worried about whether
ye might die because ye do.”
“Thee has a cheek! I didn’ t say I loved thee.”
He l ooked at he r then, and something moved in his chest. It
might have been laughter . It might not.
“A g reat deal be tter ye don’ t,” h e said softly . “I’m no a fool,
and neither are you.”
She made an impulsive gesture toward him, and he drew
back, just a hair .
“I think ye’d be st not touch me, lass,” he said, still staring
intently into her eyes, the color of cress under rushing water .
“Because if ye d o, I’ll take ye, here and now . And then it’ s too
late for us both, isn’ t it?”
Her hand hung in the air , and while he could see her willing
it, she could not draw it back.He turned from her then and went out into the night, his skin
so hot that the night air turned to steam as it touched him.
 
RACHEL ST OOD stock-still fo r a moment, listening to
the pounding of her heart. Another regular sound began to
intrude, a soft lapping noise, and she looked down, blinking, to
see that  Rollo had tidily polis hed of f the last of the goose
grease from the tin she had dro pped and was now licking the
empty tin.
“Oh, Lord,” she said, and put a hand over her mouth, afraid
that if she laug hed, it would erupt into hysterics. The dog
looked u p at her , his eyes yellow in the candlelight. He licked
his lips, long tail waving gently .
“What am I to do?” she asked h im. “W ell enough for thee;
thee can  chase about after him all day , and share his bed at
night, and not a word said.”
She sat down on the stool, her k nees feeling weak, and took
a grip of the thick fur that ruf fed the dog’ s neck.
“What does he m ean?” she asked him. ” ‘I’m worried about
whether ye might die because ye do?’ Does he think me one of
those fools who pines and swoons and looks pale for love, like
Abigail Miller?  Not that she’d think of actually dying for
anyone’ s sake, let alone her poor husband’ s.” She looked down
at th e dog and shook his ruf f. “And what does he mean,
kissing t hat chit—for give my lack of charity , Lord, but there’ s
no good  to be do ne by ignoring the truth—and not three hours
later kissing me? T ell me that! What does he mean  by it?”
She let go of the  dog then. He licked her hand politely , then
vanished silently through the tent flap, no doubt to convey her
question to his annoying master .
She ought to be  putting cof fee on to boil and getting up
some supper; Denny would be  back soon from the hospital
tent, hun gry and cold. She cont inued to sit, though, staring atthe cand le flame, wondering whether she would feel it were
she to pass her hand through it.
She doubted it. Her whole bo dy had ignited when he’d
touched her , sudden as a torch soaked in turpentine, and she
was still afire. A wonder her shift did not burst into flames.
She kne w what he was. He’d m ade no secret of it. A man
who lived by violence, who carried it within him.
“And I used that when it suited me, didn’ t I?” she asked the
candle. Not the act of a Friend. She had not been content to
trust in God’ s m ercy , not willing to accept His will. She’d not
only connived at and encouraged violence, she’d put Ian
Murray in gross danger of both soul and body . No, no good to
be done by ignoring the truth.
“Though if it’ s truth we’re speaking here,” she said to the
candle, still feeling defiant, “I bear witness that he did it for
Denny , as much as for me.”
“Who did what?” Her brother ’ s bent head poked into the
tent, and he straightened up, blinking at her .
“W ill thee pray for me?” she as ked abruptly . “I am in great
danger .”
Her brother stared at her , eyes unblinking behind his
spectacles.
“Indeed thee is,” he said slowly . “Though I am in doubt that
prayer will aid thee much.”
“What, has thee no faith left i n God?” She spoke sharp,
made sti ll more anxious by the thought that her brother might
have be en overcome by the th ings he had seen in the last
month. She feared they had shak en her own faith considerable
but depe nded upon her brother ’ s faith as she would on shield
and buckler . If that were gone …
“Oh, endless faith in God,” he said, and smiled. “In thee?
Not quite so mu ch.” He took of f  his hat and hung it on the nail
he had driven into the tent pole , and checked to be sure that
the flap was closed and tied fast behind him.“I h eard heard wolves howling on my walk back,” he
remarked. “Closer than was comfortable.” He sat down and
looked directly at her .
“Ian Murray?” he asked bluntly .
“How did thee know that?” Her  hands were trembling, and
she wiped them irritably on her apron.
“I m et his dog just now .” He ey ed her with interest. “What
did he say to thee?”
“I—nothing.”
Denny cocked one brow in disbelief, and she relented.
“Not much. He said—I was in love with him.”
“Is thee?” Denny asked, sounding not at all surprised.
“How can I be in love with such a man?”
“If t hee were no t, I do not suppose thee would be asking me
to pray for thee, ” he pointed out  logically . “Thee would simply
send him away . ‘How’ is pr obably not a question I am
qualified to answer—though I imagine thee means it
rhetorical, in any case.”
She laughed, in spite of her agitation.
“No,” sh e said, smoothing the a pron over her knees. “I do
not  m ean it rhetori cal. More… well, would thee say that Job
was bei ng rhetorical when he asked the Lord what He was
thinking? I mean it in that way .”
“Questioning the Lord is an awkward business,” her brother
said thoughtfully . “Thee does get answers, but they are
inclined to lead thee to strange places.” He smiled at her again,
but gently and with a depth of sympathy in his eyes that made
her look away .
She sat pleating the cloth of the  apron between her fingers,
hearing the shouts and drunken singing that marked every
night in camp. S he wished to sa y that places didn’ t get much
stranger than this—two Friends , in the midst of an army , and
part of it—but it was indeed Denny’ s questioning of the Lordthat had  got them here, and she did not wish him to feel that
she blamed him for it.
Instead, she looked up and asked earnestly , “Has thee ever
been in love, Denny?”
“Oh,” he  said, and looked at hi s own hands, cupped on his
knees. H e still smiled, but it had altered, become inward, as
though he saw something inside his head. “Y es. I suppose so.”
“In England?”
He nodded. “Y es. It—would not do, though.”
“She … was not a Friend?”
“No,” he said softly . “She was not.”
In a way , that w as a relief; she had been fearing that he had
fallen in  love with a woman who would not leave England, but
had felt obliged himself to return to America—for her sake.
Insofar as her own feelings for Ian Murray were concerned,
though, this did not augur well.
“I’m sorry about the grease,” she said abruptly .
He blinked.
“Grease?”
“For someone’ s arsehole, Friend Murray said. The dog ate
it.”
“The do g ate … oh, the dog ate the grease.” His mouth
twitched, and he rubbed the th umb of his right hand slowly
over his fingers. “That’ s all right; I found some.”
“Y ou’re hungry , ” she said abruptly , and stood up. “W ash thy
hands and I’ll put the cof fee on.”
“That would be good. I thank thee, Rachel. Rachel…” He
hesitated, but was not a man to avoid things. “Friend Murray
said to thee that thee loves him—but not that he loves thee?
That seems—a peculiar way of expression, does it not?”
“It d oes,” she sa id, in a tone indicating that she didn’ t wish
to di scuss Ian M urray’ s peculiarities. She was not about to tryto ex plain to De nny that Ian Murray had not declared himself
to her in words because he had n’ t needed to. The air around
her still shimmered with the heat of his declaration. Though…
“Perhaps he did,” she said slowly . “He said something to
me, but it wasn ’ t in English, a nd I didn’ t understand. Does
thee know what ‘mo cr ee-ga  ‘ might mean?”
Denny frowned for a moment, then his brow cleared.
“That would be the Highlander ’ s tongue, what they call the
Gaidhlig , I think. No, I don’ t know what  it means—but I have
heard Friend Jamie say that to his wife, in such circumstances
as to make it evident that it is a term of deep … af fection.” He
coughed.
“Rachel—does thee wish me to speak to him?”
Her skin still bu rned, and her fa ce felt as though it glowed
with fev er , but at this, a deep shard of ice seemed to pierce her
heart.
“Speak to him,” she repeated, and swallowed. “And say…
what?” She had found the cof fe epot and the pouch of roasted
acorns a nd chicory . She poured a handful of the blackened
mixture into her mortar and com menced to pound it as though
the cup were full of snakes.
Denny shrugged, watching her with interest.
“Thee will break that mortar ,” he observed. “As to what I
should say—why , thee must tell me, Rachel.” His eyes were
still inte nt upon her , but serious now , with no hint of humor . “I
will tell him to stay away and n ever to speak to thee again, if
thee wishes it. Or if thee prefers, I can assure him that thy
af fection for him is only that of a friend and that he must
refrain from further awkward declarations.”
She poured the grounds into th e pot and then added water
from the canteen she kept hanging on the tent pole.
“Are tho se the only alternatives you see?” she asked, trying
to keep her voice steady .“Sissy ,” he said, very gently , “t hee cannot wed such a man
and rem ain a Friend. No meetin g would accept such a union.
Thee knows that.” He waited a moment and added, “Thee did
ask me to pray for thee.”
She didn’ t answer or look at him but untied the tent flap and
went out to put the cof feepot among the coals, pausing to poke
up the fire and add more wo od. The air glowed near the
ground, lit by th e smoke and fie ry haze of thousands of small
fires like hers. But the night above stretched black and clear
and infinite, the stars burning with their own cold fire.
When s he went back in, he was half under the bed,
muttering.
“What?” she demanded, and he backed out, bringing with
him the small crate that held their foodstuf fs—save that it
didn’ t. O nly a scattering of ra w acorns and an apple, half-
gnawed by mice, remained.
” What ?” she repeated, shocked. “What has happened to the
food?”
Denny was flushed and plainly angry , and rubbed his
knuckles hard across his lips before replying.
“Some m isbegotten son of a—of Belial… has slit the tent
and taken it.”
The res ultant f lood of fury at this news was almost
welcome, for the distraction that it of fered.
“Why , that—that—”
“Doubtless,” Denny said, taking a deep breath and seeking
to regain  control of himself, “h e was hungry . Poor soul,” he
added, with a distinct lack of charitable intonation.
“If so, he might have asked to be fed,” she snapped. “He is a
thief, pl ain and simple.” She ta pped a foot, fuming. “W ell. I
will go and beg some food myself, then. W atch the cof fee.”
“Thee need not go on my account,” he protested, but it was
a ha lfhearted protest; she knew h e had not eaten since morningand was starved, and she said as much to him with a wide-
eyed stare in his direction.
“The wolves…”  he said, but she was already wrapping up
her cloak and pulling on her cap.
“I’ll tak e a torch,” she assured him. “And it would be an
unlucky wolf who made the mistake of crossing me in my
present m ood, I assure thee!” Sh e seized her gathering bag and
went out quickly , before he cou ld ask her where she proposed
to go.
 
SHE MIGHT HA VE gone to a dozen dif ferent tents
nearby . Puzzlement and suspicion of the Hunters had faded
after Denny’ s adventures as a deserter , and Rachel herself had
cordial relations with a number of the militia wives who
camped near them.
She might have told herself th at she hesitated to disturb
these wo rthy women so late. Or that she wished to hear the
latest ne ws regarding the surrender—Friend Jamie was always
privy to the negotiations and would tell her what he could. Or
that she thought to consult Claire Fraser regarding a small but
painful w art upo n her great toe and might as well do this while
seeking food, for the sake of convenience.
But she was an honest woman and told herself none of these
things. She was walking toward  the Frasers’ camp as though
drawn b y a magnet, and the magnet’ s name was Ian Murray .
She saw this clearly , thought her own behavior insane—and
could no more d o otherwise than she could change the color of
her eyes.
What she meant to do, say , or even think if she did  see him
was unimaginable, but she walked on nonetheless, steady as
though she went to market, th e light of her torch a beacon
upon the trampled dirt of her pa th, her own shadow following,
huge and strange upon the pale canvas of the tents she passed. DESPOILER
 
I  W A S TENDING the fire whe n I heard the sound of
slow footsteps approaching. I turned, to see a massive shape
between me and the moon, co ming fast. I tried to run but
couldn’ t make my legs obey me . As in all the best nightmares,
I tried to scream , only to find it trapped in my throat. I choked,
and it came out as a small, strangled “ eep .”
The mon strous shape—manlike, but humped and headless,
grunting—stopped before me, and there was a short whoosh
and a loud thump of something hitting the ground that sent the
cold air rushing up under my skirt.
“I brought ye a present, Sassenach,” Jamie said, grinning
and wiping sweat from his jaw .
“A… present,” I said faintly , lo oking at the enormous heap
of… wh at?… he  had dropped o n the ground at my feet. Then
the smell reached me.
“A buf falo robe!” I exclaimed. “Oh, Jamie! A real buf falo
robe?”
Not much doubt of that. It was not—thank God—a fresh
one, but  the scent of its original owner was still perceptible,
even in the cold . I fell to my knees, running my hands over it.
It w as well-cured, flexible, and relatively clean, the wool of it
rough under my hands but free of mud, burrs, clumps of dung,
and the other impedimenta that normally attended live buf falo.
It was enormous. And warm. W onderfully warm.
I sank my freezing hands into the depths of it, which still
held Jamie’ s body heat.
“Oh,” I breathed. “Y ou won it?”
“I did,” he said p roudly . “From one of the British of ficers. A
decent man at cards,” he added fairly , “but no luck.”“Y ou’ve been playing with British of ficers?” I cast an
uneasy look in the direction o f the British camp, though it
wasn’ t visible from here.
“Just one. A Captain Mansel. He came wi’ the latest reply
from Bu r goyne and was obliged to wait while Granny chews it
over . He ’ll be lucky if he’ s not skinned to the bone before he
goes back,” he added callously . “W orse luck wi’ cards I never
saw .”
I pa id no attention, engrossed in  examining the robe. “This
is marvelous, Jamie! It’ s huge!”
It was. A good eight feet long, and wide enough that two
people could lie cradled in its warmth—provided they didn’ t
mind sleeping close. The thought of crawling into that
enveloping shelter , warm and cozy , after so many nights
shivering under threadbare blankets …
Jamie appeared to have been thinking along similar lines.
“Big enough for the two of us,” he said, and touched my
breast, very delicately .
“Oh, really?”
He lean ed closer , and I caugh t his own scent above the
gamy pong of the buf falo robe—dry leaves, and the bitterness
of ac orn cof fee, laced with swee t brandy , top notes to the deep
male scent of his skin.
“I could pick you out of a dozen men in a dark room,” I
said, closing my eyes and inhaling enjoyably .
“I da resay ye co uld; I havena ba thed in a week.” He put his
hands on my shoulders and bent his head until our foreheads
touched.
“I w ant to unla ce the neck o’ your shift,” he whispered,
“and suckle your breasts until ye curl up like a wee shrimp,
wi’ your knees in my balls. Then take ye fast and hard, and fall
asleep wi’ my h ead pillowed on your naked breasts. Really ,”
he added, straightening up.
“Oh,” I said. “What a good idea.” 
IN F A VOR AS I W AS of the su ggested program, I could
see that Jamie re quired nourishm ent before executing anything
of a further strenuous nature; I could hear his stomach
rumbling from a yard away .
“Playing cards takes it out of you, does it?” I observed,
watching him demolish three apples in six bites.
“A ye, it does,” he said briefly . “Have we any bread?”
“No, but there’ s beer .”
As though the word had evoked him, Y oung Ian
materialized out of the gloom.
“Beer?” he said hopefully .
“Bread?” Jamie and I said together , snif fing like dogs.
W afting from Ian’ s clothes was a yeasty , half-burned
fragrance, which  proved to come from two small loaves in his
pockets.
“Where did you get these, Ian ?” I asked, handing him a
canteen of beer .
He drank deep, then lowered the canteen and stared
vacantly at me for a moment.
“Ah?” he said vaguely .
“Are yo u all right, Ian?” I peered at him in some concern,
but he blinked, and intelligence returned momentarily to his
face.
“A ye, Auntie, fine. I’ll just… ah… oh, thank ye for the
beer .” He handed back the em pty canteen, smiled at me as
though I were a stranger , and wandered of f into the darkness.
“Did yo u see that?” I turned to find Jamie absorbed in
dabbing up bread crumbs from his lap with a moistened finger .
“No, what? Here, Sassenach.” He handed me the second
loaf.“Ian acti ng like a half-wit. Here, you have half; you need it
more than I do.”
He didn’ t ar gue.
“He wasna bleeding or staggering, was he? W ell, then, I
suppose he’ s fallen in love wi’ some poor lass.”
“Oh? W ell, that  would fit the symptoms. But…” I nibbled
the bread slowly , to make it last; it was crusty and fresh,
clearly just out of the ashes. I’d seen young men in love,
certainly , and Ian’ s behavior did  f it the symptomology . But I
hadn’ t seen it in Ian, not since … “I wonder who?”
“God knows. I hope it’ s no o ne of the whores.” Jamie
sighed a nd rubbed a hand over his face. “Though maybe better
that than someone else’ s wife.”
“Oh, he wouldn ’ t—” I began, but then saw the wry look on
his face. “Oh, he didn’ t ?”
“No, he didn’ t,” Jamie said, “ but a near thing—and no
credit to the lady involved.”
“Who?”
“Colonel Miller ’ s lady .”
“Dear me.” Abigail Miller was a sprightly young blonde of
twenty or so, an d twenty or so years younger than her rather
stout—and distin ctly humorless— husband. “Just … how  near a
thing?”
“Near en ough,” Jamie said grimly . “She had him up against
a tree, rubbing up to him like a wee cat in heat. Though I
imagine her husband will ha’ put a stop to her antics by now .”
“He saw  them?”
“A ye. H e and I were walking together , came round a bush,
and ther e they were. It was cle ar enough to me that it wasna
the lad’ s idea—but he wasna resisting all that much, either .”
Colonel Miller had frozen for an instant, then strode
forward, grippe d his startled wife by the arm, and with amurmured “Goo d day , sir” to Jamie, had dragged her of f,
squealing, in the direction of his camp.
“Jesus H…. when did this happen?” I demanded.
Jamie glanced at the rising moon, estimating.
“Oh, maybe five or six hours ago.”
“And he’ s already managed to  fall in love with someone
else ?”
He smiled at me.
“Ever he ard of coup de foudr e , S assen ach? It didna take me
more than one good look at you.”
“Hmm,” I said, pleased.
 
WITH SOME EFFOR T , I heaved the heavy buf falo robe
over the stack of  cut fir branches that formed the foundation of
our bed, spread our two blankets over the robe, then folded the
whole thing over like a dumpling, creating a lar ge,
weatherproof, c ozy pocket into which I inserted myself,
shivering in my shift.
I lef t the tent flap open, watching Jamie as he drank cof fee
and talked with two militiamen who had come by to gossip.
As my feet thawed for the first time in a month, I relaxed
into untrammeled bliss. Like most people obliged to live
outdoors in the autumn, I normally slept in everything I
owned. W omen  moving with the army would occasionally
remove their stays—if it wasn’ t raining, you saw them hung to
air from  tree branches in the mornings sometimes, like huge,
malodorous bird s poised for flight—but most simply loosened
the ties and lay down regardles s. Stays are quite comfortable
to wear while standing up, but leave a lot to be desired in
terms of nightwear .
T onight, with the prospect of warm, waterproof shelter at
hand, I had actually gone so far as to take of f not only mystays—rolled up  under my head as a pillow—but also skirt,
blouse, j acket, and kerchief, crawling into bed in nothing save
my shift and stockings. I felt absolutely depraved.
I s tretch ed luxuriously and ran m y hands down the length of
my body , then t houghtfully cup ped my breasts, contemplating
Jamie’ s proposed plan of action.
The war mth of the buf falo robe was making me deliciously
drowsy . I thought I needn’ t struggle to stay awake; I could tell
that Jamie wasn’ t in any mood  to forbear waking me out of
chivalrous regard for my rest.
Had the fortuitous acquisition of the buf falo robe inspired
him? I wondere d, thumb dreamily circling one nipple. Or had
sexual d esperation inspired him to bet on the thing? What with
his injured hand, it had been … how many days? I was
absently totting up the total in my mind when I heard the low
murmur of a new voice by the fire, and sighed.
Ian. Not  that I w asn’ t pleased to see him, but… oh, well. At
least he hadn’ t turned up just as we were…
He w as sitting o n one of the stones near the fire, head bent.
He took somethi ng from his sporran and rubbed it thoughtfully
between his fingers as he talke d. His long, homely face was
worried—but bore an odd sort of glow .
How peculiar , I thought. I’d seen it before, that look. A sort
of intent concentration on some thing wonderful, a marvelous
secret held to himself.
It was a girl, I  thought, both amused and touched. He’d
looked j ust that way at Mary , the young prostitute who had
been his first. And Emily?
W ell, yes… I th ought so, though in that instance his joy in
her had been t erribly shadowed by the knowledge of his
impending separation from eve ryone and everything else he
loved.
Cruimnich , Jamie had said  to him, laying his own plaid over
Ian’ s shoulders in farewell. “Remember .”  I had thought my
heart would break, to leave him—I knew Jamie’ s had.He w as still we aring the same ragged plaid, pinned to the
shoulder of his buckskins.
“Rachel Hunter ?” Jamie said, loud enough for me to hear ,
and I jerked upright, startled.
“Rachel Hunter ?” I echoed. “Y ou’re in love with Rachel?”
Ian looked at me, startled by my jack-in-the-box
appearance.
“Oh, there ye are, Auntie. I wondered where ye’d got to,” he
said mildly .
“Rachel Hunter? ” I repeated, not intending to let him elude
the question.
“W ell… aye. At least, I… well,  aye. I am.” The admission
made the blood rise in his ch eeks; I could see it even by
firelight.
“The lad is thinking we’d maybe have a word wi’ Denzell,
Sassenach,” Jam ie explained. He looked amused, but slightly
worried, as well.
“A word? What for?”
Ian l ooked up an d glanced from one to the other of us. “It’ s
only… D enny Hunter ’ s no going to like it. But he thinks the
world of Auntie Claire, and he respects you, of course, Uncle
Jamie.”
“Why would he not like it?” I asked. I had by now extracted
myself from the robe and, wr apping my shawl round my
shoulders, sat down on a rock beside him. My mind was
racing. I liked Rachel Hunter very much. And I was very
pleased—to say nothing of relie ved—if Ian had at last found a
decent woman to love. But…
Ian gave me a look.
“Surely ye’ve noticed that they’re Quaker , Auntie?”
“I did, yes,” I said, giving him back the look. “But—”
“And I’m not.”“Y es, I’d noticed that, too. But—”
“She’d be put out of meeting, if she weds me. Most likely
they both would. They’ve been put out once already for
Denny’ s going wi’ the army , and that was hard for her .”
“Oh,” sa id Jami e, pausing in th e act of tearing of f a bit of
bread. He held it for a momen t, frowning. “A ye, I suppose
they wo uld.” He put the bread  into his mouth and chewed
slowly , considering.
“Do you  think she loves you, too , Ian?” I asked, as gently as
possible.
Ian’ s face was a  study , torn between worry , alarm, and that
inner glow that kept breaking through the clouds of distress.
“I—well… I think so. I hope so.”
“Y ou haven’ t asked  her?”
“I… not exactly . I mean—we didna really talk , ken?”
Jamie swallowed his bread and coughed.
“Ian,” he said. “T ell me ye havena bedded Rachel Hunter .”
Ian gave  him a look of af front. Jamie stared at him, brows
raised. I an dropped his gaze ba ck to the object in his hands,
rolling it between his palms like a ball of dough.
“No,” he muttered. “I wish I had, though.”
“What?”
“W ell… if I had , then she’d have to wed me, no? I wish I’d
thought of that—but no, I couldna; she said stop, and I did.”
He swallowed, hard.
“V ery gentlemanly of you,” I m urmured, though in fact I
rather saw his point. “And very intelligent of her .”
He sighed. “What am I to do, Uncle Jamie?”
“I d on’ t suppose you could bec ome a Quaker yourself?” I
asked hesitantly .Both Jamie and Ian looked at  me. They didn’ t resemble
each other in the slightest, but the look of ironic amusement on
both faces was identical.
“I dinna ken very much about myself, Auntie,” Ian said,
with a painful half smile, “but I think I wasna born to be a
Quaker .”
“And I suppose you couldn’ t—no, of course not.” The
thought of professing a conver sion that he didn’ t mean had
plainly never entered his mind.
It st ruck me qu ite suddenly that, of all people, Ian would
understand exac tly what the cost to Rachel would be if her
love for  him severed her from  her people. No wonder he
hesitated at the thought of her paying such a price.
Always assuming, I reminded myself, that she did  love him.
I had better have a talk with Rachel first.
Ian was still turning something over in his hands. Looking
closer , I  saw that it was a small, darkened, leathery-looking
object. Surely it wasn’ t—
“That isn’ t Neil Forbes’ s ear , is it?” I blurted.
“Mr . Fraser?”
The voice brought me up standing, hairs prickling at the
back of my neck. Bloody hell, n ot him  again? Sure enough, it
was the  Continental soldier , the despoiler of my soup. He
came slowly into the circle of firelight, deep-set eyes fixed on
Jamie.
“I am  James Fra ser , aye,” Jamie said, setting down his cup
and gest uring politely toward a vacant rock. “W ill ye take a
cup of cof fee, sir? Or what passes for it?”
The man shook his head, not speaking. He was looking
Jamie over appraisingly , like on e about to buy a horse and not
sure of its temper .
“Perhaps ye’d prefer a warm cup o’ spittle?” Ian said, in an
unfriendly tone. Jamie glanced at him, startled.“Seo ma c na muice a thainig na bu thraithe gad shiubhal,”
Ian adde d. He didn’ t take his eyes of f the stranger . “Chan eil e
ag iarraidh math dhut idir ‘uncle.’This  is the misbegotten son
of a pig who ca me earlier in search of you. He means you no
good, Uncle.”
“T apadh leat Iain. Cha r obh fio s air a bhith agam,”  Jamie
answered in the same language, keeping his voice pleasantly
relaxed. “Thank you, Ian. I should never have guessed. Have
ye business with me, sir?” he asked, changing to English.
“I would speak with you, yes. In privacy ,” the man added,
with a dismissive glance at Ian. Apparently I didn’ t count.
“This is  my nephew ,” Jamie said, still courteous but wary .
“Y e may speak in front of him.”
“I fear ye may think dif ferently , Mr . Fraser , when you hear
what I’ve to say . And once said,  such things cannot be unsaid.
Leave, young man,” he said, no t bothering to look at Ian. “Or
you will both regret it.”
Both Jamie and Ian stif fened v isibly . Then they moved, at
nearly the same instant, bodies shifting subtly , their feet
coming under them, should ers squaring. Jamie gazed
thoughtfully at the man for a moment, then inclined his head
an in ch toward Ian. Ian rose wi thout a word and disappeared
into the darkness.
The man stood waiting, until t he sound of Ian’ s footsteps
had fade d and the night settled  into silence around the tiny
fire. Then he m oved round the fire and sat down slowly ,
opposite Jamie, still maintaining that unnerving air of scrutiny .
W ell, it unnerved me;  Jamie merely picked up his cup and
drained it, calm as though he w ere sitting at his own kitchen
table.
“If ye’ve  aught to say to me, sir , say it. It’ s late, and I’m for
my bed.”
“A b ed w ith you r lovely wife in  it, I daresay . Lucky man.” I
was beg inning to dislike this gentleman intensely . Jamie
ignored both the comment and the mocking tone in which itwas spoken, leaning forward to pour the last of the cof fee into
his cup. I could smell the bitter tang of it, even over the scent
the buf falo robe had left on my shift.
“Does the name of W illie Coul ter recall itself to you?” the
man asked abruptly .
“I’ve ke nt several men of that  name and that ilk,” Jamie
replied. “Mostly in Scotland.”
“A ye, it  was in Scotland. On  the day before the great
slaughter at Culloden. But you h ad your own wee slaughter on
that day , no?”
I had been racking my memory for any notion of a W illie
Coulter . The mention of Culloden struck me like a fist in the
stomach.
Jamie ha d been obliged to kill h is uncle Dougal MacKenzie
on that day . And there had b een one witness to the deed
besides me: a MacKenzie clansman named W illie Coulter . I
had ass umed him long dead, either at Culloden or in the
dif ficulties that followed—and I was sure Jamie had thought
likewise.
Our visitor rocked back a l ittle on his rock, smiling
sardonically .
“I was once overseer on a sugar plantation of some size, you
see, on the islan d of Jamaica. W e’d a dozen black slaves from
Africa, b ut blacks of decent quality grow ever more expensive.
And so the mas ter sent me to market one day with a purse of
silver , to look over a new crop of indentures—transported
criminals, the most of them. From Scotland.”
And among the two dozen men the overseer had culled from
the ragg ed, scrawny , lice-ridden ranks was W illie Coulter .
Captured after the battle, tried and condemned in quick order ,
and loaded onto a ship for the Indies within a month, never to
see Scotland again.
I could just see the side of Jamie’ s face and saw a muscle
jump in his jaw . Most of his Ardsmuir men had been similarly
transported; only  the interest of John Grey had saved him fromthe same fate, a nd he had distinctly mixed feelings about it,
even so many y ears after the fa ct. He merely nodded, though,
vaguely interested, as though listening to some traveler ’ s tale
in an inn.
“They all died within two we eks,” the stranger said, his
mouth twisting. “And so did the  blacks. Bloody pricks brought
some filthy fever with them from the ship. Lost me my
position. But I did get one thing of value to take away with
me. W illie Coulter ’ s last words.”
 
JAMIE HADN’ T MOVED appreciably since Mr . X had
sat dow n, but I could sense the tension thrumming through
him; he was strung like a bow with the arrow nocked.
“What is it ye want?” he asked calmly , and leaned forward
to pick up the tin mug of cof fee, wrapped in rags.
“Mmphm.” The man made a ple ased sound in his throat and
sat back a little, nodding.
“I kent ye for a s ensible gentleman. I’m a modest man, sir—
shall we  say a h undred dollars?  T o show your good faith,” he
added, w ith a grin that displayed snaggled teeth discolored by
snuf f. “And to s ave ye the troub le of protest, I’ll just mention
that I ken ye’ve got it in your pocket. I happened to speak wi’
the gentleman ye won it from this afternoon, aye?”
I blinked  at that; evidently Jamie had had an extraordinary
run of luck. At cards, at least.
“T o show  good faith,” Jamie rep eated. He looked at the cup
in his hand, then at the Low lander ’ s grinning face, but
evidently decide d that the distance was too great to throw it at
him. “And to be going on with… ?”
“Ah, well. W e can be discussin g that later . I hear ye’re a
man of considerable substance, Colonel Fraser .”
“And ye propose to batten on me like a leech, do ye?”“Why , a bit of leeching does a man good, Colonel. Keeps
the humors in balance.” He leered at me. “I’m sure your good
wife kens the wisdom of it.”
“And w hat do you mean by that , you  slimy little  worm?” I
said, standing up. Jamie might have decided against throwing
a cup of cof fee at him, but I was  willing to have a try with the
pot.
“Manners, woman,” he said, giving me a censorious glance
before s hifting his gaze back to Jamie. “Do ye not beat her ,
man?”
I c ould see the t autness in Jamie’ s body subtly shifting; the
bow was being drawn.
“Don’ t—” I began, turning to Ja mie, but never got to finish.
I saw  the expre ssion change on Jamie’ s face, saw him leap
toward the man—and whirled just in time to see Ian
materialize out of the darkness behind the blackmailer and put
a sinewy arm round his throat.
I didn’ t see the knife. I didn’ t have to; I saw Ian’ s face, so
intent as almost to be expressionless—and I saw the ex-
overseer ’ s face.  His jaw dropped and the whites of his eyes
showed, his back arching up in a futile attempt at escape.
Then Ian  let go, and Jamie cau ght the man as he began to
fall, his body gone suddenly and horribly limp.
“Jesus God!”
The exclamation came from directly behind me, and I
whirled again, this time to see C olonel Martin and two of his
aides, as drop-jawed as Mr . X had been a moment before.
Jamie gl anced up at them, startl ed. Then in the next breath,
he turned and said quietly over his shoulder , “Ruith.” Run .
“Hi! Murder!” one of the aides shouted, springing forward.
“Stop, villain!”
Ian had lost no time in taking Jamie’ s advice; I could see
him dart ing tow ard the edge of the distant wood, but there was
enough light from the many cam pfires to reveal his flight, andthe shou ts of Martin and his aides were rousing everyone in
hearing; people were jumping up from their firesides, peering
into the dark, shouting questions. Jamie dropped the overseer ’ s
body by the fire and ran after Ian.
The younger of the aides hurtle d past me, legs churning in
furious pursuit. Colonel Martin dashed after him, and I
managed to stick out a foot and  trip him. He went sprawling
through the fire, sending a foun tain of sparks and ashes into
the night.
Leaving the second aide to beat out the flames, I picked up
my shift and ra n as fast as I c ould in the direction Ian and
Jamie had taken.
The encampment looked like something from Dante’ s
Inferno , black figures shouting against the glow of flames,
pushing one another amid smoke and confusion, shouts of
“Murder! Murder!” ringing from  dif ferent directions as more
people heard and took it up.
I had a stitch in my side but ke pt running, stumbling over
rocks and hollows and trampled ground. Louder shouts from
the l eft—I paused, panting, han d to my side, and saw Jamie’ s
tall form jerking free of a couple of pursuers. He must mean to
draw pursuit away from Ian—w hich meant… I turned and ran
the other way .
Sure eno ugh, I saw Ian, who had sensibly stopped running
as so on as he saw Jamie take of f, now walking at a good clip
toward the wood.
“Murderer!” a voice shrieked behind me. It was Martin,
blast him, somewhat scorched b ut undaunted. “Stop, Murray!
Stop, I say!”
Hearing his name shouted, Ian began to run again,
zigzagging around a campfire. As he passed in front of it, I
saw the shadow at his heels—Rollo was with him.
Colonel Martin had drawn up even with me, and I saw with
alarm that he had his pistol in hand.“St—” I began, but before the  word was out, I crashed
headlong into someone and fell flat with them.
It was Rachel Hunter , wide-eyed and openmouthed. She
scrambled to her feet and ran toward Ian, who had frozen
when he saw her . Colonel Martin cocked his pistol and pointed
it at Ian, and a second later R ollo leapt through the air and
seized the colonel’ s arm in his jaws.
The pandemonium grew worse. There were bangs from two
or three pistols, and Rollo dropped writhing to the ground with
a ye lp. C olonel Martin jerked back, cursing and clutching his
injured wrist, and Jamie drew back and punched him in the
belly . Ian was already rushing toward Rollo; Jamie grabbed
the d og by two legs, and, between them, they made of f into the
darkness, followed by Rachel and me.
W e mad e it to the edge of the wood, heaving and gasping,
and I fell at onc e to my knees beside Rollo, feeling frantically
over the huge shaggy body , hunting for the wound, for
damage.
“He’ s not dead,” I panted. “Shoulder … broken.”
“Oh, God,” Ian said, and I felt him turn to glance in the
direction from which pursuit wa s surely headed. “Oh, Jesus.” I
heard tears in h is voice, and h e reached to his belt for his
knife.
“What are you doing ?!” I exclaimed. “He can be healed!”
“They’ll kill him,” he said, savage. “If I’m no there to stop
them, they’ll kill him! Better I do it.”
“I—” Jamie began, but Rachel Hunter forestalled him,
falling to her knees and grabbing Rollo by the scruf f.
“I’ll mind thy dog for thee,” she said, breathless but certain.
“Run!”
He took  one last despairing look at her , then at Rollo. And
he ran. TERMS OF SURRENDER
 
W HEN THE MESSAGE came from General Gates in
the morning, Jamie knew what it must be about. Ian had got
clean away , and little surprise. H e’d be in the wood or perhaps
in an  Ind ian cam p; either way , n o one would find him until he
wished to be found.
The lad had bee n right, too; the y did  want to kill the dog,
particularly Col onel Martin, and it had taken not only all
Jamie’ s resources but the young Quaker lass’ s prostrating
herself upon the hound’ s hairy c arcass and declaring that they
must kill her first.
That ha d taken Martin back a bit, but there was still
considerable public opinion in favor of dragging her away and
doing the dog in. Jamie had prepared himself to step in—but
then Rachel’ s brother had come out of the dark like an
avenging angel. Denny stood in front of her and denounced the
crowd as cowards, recreants, and inhuman monsters who
would seek to revenge themselves upon an innocent animal, to
say nothing of their damnable injustice—yes, he’d really said
“damnable,” wi th the greatest spirit, and the memory of it
made Jamie smile, even in the f ace of the upcoming interview
—in driving a young man to exile and perdition out of their
own sus picion and iniquity , and could they not seek to find
within t heir own bowels the slightest spark of the divine
compassion that was the God-given life of every man…
Jamie’ s arrival at Gates’ s headquarters cut short these
enjoyable rem iniscences, and he straightened himself,
assuming the grim demeanor suitable to trying occasions.
Gates lo oked as though he had been severely tried himself
—which he had, in all justice. The bland, round face never
looked a s thoug h it had any bones, but now it sagged like a
soft-boiled egg, and the small eyes behind the wire-rimmedspectacles were huge and bloodshot when they looked at
Jamie.
“Sit down, Colonel,” Gates said, and pushed a glass and
decanter toward him.
Jamie was dumbfounded. He’d had enough grim interviews
with high-ranking of ficers to know that you didn’ t start them
out with a cord ial dram. He accepted the drink, though, and
sipped it cautiously .
Gates dr ained his own, much less cautiously , set it down,
and sighed heavily .
“I require a favor of you, Colonel.”
“I sh all be pleas ed, sir ,” he replied, with still more caution.
What co uld the fat bugger possibly want of him? If it was
Ian’ s wh ereabouts or an explanation of the murder , he could
whistle for that and must know it. If not…
“The surrender negotiations are almost complete.” Gates
gave a bleak gl ance to a thick  stack of handwritten papers,
perhaps drafts of the thing.
“Bur goyne’ s troops are to march out of camp with the
honors of war and ground arms at the bank of the Hudson at
the command of their own of f icers. All of ficers will retain
their swords and equipment, the soldiers, their knapsacks. The
army is to march to Boston, wh ere they will be properly fed
and sheltered before embarking for England. The only
condition imposed is that they are not to serve in North
America again during the present war . Generous terms, I think
you will agree, Colonel?”
“V erra generous, indeed, sir .” Surprisingly so. What had
made a general  who undeniably held the whip hand to the
extent that Gates did of fer such extraordinary terms?
Gates smiled sourly .
“I se e you are surprised, Colonel. Perhaps you will be less
so if  I tell you that Sir Henry Clinton is heading north.” And
Gates w as in a rush to conclud e the surrender and get rid ofBur goyne in order to have time  to prepare for an attack from
the south.
“A ye, sir , I see.”
“Y es, well.” Gates closed his ey es for an instant and sighed
again, s eeming exhausted. “There is one additional request
from Bur goyne before he will aceept this arrangement.”
“Y es, sir?”
Gates’ s eyes were open again and passed slowly over him.
“They te ll me you are a cousin to Brigadier General Simon
Fraser .”
“I am.”
“Good. Then I am sure you will have no objection to
performing a small service for your country .”
A small service pertaining to Simon? Surely…
“He had at one  time expressed a desire to several of his
aides that, should he die abroad , they might bury him at once
—which they did, in fact; th ey buried him in the Great
Redoubt—but that when convenient, he wished to be taken
back to Scotland, that he might lie at peace there.”
“Y e wan t me to take his body t o Scotland?” Jamie blurted.
He coul d not have been more astonished had Gates suddenly
got up and danced a hornpipe on his desk. The general nodded,
his amiability increasing.
“Y ou are  very quick, Colonel. Y es. That is Bur goyne’ s final
request. He says that the brigadier was much beloved by his
men and  that knowing his wish is fulfilled will reconcile them
to march ing away , as they will  not feel they are abandoning
his grave.”
This sou nded th oroughly romantic, and quite like something
Bur goyne might do, Jamie reflected. He had a reputation for
dramatic gestur e. And he was probably not wrong in his
estimation of the feelings of the men who had served under
Simon—he was a good fellow , Simon.Only belatedly did it dawn on him that the final result of
this request…
“Is… there some provision to be made for my reaching
Scotland with the body , sir?” he asked delicately . “There is a
blockade.”
“Y ou will be transported—with your wife and servants, if
you like—on one of His Majes ty’ s ships, and a sum will be
provided you for transporting the cof fin once it has come
ashore in Scotland. Have I your agreement, Colonel Fraser?”
He was  so stunned, he scarce ly knew what he said in
response, but evidently it was suf ficient, for Gates smiled
tiredly a nd dismissed him. He made his way back to his tent
with his  head in a whirl, wondering whether he could disguise
Y oung Ian as his wife’ s maid, in the manner of Charles Stuart.
 
OCT OBER 17, like all the day s that had gone before it,
dawned dark and foggy . In his t ent, General Bur goyne dressed
with particular care, in a gor geo us scarlet coat with gold braid
and a hat decor ated with plumes. W illiam saw him, when he
went with the o ther of ficers to Bur goyne’ s tent for their last,
anguished meeting.
Baron von Riedesel spoke to them, too; he took all the
regimental flags. He would give them to his wife, he said, to
be sewn inside a pillow and taken secretly back to Brunswick.
W illiam cared for none of this.  He was conscious of deep
sorrow , for he had never before left comrades on a battlefield
and marched away . Some shame, but not much—the general
was right in say ing that they could not have mounted another
attack w ithout losing most of th e army , so wretched was their
condition.
They looked wretched now , lining up in silence, and yet
when fif e and drum began to play , each regiment in its turn
followed the flying colors, heads high in their tattered
uniforms—or whatever clothing they could find. The enemyhad withdrawn on Gates’ s order , the general said. That was
delicate, W illiam  thought numbly; the Americans would not
be present to witness their humiliation.
Redcoats first, and then the German regiments: dragoons
and grenadiers in blue, the green-clad infantry and artillery
from Hesse-Cassel.
On the river fl ats, scores of h orses lay dead, the stench
adding to the somber horror of the occasion. The artillery
parked their cannon here, and the infantry , rank by rank by
unending rank, poured out their cartridge boxes and stacked
their muskets. Some men were s uf ficiently furious as to smash
the butts of the ir guns before throwing them on the piles;
W illiam saw a drummer put his  foot through his drum before
turning away . He was not furious, or horrified.
All he wanted now was to see his father again.
 
THE CONTINENT AL troops a nd the militia marched to
the meetinghouse at Saratoga and from there lined up along
both sides of the river road. Some women came, watching
from a distance . I could have  stayed in camp, to see the
historic ceremony of surrender between the two generals, but I
followed the troops instead.
The sun had ris en and the fog had fled, just as it had done
every day for the last few weeks. There was a smell of smoke
in the air , and the sky was the infinite deep blue of October .
Artillery and infantry stood along the road, evenly spaced,
but that spacing was the only uniform thing about them. There
was no common dress, and each man’ s equipment was
distinctively his own, in form a nd how he held it—but each
man held his musket, or his rifle, or stood beside his cannon.
They were a m otley crew in every sense of the word,
festooned with powder horns and shot bags, some wearing
outlandish old- fashioned wigs . And they stood in grave
silence, each man with his righ t foot forward, right hands ontheir guns, to watch the enemy march out, with the honors of
war .
I sto od i n the wood, a little way behind Jamie, and I saw his
shoulders stif fen  a little. W illiam walked past, tall and straight,
his f ace the face  of a man who i s not really there. Jamie didn’ t
dip h is h ead or make any ef fort not to be seen—but I saw his
head tur n just slightly , following W illiam out of sight in the
company of his men. And then his shoulders dropped just a
little, as though a burden dropped from them.
Safe , tha t gesture sa id, though he still stood straight as the
rifle beside him. Thank God. He is safe . SANCTUAR Y
 Lallybroch
 
R OGER C OULD NOT have said quite what impelled
him to do it, oth er than the sens e of peace that hung about the
place, but he had begun to rebuild the old chapel. By hand, and
alone, one stone upon another .
He’d tried to explain it to Bree; she’d asked.
“It’ s them,”  he said  at last, helpless. “It’ s a sort of… I feel
as though I need to connect with them, back there.”
She took one of his hands in her  own, spreading his fingers,
and ran the ball of her thumb gently over his knuckles, down
the leng th of his fingers, touch ing the scabs and grazes, the
blackened nail where a stone had slipped and bruised it.
“Them,” she repeated carefully . “Y ou mean my parents.”
“Y es, among other things.” Not only with Jamie and Claire
but w ith the life  their family ha d built. W ith his own sense of
himself as a m an—protector , provider . And yet it was his
bone-deep ur ge to protect that had led him to abandon all his
Christian principles—on the eve of ordination, no less—and
set out in pursuit of Stephen Bonnet.
“I su ppose I’m hoping I can ma ke sense of… things,” he’d
said, with a wry smile. “How to reconcile what I thought I
knew then with what I think I am now .”
“It’ s not Christian to want to save your wife from being
raped an d sold into slavery?” s he inquired, a distinct edge in
her voic e. “Because if it’ s n ot, I’m taking the kids and
converting to Judaism or Shinto or something.”
His smile had grown more genuine.
“I found something there.” He fumbled for words.
“Y ou los t a few things, too,” she whispered. Not taking her
eyes fro m his, she reached out, the tips of her fingers cool on
his throat. The rope scar had faded somewhat but was stilldarkly visible; he made no ef fort to hide it. Sometimes when
he spoke with people, he could see their eyes fix on it; given
his h eight, it wa s not unusual fo r men to seem to be speaking
directly to  the scar , rather than to himself.
Found a sense o f himself as a man, found what he thought
was his  calling. And that, he supposed, was what he was
looking for under those piles of fallen stone, under the eyes of
a blind saint.
W as Go d openin g a door , show ing him that he should be a
teacher now? W as this, the Gael ic thing, what he was meant to
do? He had ple nty of room to ask questions, room and time
and silence. Answers were scarc e. He’d been at it most of the
aftenoon; he was hot, exhausted, and ready for a beer .
Now his eye ca ught the edge of a shadow in the doorway ,
and he turned—Jem or maybe Brianna, come to fetch him
home to tea. It was neither of them.
For a moment, he stared at th e newcomer , searching his
memory . Ragged jeans and sweatshirt, dirty-blond hair hacked
of f and tousled. Surely he knew the man; the broad-boned,
handsome face was familiar , eve n under a thick layer of light-
brown stubble.
“Can I help you ?” Roger asked, taking a grip on the shovel
he’d been using. The man wasn ’ t threatening but was roughly
dressed and dirty—a tramp , perhaps—and there was
something indefinable about him that made Roger uneasy .
“It’ s a church, aye?” the man said, and grinned, though no
hint of warmth t ouched his eyes. “Suppose I’ve come to claim
sanctuary , then.”  He moved sud denly into the light, and Roger
saw his eyes more clearly . Cold, and a deep, striking green.
“Sanctuary ,” W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie repeated. “And
then, Mi nister d ear , I want ye to tell me who ye are, who I  am
—and what in the name of God almighty ar e  we?”P AR T  S IX Coming Home
 
  A ST A TE OF CONFLICT
 September 10, 1777
 
J OHN GREY FOUND himself wondering how many
horns a  dilemma could have. T wo, he believed, was the
standard numbe r , but supposed that it was theoretically
possible to encounter a more exotic form of dilemma—
something like the four -horned sheep he had once seen in
Spain.
The most pressing of the horns a rrayed under him at present
concerned Henry .
He’d written to Jamie Fraser , explaining Henry’ s state and
asking w hether Mrs. Fraser might see her way to come. He
had, as delicatel y as possible, as sured her of his willingness to
bear all expense s of the journey , to expedite her travel in both
directions by ship (with protection from the exigencies of
warfare insofar as the royal na vy could provide it), and to
provide her with whatever materials and instruments she might
require. Had even gone so far as to procure a quantity of
vitriol, which he recalled her n eeding for the composition of
her ether .
He had spent a g ood deal of time with quill suspended over
the page, wondering whether to add anything regarding Fer gus
Fraser , t he printer , and the incred ible story Percy had told him.
On the one han d, this might b ring Jamie Fraser belting up
from No rth Carolina to look into the matter , thus improving
the chances of M rs. Fraser coming, as well. On the other… he
was mo re than reluctant to exp ose any matter having to do
with Percy Beauchamp to Jamie Fraser , for assorted reasons,
both personal and professional. In the end, he had said nothing
of it and made his appeal solely on behalf of Henry .
Grey had waited through an anxious month, watching his
nephew suf fer from heat and inanition. At the end of the
month, the courier he had sen t to take his letter to North
Carolina returned, sweat-soaked, caked with mud, and with
two bull et holes  in his coat, to report that the Frasers had leftFraser ’ s Ridge with the declared intent of removing to
Scotland, thoug h adding helpfully that this removal was
presumed to be only in the na ture of a visit, rather than a
permanent emigration.
He had fetched a physician to visit Henry , of course, not
waiting for Mrs. Fraser ’ s reply . He had succeeded in
introducing himself to Benjamin Rush and had that gentleman
examine his nephew . Dr . Rush had been grave but
encouraging, say ing that he believed one of the musket balls,
at least, had created scarring, this partially obstructing Henry’ s
intestines and encouraging a localized pocket of sepsis, which
caused his persistent fever . He h ad bled Henry and prescribed
a febrifuge, but made the strongest representations to Grey that
the situation was delicate and might worsen abruptly; only
sur gical intervention might ef fect a cure.
At the same time, he said that he did believe Henry to be
strong enough to survive such sur gery—though there was, of
course, n o certainty of a happy outcome. Grey had thanked Dr .
Rush bu t had chosen to wait j ust a little while, in hopes of
hearing from Mrs. Fraser .
He looked out the window of his rented house on Chestnut
Street, watching  brown and ye llow leaves scour to and fro
among the cobbles, driven by a random wind.
It was mid-September . The last ships would depart for
England at the e nd of October , j ust ahead of the Atlantic gales.
Ought he to try to get Henry on one of them?
He h ad m ade the  acquaintance of the local American of ficer
in char g e of prisoners of war billeted in Philadelphia and made
an application for parole. This had been granted without
dif ficulty; captu red of ficers were normally paroled, save there
was something unusual or dangerous about them, and Henry
plainly was unlikely to attempt escape, foment rebellion, or
support insurrection in his present state.
But he had no t yet managed to arrange to have Henry
exchanged, which status would permit Grey to move him back
to England. Always assuming that Henry’ s health would standthe journey , and that Henry himself would be willing to go.
Which it likely wouldn’ t, and Henry wasn’ t, he being so much
attached to Mrs. W oodcock. Grey was quite willing to take her
to E ngland, too, but she wouldn ’ t consider leaving, as she had
heard that her husband had been taken prisoner in New Y ork.
Grey rubbed two fingers between his brows, sighing. Could
he force Henry aboard a naval vessel against his will—
drugged, perha ps?—thus brea king his parole, ruining his
career , a nd endangering his life, on the supposition that Grey
could find a sur geon in England more capable than Dr . Rush
of d ealing with the situation? The best that could be hoped
from such a cou rse of action wa s that Henry would survive the
journey long enough to say goodbye to his parents.
But if he did not  undertake this drastic step, he was left with
the choi ce of forcing Henry to submit to a horrifying sur gery
that he feared d esperately and which was very likely to kill
him—or watchi ng the boy die by inches. Because he was
dying; Grey saw it plainly . Sheer stubbornness and Mrs.
W oodcock’ s nursing were all that was keeping him alive.
The thought of having to write to Hal and Minnie and tell
them… No. He stood up abruptly , unable to bear more
indecision. He would call upon Dr . Rush at once and make
arrangements—
The front door slammed open, admitting a blast of wind,
dead leaves, and his niece, pale-faced and round-eyed.
“Dottie!” His first, heart-stopping fear was that she had
rushed home to tell him that Henry had died, for she had gone
to visit her brother as she usually did every afternoon.
“Soldiers!” she gasped, clutching him by the arm. “There
are soldiers in the street. Riders. Someone said Howe’ s army is
coming! Advancing on Philadelphia!”
 
HOWE MET W ashington’ s army at Brandywine Creek
on September 1 1, some distance south of the city .W ashington’ s tr oops were driven back, but rallied to make a
stand a few day s later . A tremendous rainstorm arose in the
midst of  the battle, though, pu tting an end to hostilities and
allowing W ashi ngton’ s army to escape to Reading Furnace,
leaving a small force behind und er General Anthony W ayne at
Paoli.
One of Howe’ s commanders, M ajor General Lord Charles
Grey—a distant  cousin of Grey’ s—attacked the Americans at
Paoli at night, w ith orders to his troops to remove the flints
from their muskets. This pr evented discovery from the
accidental dischar ge of a weapon, but also obliged the men to
use bayonets. A number of Ame ricans were bayoneted in their
beds, th eir tents  burned, a hund red or so made captive—and
Howe marched into the city of Philadelphia, triumphant, on
September 21.
Grey watched them, rank upon rank of redcoats, marching
to drum music, from the porch of Mrs. W oodcock’ s house.
Dottie had feared that the rebel s, forced to abandon the city ,
might fire the houses or kill their British prisoners outright.
“Nonsense,” Grey had said to this. “They are rebel
Englishmen, not barbarians.” Nonetheless, he had put on his
own uniform and his sword, tucked two pistols into his belt,
and spent twenty-four hours s itting on the porch of Mrs.
W oodcock’ s house—with a lantern by night—coming down
now and then to speak to any of ficer he knew who passed by ,
both to glean news of the situati on and to ensure that the house
remained unmolested.
The next day he  returned to his own house, through streets
of shutte red windows. Philadelphia was hostile, and so was the
surrounding countryside. Still, the occupation of the city was
peaceful—or as peaceful as a military occupation well can be.
Congress had fled as Howe app roached, and so had many of
the more prominent rebels, including Dr . Benjamin Rush.
So had Percy Beauchamp. THE FEAST OF ALL SAINTS
 Lallybroch
 October 20, 1980
 
B RIANNA PRE SSED THE letter to her nose and
inhaled deeply . So long after , sh e was sure it was imagination
rather th an odor , but still she sensed the faint aromas of smoke
in th e pages. M aybe it was memory as much as imagination;
she knew what the air was like in an ordinary , full of the scents
of hearth fire, roasting meat, and tobacco, with a mellow smell
of beer beneath it all.
She felt silly smelling the letters in front of Roger but had
developed the habit of snif fing them privately , when she read
them over by herself. They’d opened this one the night before
and had read it s everal times together , discussing it—but she’d
got it out again now , wanting j ust to hold it privately and be
alone with her parents for a bit.
Maybe the scent was really the re. She’d noticed that you
don’ t actually remember smells, not the same way you
remember something you’ve seen. It’ s just that when you
smell that smell again, you kn ow what it is—and often it
brings b ack a lot of other memories with it. And she was
sitting here on a  fall day , surrounded by the ripeness of apples
and heat her , the dust of ancient wood paneling, and the hollow
smell of wet stone—Annie MacDonald had just mopped the
hall—but she was seeing the front room of an eighteenth-
century ordinary , and smelling smoke.
November 1, 1777
 New Y ork
 
Dear Br ee, et al—
Do you r emember the high school field trip when
your eco nomics class went to W all Str eet? I am at themoment sitting in an or dinary a t the foot of W all Str eet,
and neither a b ull nor a bear  to be seen, let alone a
ticker -tape machine. No wall, either . A few goats, though,
and a small cluster of men  under a big leafless
buttonwood tr ee , smoking pipes and conferring head-to-
head. I can’ t tell whether they’ r e Loyalists complaining,
r ebels plotting in public (which is, by the way , very much
safer tha n doing  it in private, though I do hope you won’ t
need to make u se of that bit of special knowledge), or
simply mer chants and traders—business is  being done, I
can tell that; hands shaken, bit s of paper scribbled and
exchanged. It’ s amazing how business thrives in wartime;
I think it’ s because the normal rules—whatever they
normally ar e—ar e suspended .
That’ s true of most human transactions, by the way .
Hence the flowering of war time r omances and the
founding of gr eat fortunes in the wake of wars. It seems
rather paradoxi cal—though ma ybe it’ s only logic (ask
Roger whether ther e is such a thing as a logical paradox,
will you?)—that a pr ocess so wasteful of lives and
substance should then r esult in an explosion of babies
and business .
Since I speak of war—we ar e  all alive, and mostly
intact. Y our father was slightly wounded during the first
battle at Saratoga (ther e wer e two, both very bloody), and
I wa s obliged t o r emove the fourth finger of his right
hand—the stiff one; you’ll r ecall it. This was traumatic,
of course (as much to me as to him, I think), but not
altogether a disaster . It’ s healed very well, and while the
hand is still giving him a good bit of pain, it’ s much mor e
flexible and I think will be mor e useful to him overall .
W e ar e—belated ly—about to take ship to Scotland,
under rather peculiar cir cums tances. W e ar e to sail
tomorr ow , on HMS  Ariadne, accompanying t he body of
Brigadier General Simon Fraser . I met the brigadier very
briefly befor e his death—he was dying at the time—but he
was evidently a very good sold ier and much beloved by
his men. The British commander at Saratoga, JohnBur goyne, asked  as a sort of footnote to the surr ender
agr eement that your father (he  being a kinsman of the
brigadier ’ s and knowing wher e his family place in the
Highlands is) take the body to Scotland, in accor dance
with the brigadier ’ s wishes. This was unexpected, but
rather fortuitou s, to say the least. I can’ t think how we
should have managed it otherwise, though your father
says he would have thought of something .
The logistics of this expedition ar e a trifle delicate, as
you might suppose. Mr . Kosciuszko (known as “Kos” to
his i ntimates, which includes yo ur father—well, actually ,
he’ s known as “K os” to everybody , because no one (other
than your father) can pr onounce  his name, or car es to try .
Y our father ’ s very fond of him and vice versa) offer ed his
services, and with the aid of General Bur goyne’ s butler
(doesn’ t everyone take their butler to war with them?),
who sup plied him  with a gr eat deal of lead foil fr om wine
bottles (well, you r eally can’ t blame General Bur goyne if
he’ s taken to drink, in the cir cumstances, though my
general impr ession is that everyone on both sides drinks
like a fish all of the time, r egar dless of the military
situation of the moment), has pr oduced a miracle of
engineering: a lead-lined coffin (very necessary) on
detachable wheels (also very necessary; the thing must
weigh close to a  ton—your father says no, it’ s only seven
or eight hundr edweight, but as he hasn’ t tried to lift it, I
don’ t see how he would know) .
General Fraser had been burie d for a week or so and
had to be exhum ed for transport. It wasn’ t pleasant, but
could h ave been worse. He had a number of Indian
rangers, many of whom also est eemed him; some of these
came to the unburying with a medicine person (I think it
was a man but couldn’ t be sur e; it was short and r ound
and wor e a bir d mask), who inc ensed the r emains heavily
with burning sage and sweetg rass (not much  help in
terms of olfaction, but the smok e did draw a gentle veil
over the mor e h orrid aspects of the situation) and sang
over him at some length. I should have liked to ask Ianwhat wa s being sung, but owin g to an unpleasant set of
cir cumstances that I won’ t go into her e, he wasn’ t pr esent .
I’ll expla in it all in a later letter ; it’ s very complicated,
and I must finis h this befor e the sailing. The important
points, in r e Ian, ar e that he is in love with Rachel Hunter
(who is a lovely young woma n, and a Quaker , which
pr esents some difficulties) and that he is technically a
mur der er and thus unable to appear in public in the
vicinity of the C ontinental army . As a side r esult of the
technical mur der (a very unpleasant person, and no gr eat
loss to humanity , I assur e yo u), Rollo was shot and
injur ed (beyond the superficial bullet wound, he has a
br oken scapula; he should r ecover but can’ t be moved
easily . R achel is keeping him for Ian while we go to
Scotland) .
As the brigadier  was known to be r ever ed by his Indian
associates, the  Ariadne ‘s c aptain was startled, but not
overly d isturbed, to be informed that the body is being
accompanied not only by his close kinsman (and wife) but
by a  Mohawk wh o speaks little English (I should be mor e
than surprised if anyone in the  r oyal navy can tell the
differ ence between Gaelic and Mohawk, come to that) .
I h ope this attem pt is rather less  eventful than our first
voyage. If so, the next letter should be written in
Scotland. Keep your fingers cr ossed .
All my love,
 Mama
P .S. Y our father insists upon a dding a few wor ds to
this. This will be his first try a t writing with his alter ed
hand, and I wou ld like to watch  to see how it’ s working,
but h e instructs me firmly that h e r equir es privacy . I don’ t
know whether this is to do wi th his subject matter or
simply with the fact that he do esn’ t want anyone to see
him struggle. Both, pr obably .
 
The third page of the letter was markedly dif ferent. The
writing was much lar ger than us ual, and more sprawling. Still
identifiably her father ’ s hand, but the letters seemed looser ,less jagged somehow . She felt her heart twist, not only from
the thought of her father ’ s mutilated hand, slowly drawing
each letter—but for what he had thought it worth so much
ef fort to write:
My Dear est,
Y our Br other is alive, and unwounded. I saw him
mar ch out fr om Saratoga with his T r oops, bound for
Boston and eventually England.  He will not fight again in
this W ar . Deo gratias.
Y our most loving Father ,
 JF
Postscriptum: It is the Feast of All Saints. Pray for me .
 
The nuns had always told them —and she’d told him. By
saying a n Our Father , a Hail M ary , and a Glory Be on the
Feast of All Saints, you can obtain the release of a soul from
pur gatory .
“Y ou bloody man,” she muttered, snif fing ferociously and
fumbling in her desk for a tissue . “I knew you’d make me cry .
Again .”
 
“BRIANNA?”
Roger ’ s voice came from the kitchen, surprising her . She
hadn’ t expected  him to come down from the chapel ruins for
another hour or two, and she blew her nose hastily , calling,
“Coming!” and hoping that the recent tears didn’ t show in her
voice. It was only as she hit the corridor and saw him holding
the g reen baize d oor to the kitch en half open that it occurred to
her that there had been something odd about his voice, as well.
“What is it?” she said, hastening her step. “The kids—”
“They’re fine,” he interrupted. “I told Annie to take them
down to  the post of fice in the village for an ice cream.” Hestepped away from the door then and beckoned her to enter .
She stopped dead, just inside th e door . A man was leaning
back aga inst the old stone sink, arms folded. He straightened
up when he saw her and bowed, in a way that struck her as
terribly odd and yet familiar . Be fore she could think why that
should be, he straightened again and said, “Y our servant,
ma’am,” in a soft Scottish voice.
She look ed straight into eyes tha t were the twins of Roger ’ s,
then glanced wildly at  Roger , just to be sure. Y es, they were.
“Who—”
“Allow me to i ntroduce W illia m Buccleigh MacKenzie,”
Roger said, a distinct edge in his voice. “Also known as the
Nuckelavee.”
For an instant, n one of this made any sense whatever . Then
things—astonishment, fury , disbelief—came flooding into her
mind at such a rate that none of them could make it to her
mouth, and she simply gaped at the man.
“I’ll ask your pardon, ma’am, for frightening your weans,”
the man said. “ I’d nay notion they were yours, for the one
thing. I ken what weans are like, though, and I didna wish to
be discovered before I’d made some sense of it all.”
“All … what ?” Brianna finally found a couple of words. The
man smiled, very slightly .
“A ye, well. As to that, I think you and your husband may
know better than I.”
Brianna pulled out a chair and sat down rather abruptly ,
motioning to the man to do the same. As he came forward into
the light from the window , she saw that there was a graze on
his cheekbone—a prominent cheekbone, and one that with the
modeling of his temple and eye socket seemed terribly
familiar; the man himself seemed familiar . But of course he
was, she thought dazedly .
“Does h e know who he is?” she asked, turning to Roger .
Who, now that s he noticed, was nursing his right hand, whichappeared to have blood on the knuckles. He nodded.
“I told him. Not sure he believes me, though.”
The kitc hen was  its usual solid, homely place, peaceful with
the autumn sun coming in and t he blue-checkered dish towels
hung on the Aga. But now it felt like the backside of Jupiter ,
and whe n she reached for the sugar bowl, she would not have
been at all surprised to see her hand pass through it.
“I sh ould be incl ined to believe a good deal more today than
I should have been three months ago,” the man said, with a dry
intonation that held some faint echo of her father ’ s voice.
She shook her head violently , in hopes of clearing it, and
said, “W ould you like some c of fee?” in a polite voice that
could have belonged to a sitcom housewife.
His face  lightened at that, and  he smiled. His teeth were
stained and a l ittle crooked. W ell, of course they ar e , she
thought with remarkable lucidity . No d entists to sp eak of in the
eighteenth century . The thought of the eighteenth century sent
her sur ging to her feet.
“Y ou!” she exclaimed. “Y ou  got Roger hanged!”
“I d id,” he said , not looking very perturbed. “Not that I
meant to. And if he likes to strike me again for it, I’ll let him.
But—”
“That was for scaring the kid s,” Roger said with equal
dryness. “The hanging … we’ll maybe talk about that a bit
later .”
“Fine talk for a minister ,” the man said, looking faintly
amused. “Not that most ministers go about interfering wi’ a
man’ s wife.”
“I—” Roger began, but she interrupted him.
” I’ll  bloody hit you,”  Brianna said, glaring at the man. Who,
to he r annoyance, squinched his eyes shut and leaned forward,
features clenched.
“All right,” he said, through compressed lips. “Go ahead.”“Not in the face,” Roger advised, surveying a bruised
knuckle. “Make him stand up and go for his balls.”
W illiam Buccleigh’ s eyes popped open, and he looked
reproachfully at Roger .
“D’ye think she needs advice?”
“I think you  need a fat lip,” she told him, but sat slowly
down a gain, eyeing him. She took a breath down to her
toenails and let it out.
“Right,” she said, more or less calmly . “Start talking.”
He nodded cautiously and touched the bruise on his
cheekbone, wincing a little.
Son of a witch , she thought suddenly . Does he know  that ?
“Did ye  not mention cof fee?” he asked, sounding a little
wistful. “I havena had real cof fee in years.”
 
HE W AS F ASCINA TED by the Aga and pressed his
backside against it, fairly shivering with delight.
“Oh, sw eet V ir gin,” he breathed, eyes closed as he reveled
in the heat. “Is it not the lovely thing.”
The cof fee he pronounced good in itself but rather feeble—
reasonable, Brianna thought, knowing that such cof fee as he
was use d to was boiled over a fire, often for several hours,
rather than gently perked. He apologized for his manners,
which were actually fine, saying  that he hadn’ t eaten in some
little while.
“How have ye been feeding yourself?” Roger asked, eyeing
the steadily diminishing pil e of peanut-butter -and-jelly
sandwiches.
“Stole from cottages, to begin  with,” Buccleigh admitted
frankly . “After a bit, I found my way to Inverness and was
sittin’ on  the curb of the street, quite dazed by the huge great
roaring things goin’ by me—I ’d seen the cars on the roadnorth, of course, but it’ s dif ferent when they’re whizzin’ past
your sh ins. Anyway , I’d sat down outside the High Street
Church, for I knew that place, at least, and thought I’d go and
ask the minister  for a bite of bread when I’d got myself a bit
more in hand. I was that wee bit rattled, ken,” he said, leaning
confidentially toward Brianna.
“I s uppose so,” she murmured, and lifted an eyebrow at
Roger . “Old High St. Stephen’ s?”
“A ye, it was the High Church— meaning on the High Street,
not Anglican—before it was Old, or joined congregations with
St. Stephen’ s.” He switched  his attention to W illiam
Buccleigh. “Did ye, then? Speak to the minister? Dr .
W eatherspoon?”
Buccleigh nodded, mouth full.
“He saw me sitting there and came out to me, the kind man.
Asked was I in need, and when I assured him I was, he told me
where to  go for food and a b ed, and I went there. An aid
society , they called it, a charity , and it surely was.”
The people who ran the aid soc iety had given him clothes
—”for what I had on was little more than rags”—and helped
him to find a job doing rough labor for a dairy farm outside the
town.
“So why are ye not on the dairy farm?” Roger asked, at the
same mo ment that Brianna asked, “But how did you come to
Scotland?” Their words colliding, they stopped, gesturing to
each oth er to continue, but W illi am Buccleigh waved a hand at
them bo th and chewed rapidly for a moment, then swallowed
several times and gulped more cof fee.
“Mother of God, that stuf f ’ s tast y , but it sticks in your craw .
A ye, ye want to know why I’m here in your kitchen eating
your food and not dead in a creek in North Carolina.”
“Since y ou mention it, yes,” sai d Roger , leaning back in his
chair . “Start with North Carolina, why don’ t you?”
Buccleigh nodded once more, leaned back in turn with his
hands linked comfortably over his stomach, and began. 
HE’D BEEN ST AR VED out of Scotland, like so many
folk after Culloden, and had s craped together the money to
emigrate with his wife and infant son.
“I know ,” Roger said. “It was me you asked to save them,
on the ship. The night the capt ain put the sick ones over the
rail.”
Buccleigh looked up, startled, green eyes wide.
“W as it, then? I didna see ye at all, in the dark and me
desperate. If I’d kent that…” H e trailed of f, then shook his
head. “W ell, what’ s done is done.”
“It i s,” R oger sa id. “I couldn’ t s ee you in the dark, either . I
only ken t ye later , because of y our wife and son, when I met
them ag ain at Alaman-k.” T o his intense annoyance, the last
sound caught in his throat with  a glottal click. He cleared it
and repeated evenly , “At Alamance.”
Buccleigh nodded slowly , eyes fastened with interest on
Roger ’ s throat. W as that regre t in his eyes? Probably not,
Roger th ought. He hadn’ t thanked him for saving his wife and
child, either .
“A ye. W ell, I’d thought to take land and farm it, but… well,
the long  and the short of it was, I wasna much of a farmer . Nor
a builder . Didna ken the first thing about the wilderness, not
much more about crops. Not a  hunter , either . W e would ha’
starved, surely , had I not taken Morag and Jem—that’ s my
son’ s na me, too, is that not strange?—back down to the
piedmont and scraped a little  work on a wee turpentine
plantation there.”
“Stranger than you know ,” Bree said, half under her breath.
And a little louder , “So?”
“So the fellow I  worked for tur ned out for the Regulation,
and those of us on the place went, too. I should have left
Morag b ehind, b ut there was a fellow on the place who had a
hot e ye f or her— he was the blac ksmith and had but one leg, sohe’d not  be coming with us to th e fight. I couldna leave her to
him, so she an d the wean came with me. Where the next
fellow she meets is you ,” he said pointedly .
“Did she not tell ye who I was?” Roger asked testily .
“W ell, she did, then,” Buccleigh admitted. “She’d said about
the ship  and all, and said that was you. Even so,” he added,
giving Roger a hard eye, “d’ye go about makin’ love to other
men’ s wives regular , or was it just Morag took your fancy?”
“Morag is my five—or maybe only four—times great-
grandmother ,” Roger said evenly . He fixed Buccleigh with a
stare equal to the other man’ s. “And since you asked me who
ye a re—you’re my grandda. Fiv e or six times back. My son’ s
named J eremiah after my da, w ho was named for his grandda
—who was named for your  son. I think,” he added. “I might
be missing one or two Jeremiahs along the way .”
Buccleigh stared  at him, stubbled face gone quite blank. He
blinked once or twice, glanced at Brianna, who nodded, then
returned his stare to Roger , carefully scrutinizing his face.
“Look at his eyes,” Brianna sa id helpfully . “Shall I bring
you a mirror?”
Buccleigh’ s mouth opened as though to answer , but he
found no words and shook his head as though dislodging flies.
He pick ed up his cup, stared in to it for a moment as though
astonished to find it empty , and  set it down. Then looked at
Brianna.
“Y e wouldna have anything in the house stronger than
cof fee, would ye, a bhana-mhaighstir ?”
 
IT T OOK ROGER a little rummaging in his study to find
the genealogical table the Reverend had drawn up years
before. W hile he  was gone, Bree  found the bottle of Oban and
poured W illiam Buccleigh a generous glass. W ith no
hesitation, she poured for herself and Roger , as well, and put a
jug of water on the table.“Do you take a little water?” she asked politely . “Or do you
like it neat?”
Rather to her su rprise, he reached at once for the water and
splashed a little into the whisk y . He saw her expression and
smiled.
“If it was the rotgut, I’d thro w it down. Whisky worth
drinking, a little water opens the flavor . But ye ken that, don’ t
ye? Y e’re no Scots, though.”
“Y es, I am,” she said. “On my f ather ’ s side. His name is—
was—James Fr aser , of Lallybroch. They called him the
Dunbonnet.”
He blinked, looked round the kitchen, then back at her .
“Are you… another , then?” he said. “Like your husband and
me. Another of—whatever it is?”
“Whatever it is,” she agreed. “And yes. Y ou knew my
father?”
He s hook his he ad, closing his e yes as he sipped, and took a
moment to reply while the whisky made its way down.
“Dear Lord, that’ s good,” he bre athed, and opened his eyes.
“Nay , I was born only a year or so before Culloden. I heard of
the Dunbonnet, though, when I was a lad.”
“Y ou said you weren’ t much  of a farmer ,” Bree said
curiously . “What did you do in Scotland, before you left?”
He t ook a deep breath and let it out through his nose, in just
the way her fa ther did. A MacKenzie thing , she thought,
entertained.
“I was a lawyer ,” he said abruptly , and picked up his glass.
“W ell, th ere’ s a useful professio n,” Roger said, coming in in
time to hear this. He eyed Buccleigh contemplatively , then
shook his head and spread out the MacKenzie family tree on
the tabletop.
“There y ou are,” he said, putti ng a finger on the relevant
entry , then moved a finger down the page. “And there I am.”Buccleigh blink ed at it, then bent closer to study it in silence.
Brianna saw his throat move as  he swallowed once or twice.
His face was pale beneath the stubble when he looked up.
“A ye, those are my parents, my grandparents. And there’ s
wee Jem—my Jem—where he should be, right enough. I’ve
another child, though,” he said suddenly , turning to Bree. “Or I
think I have. Morag was breeding when I—when I—went.”
Roger sat down. His face had lost a little of the angry
wariness, and he regarded W illiam Buccleigh with what might
be sympathy .
“T ell us that bit,” he suggested. “How you went.”
Buccleigh pushed across his empty whisky glass but didn’ t
wait for it to be refilled.
The ow ner of the plantation he’d worked on had been
ruined in the wake of Alamance , gaoled for taking part in the
Regulation and his property con fiscated. The MacKenzies had
drifted f or a time, having no mo ney and no home, no close kin
who might help them.
Brianna exchanged a quick glance with Roger . Had
Buccleigh known it, he was within a short distance of close
kin—and wealthy kin, at that. Jocasta Cameron was Dougal
MacKenzie’ s sister—this man’ s aunt. If he knew it.
She rais ed her brows in silent  question to Roger , but he
shook his head slightly . Let that wait.
At last, Buccleigh said, they’d made the decision to go back
to S cotland. Morag had family there, a brother in Inverness
who’d done well for himself, w as a prosperous corn chandler .
Morag had written to him, and  he had ur ged them to come
back, saying he would find a place for W illiam in his business.
“At that  point, I should ha’ been glad of a place shoveling
dung ou t of the holds of cattle sh ips,” Buccleigh admitted with
a sigh. “Ephraim—that’ s Morag’ s brother , Ephraim Gunn—
said he thought he might have use for a clerk, though. And I
can  write a fair hand and do sums.”The lure of work—work that he was well equipped to do—
and a place to li ve was strong en ough to make the little family
willing t o emba rk once more on  the perilous Atlantic voyage.
Ephraim had sent a draft on his bank for their passage, and so
they had come b ack, landing in Edinbur gh, and from there had
made their slow way north.
“By wagon, for the most part.”  Buccleigh was on his third
glass of  whisky , Brianna and Roger not so far behind. He
poured a little w ater into his em pty glass and swished it round
his m outh before swallowing, to clear his throat, then coughed
and went on.
“The wagon broke down—again—near the place they call
Craigh na Dun. I’m thinking the two of ye will know it?” He
glanced back and forth between them, and they nodded. “A ye.
W ell, M orag wasna feeling all that peart, and the bairn was
peely-wally , too, so they lay down in the grass to sleep a bit
whilst the wheel was mending . The drover had a mate and
didna need my help, so I set of f to stretch my legs.”
“And you climbed the hill, to th e stones,” Brianna said, her
own chest feeling tight at the thought.
“Do you know what date it was?” Roger broke in.
“Summer ,” W illiam Buccleigh said slowly . “Near
Midsummer Da y , but I couldna swear to the day exactly .
Why?”
“The sum mer so lstice,” Brianna said, and hiccuped slightly .
“It’ s—we think it’ s open. The—whatever it is—on the sun
feasts and the fire feasts.”
The sou nd of a car coming down the drive came faintly to
them, an d all three looked up as though surprised in some
furtive business.
“Annie and the kids. What are we going to do with him?”
she asked Roger .
He glanced with narrowed eyes  at Buccleigh for an instant,
then ma de up his mind. “W e’ll n eed a bit of thought to explainye,” Roger said, rising. “Just for the moment, though—come
with me, aye?”
Buccleigh stood at once and followed Roger into the
scullery . She heard Buccleigh’ s voice rise in momentary
astonishment, a brief mutter of explanation from Roger , then
the g rating noise as they moved  the bench that hid the access
panel covering the priest’ s hole.
Moving as if in a trance, Brianna rose hastily to clear and
wash the three glasses, to put away the whisky and water .
Hearing the knocker go against the front door , she jumped a
little. Not the kids, after all. Who could that be?
She swe pt the family tree of f the  table and hurried down the
hall, pausing to toss it onto Roger ’ s desk as she made her way
to the door .
How old is he?  she thought abruptly , as she reached for the
handle. He looks to be in his late thirties, maybe, but—
“Hi,” sa id Rob Cameron, looking faintly alarmed at the look
on her face. “Have I come at a bad time, then?”
 
ROB HAD COME to bring back a book Roger had lent
him and  to deliver an invitation: would Jem like to come to the
pictures with Bobby on the F riday , then have a nice fish
supper and spend the night?
“I’m sure he would,” Brianna sa id. “But he’ s not—oh, there
he is .” A nnie ha d just driven up , with a clashing of gears that
made the engine die in the driveway . Brianna shuddered
slightly , pleased that Annie hadn’ t taken her  car .
By the time the kids had been e xtracted from the car , wiped
of f, and made to shake hands politely with Mr . Cameron,
Roger h ad com e out from the back of the house and was at
once dra wn into a conversation about his ef forts on the chapel,
which w ent on to such an exten t that it became obvious that it
was sup per -time, and it would h ave been rude not to ask him
to stay…And so Brianna found herself scrambling eggs and heating
beans and frying potatoes in a sort of daze, thinking of their
uninvited guest under the scullery floor , who must be smelling
the cooking and dying of hunger—and what  on earth were
they going to do with him?
All the time they ate, making pleasant conversation, herding
the k ids of f to bed while Roger and Rob talked Pictish stones
and archaeological excavations in the Orkneys, she found her
mind dwelling on W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie.
The Orkneys , she  tho ught. Roger said the N uckelavee is an
Orkney ghoulie. Has he been in the Orkneys? When? And why
the bloo dy hell was he hanging r ound our br och all this time?
When he found w hat had happened, why didn’ t he just go right
back? What is he  doing her e?
By the time Rob took his leave—and another book—with
profuse thanks for the food and a reminder of the movie date
on Frida y , she was prepared to haul W illiam Buccleigh out of
the priest’ s hole by the scruf f of the neck, drive him straight to
Craigh na Dun herself, and stuf f him bodily into a stone.
But when he finally clambered out, moving slowly , white-
faced and clearly hungry , she found her agitation lessening.
Just a little. She made fresh eggs for him, quickly , and sat with
him whi le Roger went round the house, checking doors and
windows.
“Though I suppose we needn’ t worry so much about that,”
she observed caustically , “since you’re inside  now .”
He looked up, tired but wary .
“I did say I wa s sorry ,” he sai d softly . “D’ye want me to
go?”
“And where would  you go, if I said yes?” she asked
unkindly .
He turne d his face toward the window over the kitchen sink.
In th e da ylight, it looked out on  peace, on the kailyard with its
worn w ooden gate and the pasture beyond. Now there was
nothing out there but the black of a moonless Highland night.The sort of night when Christians stayed indoors and put holy
water on the do orposts, becaus e the things that walked the
moors and the high places were not always holy .
He didn ’ t say anything but swal lowed, and she saw the fair
hairs on his forearms rise.
“Y ou don’ t have to go,” she said, gruf f. “W e’ll find you a
bed. But tomorrow…”
He bobb ed his head, not lookin g at her , and made to rise.
She stop ped him with a hand on his arm and he looked at her ,
startled, his eyes dark in the quiet light.
“Just tel l me one thing now ,” sh e said. “Do you want to go
back?”
“Oh, God, yes,” he said, and tu rned his head away , but his
voice was thick. “I want Morag. I want my wee lad.”
She let go of his  wrist and stood  up, but another thought had
occurred to her .
“How old are y ou?” she asked abruptly , and he shrugged,
brushing the back of his wrist across his eyes.
“Eight and thirty ,” he said. “Why?”
“Just… curious,” she said, and m oved to turn the Aga’ s heat
down to  its nighttime setting. “Come with me; I’ll make you a
bed in the parlor . T omorrow we’ll—we’ll see.”
She led him down the hall past Roger ’ s study , and in her
stomach was a ball of ice. The  light was on, and the family
tree Rog er had taken out to show W illiam Buccleigh was still
where sh e’d tos sed it, on the desk. Had he seen the date? She
thought not—or if he had, he hadn’ t noticed. The dates of birth
and death weren’ t listed for everyone on that table—but they
were for him. W illiam Bucc leigh MacKenzie had died,
according to that table, at age thirty-eight.
He w on’ t get ba ck , she thought, and the ice rose up around
her heart.
 
LOCH ERROC HTY LA Y dull as pewter under a
lowering sky . They were standin g on the footbridge across Alt
Ruighe nan Saorach, the river th at fed the loch, looking down
to where  the man-made loch spread itself between the smooth
hills. Buck—he’d said that was what folk called him in
America, and he’d got used to it—looked and looked, his face
a study in amazement and dismay .
“Down there,” he said softly , po inting. “See where that wee
burn comes down into it? That’ s where my auntie Ross’ s
house stood. About a hundred feet below the burn.”
About thirty feet below the surface of the loch now .
“I imagine it’ s something of a wrench,” Brianna said, not
without sympathy . “T o see things so changed.”
“It is that.” He glanced at her ,  those eyes, so unsettlingly
like Roger ’ s, quick in his face. “ It’ s maybe more that so much
hasna  changed. Up there, aye?” He lifted his chin toward the
distant mountains. “Just like they always were. And the wee
birds in the grass, and the salmo n jumping in the river . I could
set foot on yon shore”—he nodded toward the end of the
footbridge— “an d feel as though  I had walked there yesterday .
I did  walk there yesterday! And yet… all the people are gone.
“All of them,” he ended softly . “Morag. My children.
They’re all dead. Unless I can go back.”
She hadn’ t planned to ask him a nything; better to wait until
she and Roger c ould talk to him  together in the evening after
the kids were do wn. But the opportunity of fered itself. Roger
had driven Buck around the Highlands near Lallybroch, down
the Grea t Glen along Loch Nes s, and finally dropped him of f
at the Loch Er rochty dam, where she was working today;
she’d drive him back with her for supper .
They’d a r gued—in whispers—about it the night before. Not
about what to sa y about him; he’d be Daddy’ s relative, come
for a short visit. That was the truth, after all. But whether to
take him  into the tunnel. Roger had been in favor of this, shevery much against, remembering the shock of the…
timeline?… cutting through her like a sharpened wire. She still
hadn’ t decided.
But now he’d b rought up the su bject of going back, on his
own.
“When you came to yourself aft er you… came through, and
realized what had happened,” she asked curiously , “why didn’ t
you go back into the circle right then?”
He shrugged.
“I did. Though I canna say that  I realized straight of f what
had  hap pened. I did na come to that  for some days. But I kent
something terrib le had happened and the stones were to do wi’
it. So I was wary of them, as I im agine ye can understand.” He
quirked an eyebrow at her , and she nodded reluctantly .
She could  und erstand. She wouldn’ t go w ithin a mile of a
standing stone herself, unless it was to save some member of
her f amily from a horrible fate. And even then she might think
twice. S he dism issed the thought, though, and returned to her
interrogation.
“But you did go back, you said. What happened?”
He looked helplessly at her , spreading his hands.
“I d inna ken ho w to describe it to ye. Nothing like that’ s
ever happened to me before.”
“T ry ,” she suggested, hardening her voice, and he sighed.
“A ye. W ell, I walked up to the circle, and this time I could
hear the m—the stones. T alking to themselves, like, buzzing
like a hive of bees, and with a sound in it made the hairs stand
up on my nape.”
He’d wanted to turn and run then, but with thought of
Morag a nd Jemmy in his mind , had determined to push on.
He’d walked into the center o f the circle, where the sound
assailed him from all sides.“I th ought I’d lose my mind from it,” he said frankly .
“Putting my fingers in my ears did nay good at all; it was
inside m e, like as if ‘twas comi n’ from my bones. W as it like
that for you?” he asked suddenly , peering at her curiously .
“Y es, it was,” s he answered shortly . “Or close enough. Go
on. What did you do then?”
He’d se en the big cleft stone he’d gone through the first
time and , taking  as deep a breath as he could hold, had lunged
through it.
“And ye  can skin me for a liar i f ye like,” he assured her . “I
canna fo r the life of me tell ye what happened next, but after it
did, I was lyin’ on the grass in the midst of the stones, and I
was on fire.”
She looked at him, startled.
“Literally? I mean, were your cl othes burning, or was it just
—”
“I ken what ‘lite rally’ means,” he said, with an edge in his
voice. “I may not be what you are, but I was  educated.”
“Sorry .” She made a small apo logetic nod and gestured to
him to go on.
“Anyway , aye, I was literally  on fire . My shirt was in
flames. Here—” He unzipped his wind-cheater and fumbled
with the buttons of Roger ’ s b lue cambric shirt, pulling the
edges a part to show her the sprawling reddish mark of a
healing burn on his chest. He w ould have buttoned it again at
once, bu t she motioned him not to and bent to look closer . It
seemed to be centered on his heart. W as that significant? she
wondered.
“Thank you,” she said, straighte ning up. “What—what were
you thinking about when you went through?”
He stared at her .
“I was thinking I wanted to get back, what else?”“Y es, o f course. But were you thinking of someone in
particular? Of Morag, I mean, or your Jem?”
The most extraordinary expression—shame?
embarrassment?—crossed his face, and he looked away .
“I was,”  he said briefly , and she knew he lied but couldn’ t
think why . He coughed and went on hurriedly .
“W ell, s o. I rolled upon the grass to put it out, and then I
was sick. I lay there for a good while, not having the strength
to ri se. I  dinna ken how long, bu t a long time. Y e ken what it’ s
like here, close t o Midsummer Day? That milky light when ye
canna see the sun, but it’ s not really set?”
“The summer dim,” she murmured. “A ye—I mean, yes, I
know . So did you try again?”
It was  shame now . Th e sun was low and the clouds glowed
a du ll or ange tha t washed loch a nd hills and bridge in a sullen
flush, but it was still possible to make out the darker flush that
spread across his broad cheekbones.
“No,” he muttered. “I was afraid.”
Despite her distrust of him an d her lingering anger over
what he ’d done to Roger , she  felt an involuntary spurt of
sympathy at the admission. Afte r all, both she and Roger had
known , m ore or less, what they were  getting into. He hadn’ t
expected what happened at all and still knew almost nothing.
“I would have been, too,” she said. “Did you—”
A shout  from behind interrupted her , and she turned to see
Rob Cameron bounding along the riverbank. He waved and
came up onto the bridge, puf fing a little from the run.
“Hi, bos s,” he said, grinning at h er . “Saw ye on my way out.
If ye’re of f the clock, I thought would ye fancy a drink on the
way hom e? And your friend, too, of course,” he added, with a
friendly nod toward W illiam Buccleigh.
W ith that, of course, she had no alternative but to introduce
them, passing Buck of f with their agreed-on story: Roger ’ s
relative, staying  with them, jus t in town briefly . She politelydeclined the of fer of a drink, say ing that she must get home for
the kids’ supper .
“Another time, then,” Rob said  lightly . “Nice to meet ye,
pal.” He bounded of f again, ligh t-footed as a gazelle, and she
turned to find W illiam Buccleigh looking after him with
narrowed eye.
“What?” she demanded.
“Y on man’ s got a hot eye for yo u,” he said abruptly , turning
to her . “Does your husband know?”
“Don’ t be ridiculous,” she said, just as abruptly . Her heart
had sped  up at his words, and she didn’ t like it. “I work with
him. He ’ s in the lodge with Roger , and they talk about old
songs. That’ s all.”
He made one of those Scottish noises that can convey all
manner of indelicate meaning and shook his head.
“I m ay not be what you are,” he repeated, smiling
unpleasantly . “But I’m no a fool, either .” ONE EWE LAMB RETURNS T O THE FOLD
 November 24, 1777
 Philadelphia
 
L ORD JOHN GREY desperately needed a valet. He had
employed a person so described  but found the man worse than
useless, and a th ief to boot. He had discovered the erstwhile
valet slipping teaspoons down his breeches and had—after
forcibly extracting the spoons— dismissed him. He should, he
supposed, have had the man arrested, but really was not sure
what the  local constable would do if summoned by a British
of ficer .
Most of  the British prisoners of war had been taken out of
the city as How e’ s army advanced, the Americans wishing to
keep them for exchange. Henry had not.
He brushed his own uniform, grimly considering. He wore it
daily now , as pro tection for Dottie and Henry . He had not been
an a ctively serving of ficer for y ears but, unlike most men in
that position, had not resigned his lieutenant-colonel’ s
commission, either . He wasn’ t sure what Hal would have done
had he tried  to resign, but since it was a commission in Hal’ s
own reg iment and Grey didn’ t need to sell it, the point was
moot.
One of the buttons was loose. H e took the hussif out of his
kit, threaded a needle without squinting, and whipped the
button tightly to the coat. The action gave him a small feeling
of satisfaction, though acknowledging it made him admit just
how little he fe lt he could control these days—so little that
sewing on a button should seem cause for satisfaction.
He f rowned at h imself in the glass and twitched irritably at
the gold  lace on his coat, which was tarnished in places. He
did know  what to do about that, but damned if he was going to
sit p olishing it u p with a lump of urine-soaked bread. Knowing
General Sir W illiam Howe as h e did, he doubted that his own
appearance would af fect his reception, even should he roll up
to Howe’ s headquarters in a sedan chair with his head wrappedin a T urkish turban. Howe frequently didn’ t bathe or change
his linen for a month or more—and not only when in the field.
Still. It would ha ve to be an army sur geon, and Grey wanted
his pick  of them. He grimaced at the thought. He had known
too man y army sur geons, some of them at unpleasantly close
range. B ut Howe’ s army had come into the city in late
September . It was mid-November now , the occupation was
well established , and with it a general animus among the
citizenry .
Those p hysicians of a rebellious bent had either left the city
or would have n othing to do wit h a British of ficer . Those with
Loyalist sympathies would have been more than happy to
oblige him—he  was invited to  many parties given by the
wealthy Loyalists of the city and had been introduced to two
or three  physicians there—but he had found none with any
reputation for sur gery . One dealt  mostly with cases of venereal
disease, another was an accoucheur , a nd the third w as plainly
a quacksalver of the worst sort.
So he was bound for Howe’ s headquarters, to beg
assistance. He couldn’ t wait any longer; Henry had held his
own and  even seemed to gain a bit of strength with the cooling
of the weather . B etter it was done now , to give him a chance to
heal a little before the winter ca me with its chill and the fetid
squalor of closed houses.
Ready , he buckled on his swor d and stepped out into the
street. There was a soldier , half bowed under a heavy
rucksack, walking slowly along the street toward him, looking
at the houses. He barely glanced at the man as he came down
the steps—but a glance was enough. He looked again,
incredulous, and  then ran down the street, heedless of hat, gold
lace, sword, or d ignity , and seized the tall young soldier in his
arms.
“W illie!”
“Papa!”His heart overflowed in a most  remarkable way; he could
seldom rememb er being so happy but did his best to contain it,
not wanting to embarrass W illie with unmanly excesses of
emotion. He didn’ t let go of h is son but stood back a little,
looking him up and down.
“Y ou’re… dirty , ” he said, unabl e to repress a lar ge, foolish
grin. “V ery dirty indeed.” He was. Also tattered and
threadbare. He still wore his of fi cer ’ s gor get, but his stock was
missing, as were several buttons, and one cuf f of his coat was
torn quite away .
“I have lice, too ,” W illie assured him, scratching. “Is there
any food?”
“Y es, of  course. Come in, come  in.” He took the rucksack
of f W illie’ s shoulder and beckoned him to follow . “Dottie!” he
shouted up the stairs as he pu shed open the door . “Dottie!
Come down!”
“I am  down,” his niece said behind him, coming out of the
day parlor , where she was accus tomed to breakfast. She had a
piece of buttered toast in he r hand. “What do you—oh,
W illie !”
Disregarding questions of filth and lice, W illiam swept her
up in his arms, and she dropped the toast on the carpet and
squeezed him round the body , laughing and crying, until he
protested that she had cracked all his ribs and he should never
breathe easy again.
Grey stood watching this with the utmost benevolence, even
though they had quite trampled the buttered toast into the
rented carpet. They really did  appear to love each other , he
reflected. Maybe he’d been wrong. He coughed politely , which
did not disentangle them but d id at least make Dottie look
blankly over her shoulder at him.
“I’ll go and ord er some breakfast for W illiam, shall I?” he
said. “T ake him into the parlor , why don’ t you, my dear , and
give him a dish of tea.”“T ea,” W illie breathed, his face assuming the beatific air of
one be holding—or being to ld about—some prodigious
miracle. “I haven’ t had tea in weeks. Months!”
Grey we nt out to the cookhou se, this standing at a little
distance behind the house prope r so that the latter should not
be d estroyed when—not if—som ething caught fire and burned
the c ookhouse to the ground. Appetizing smells of fried meat
and stewed fruit and fresh bread floated out of this ramshackle
structure.
He had employed Mrs. Figg, a nearly spherical black
woman, as cook, on the assumption that she could not have
gained such a figure without having both an appreciation of
good foo d and the ability to coo k it. In this assumption he had
been proved right, and not even that lady’ s uncertain
temperament and taste for foul language made him regret his
decision, though  it did make him approach her warily . Hearing
his news, though, she obligingly put aside the game pie she
was making in order to assemble a tea tray .
He wai ted to take this back himself, meaning to give
W illiam and Dottie a little time alone together . He wanted to
hear everything— for of course e veryone in Philadelphia knew
about B ur goyne’ s disastrous meeting at Saratoga, but he
particularly wanted to find out from W illiam what John
Bur goyne had known or understood beforehand. According to
some of his military acquaintances, Sir Geor ge Germain had
assured Bur goy ne that his plan had been accepted and that
Howe would march north to m eet him, cutting the American
colonies in half. According to others—several of Howe’ s staf f
among them—Howe had never  been apprised of this plan in
the first place, let alone consented to it.
W as this arrogance and presum ptuousness on Bur goyne’ s
part, obstinacy and pride on Howe’ s, idiocy and incompetence
on Germain’ s—or some combination of all three? If pressed,
he’d place his wager on this last possibility , but was curious to
know how deeply Germain’ s of fice might have been involved.
W ith Pe rcy Bea uchamp vanish ed from Philadelphia, leaving
not a wrack behind, his further movements would have to beobserved by someone else, and Arthur Norrington was likely
to c ommunicate his own findings to Germain rather than to
Grey .
He c arried the lo aded tray carefully back, to find W illiam on
the sofa in his shirtsleeves drinking tea, his hair unbound and
loose on his shoulders.
Dottie was sitting in the wing c hair before the fire, holding
her s ilver comb on her knee, an d with a look on her face that
nearly m ade Gre y drop the tray . She turned a startled face on
him as he came in, so blank th at it was clear she barely saw
him. Th en something changed and her face altered, like one
coming back in a twinkling from somewhere leagues away .
“Here,” she said, rising at once  and reaching for the tray .
“Let me have that.”
He did, covertly glancing between the two young people.
Sure enough, W illie looked odd, too. Why? he wondered.
They had been e xcited, thrilled,  exuberantly af fectionate with
each oth er a few moments be fore. Now she was pale but
trembling with an inner excitement that made the cups rattle in
their saucers as she began to pour out tea. He  was flushed
where sh e was pale, but not—Grey was almost sure—with any
sort of sexual excitement. He had the look of a man who …
well, no. It was  sexual excitem ent, he thought, intrigued—he
had, after all, se en it often and was a keen observer of it in
men—but it wasn’ t focused on Dottie. Not at all.
What th e devil ar e they up to?  h e thought. He  af fected to
ignore their distraction, though,  and sat down to drink tea and
hear W illie’ s experiences.
The telling calmed W illiam a little. Grey watched W illiam’ s
face cha nge as he talked, somet imes haltingly , and felt a deep
pang at seeing i t. Pride, yes, great pride; W illiam was a man
now , a soldier , and a good one . But Grey had also a lurking
regret for the disappearance o f the last traces of W illie’ s
innocence; the briefest look at his eyes proved that had gone.The accounts of battle, politics, Indians, all had the opposite
ef fect on  Dottie, he saw . Far from being calmed or happy , she
grew more visibly agitated by the moment.
“I w as a bout to go to visit Sir W illiam, but I think I’ll go see
Henry f irst,” Grey said at last, rising and brushing toast
crumbs from the skirts of his co at. “Do you want to come with
me, W il lie? Or the both of you, for that matter? Or would you
rather rest?”
They exchanged a look in which complicity and plotting
were so evident that he blinked.  W illie coughed and stood up,
too.
“Y es, Papa. I do  want to see Henry , of course. But Dottie
has just been telling me how grave his state is—and about
your int ent to get an army sur g eon to deal with it. I was …
thinking… I know an army sur g eon. A most excellent fellow .
V ery knowing, and wonderfully gentle in his manner—but
quick as a snake with his blade,” he hastened to add. His color
had risen remarkably , saying this, and Grey viewed him with
fascination.
“Really ,” Grey said slowly . “He  sounds an answer to prayer .
What is his name? I could ask Sir W illiam—”
“Oh, he’ s not with Sir W illiam,” W illie said hastily .
“Oh, one of Bur goyne’ s men?” The paroled soldiers of
Bur goyne’ s defeated army had all—with exceptions like
W illiam—marched to Boston, there to embark for England.
“W ell, I would o f course like to have him, but I doubt we can
send to Boston for him and have  him come in a timely fashion,
given the time of year and the likelihood—”
“No, he’ s not in Boston.” W illie  exchanged another of those
looks with Dottie. She caught G rey watching them this time,
went red  as the roses on the teacups, and looked sedulously at
her toes. W illie cleared his throat.
“In fact, he is a Continental sur geon. But W ashington’ s
army has gone i nto winter quarters at V alley For ge—that’ s nomore than a day ’ s ride. He will  come if I go in person to ask
him, I am sure of it.”
“I s ee,” Grey s aid, thinking rapidly . He was sure that he
didn’ t see the half of it—whatever “it” was—but on the face of
things, this did seem an answer to prayer . It would be a simple
matter to  ask Howe to arrange an escort and a flag of truce for
W illie, as well as a guarantee of safe passage for the sur geon.
“All rig ht,” he said, making up  his mind on the moment.
“I’ll speak to Sir W illiam about it this afternoon.”
Dottie a nd W illi e gave identical sighs—of relief? What the
devil?  he thought yet again.
“Right, then,” he said briskly . “Come to think, you’ll wish
to wash  and change, W illie. I’ll go to Howe’ s headquarters
now , and we’ll s ee Henry this a fternoon. What is the name of
this famous Continental sur geon , that I may have Sir W illiam
write a pass for him?”
“Hunter ,” said W illie, and his sunburned face seemed to
glow . “D enzell Hunter . Be sure to tell Sir W illiam to write the
pass for two; Dr . Hunter ’ s sister is his nurse—he’ll need her to
come along and help.” TWENTY -TWENTY
 December 20, 1777
 Edinburgh
 
T HE PRINT ON THE P AGE sprang into focus, clear
and black, and I exclaimed in startlement.
“Ah, close, then?” Mr . Lewis, the spectacle-maker , twinkled
at m e over his own spectacles. “T ry these.” He gently removed
the trial spectacles from my nose and handed me another pair .
I pu t the m on, examined the page of the book before me, then
looked up.
“I h ad no idea,”  I said, amazed and delighted. It was like
being re born; e verything was fresh, new , crisp, and vivid. I
had suddenly reentered the half-for gotten world of fine print.
Jamie stood by the shop’ s win dow , book in hand and a
handsome pair of steel-rimmed square spectacles on his long
nose. They gave him a most unaccustomed scholarly air , and
he lo oked for a moment like a distinguished stranger , until he
turned to look at me, his eyes slightly magnified behind the
lenses. H e shifte d his gaze over  the top of them and smiled at
sight of me.
“I li ke those,” h e said with approval. “The round ones suit
your face, Sassenach.”
I had been so taken with the new detail of the world around
me t hat it hadn’ t even occurred to me to wonder what I  looked
like. Cur ious, I got up and came  to peer into the small looking
glass hung on the wall.
“Goodness,” I said, recoiling slightly . Jamie laughed, and
Mr . Lewis smiled indulgently .
“They are most becoming to you, ma’am,” he said.
“W ell, possibly , ” I said, waril y examining the stranger ’ s
reflection in the glass. “It’ s ju st rather a shock.” It wasn’ t
really th at I’d for gotten what I looked like. It was just that I
hadn’ t t hought about it in months, beyond putting on cleanlinen and not we aring gray , which tended to make me look as
though I’d been inexpertly embalmed.
I ha d on brown today , an open jacket of brown velvet the
color of ripe ca ttails, with a narrow grosgrain ribbon in gold
down the edges, over my new gown—this a heavy cof fee-
colored silk with a close-fitted bodice and three lace-edged
petticoats to show at the ankle. W e would not be long in
Edinbur gh, owin g to the exigen cies of getting the brigadier to
his final  resting place and Jamie’ s eagerness to be away to the
Highlands—but we did have business to conduct here. Jamie
had said firmly that we could not appear as ragamuf fins and
had sent for a dressmaker and a tailor as soon as we reached
our lodgings.
I stood back a little, preening. In all honesty , I was surprised
to find how well I looked. During the long months of
traveling, of retreat and battle w ith the Continental army , I had
been red uced to my basic essence: survival and function. What
I l ooked  like would have been entirely irrelevant, even had I
had a mirror .
In fact, I’d subconsciously expected to find a witch in the
glass, a worn-lo oking woman with wild gray hair and a fierce
expression. Possibly a long hair or two sprouting from the
chin.
Instead… well, it was still recognizably me. My hair—
uncapped but covered by a small, flat straw hat with a dainty
bunch of cloth d aisies on it—was tied up behind. But flattering
small wisps curled round my t emples, and my eyes were a
bright clear amber behind the new spectacles, with a surprising
look of guileless expectancy .
I h ad the lines a nd creases of my age, of course, but on the
whole, m y face had settled peac eably on my bones, rather than
running away in jowls and wa ttles down my neck. And the
bosom, with just a discreet sha dow showing the swell of my
breasts—the roy al navy had fed us lavishly on the sea journey ,
and I had regained some of the  weight I had lost during the
long retreat from T iconderoga.“W ell, n ot all that bad, really ,” I said, sounding so surprised
that Jam ie and Mr . Lewis b oth laughed. I took of f the
spectacles with considerable regret—Jamie’ s spectacles were
simple steel-rimmed reading glasses, so could be taken at
once, but my o wn pair would be ready , complete with gold
rims, by  the next afternoon, Mr . Lewis promised—and we left
the shop to embark upon our next errand: Jamie’ s printing
press.
 
“WHERE’S IAN this morning?”  I asked, as we made our
way to Princes S treet. He’d been gone when I awoke, leaving
not a wrack beh ind, let alone a ny word of his whereabouts.
“Y ou don’ t suppose he’ s decide d to run for it rather than go
home?”
“If he has, I’ll track him down and beat him to a pudding,
and he kens that perfectly well,” Jamie said absently , looking
up across the pa rk to the great bulk of the castle on its rock,
then putting on his glasses—futiley—to see whether they
made a dif ference. “Nay , I th ink he’ s likely gone to the
brothel.”
“At eleven o’clock in the morning?” I blurted.
“W ell, t here’ s n ay rule about it ,” Jamie said mildly , taking
of f the glasses, w rapping them in his handkerchief, and putting
them in to his sporran. “I’ve been known to do it in the
morning now and then. Thoug h I doubt he’ s bent on carnal
knowledge just this minute,” he added. “I told him to go and
see whe ther Madame Jeanne still owns the place, for if so,
she’ll be able to  tell me more, in a shorter space of time, than
anyone e lse in Edinbur gh. If she’ s there, I’ll go and see her in
the afternoon.”
“Ah,” I said, no t really liking the notion of his going round
for a  cozy tete-a-tete with the elegant Frenchwoman who had
once been his partner in the whisky-smuggling business but
admitting the economy of the proposal. “And where would
Andy Bell be at ten o’clock in the morning, do you suppose?”“In b ed,” Jamie said promptly . “Sleeping,” he added with a
grin, seeing the look on my face. “Printers are sociable
creatures, as a rule, and they congregate in taverns of an
evening. I’ve never known one to rise wi’ the lark, save he’ s
got bairns wi’ the colic.”
“Y ou’re proposing to roust him out of bed?” I asked,
stretching my step to keep up with him.
“No, we’ll find him at Mowbra y’ s at dinnertime,” he said.
“He’ s a graver—he needs some  light to work by , so he rises by
noon. A nd he eats at Mowbray’ s most days. I only want to see
whether his shop’ s burnt down or not. And whether the wee
bugger ’ s been using my press.”
“Y ou make it so und as though h e’ s been using your wife,” I
said, amused at the grim tone of this last.
He made a small Scottish noise acknowledging the
presumed humor of this remark while simultaneously
declining to share in it. I hadn’ t realized that he felt so strongly
about hi s printing press, but afte r all, he’d been separated from
it for nearly twelve years. Little wonder if his lover ’ s heart was
beginning to beat at thought of being reunited with it at last, I
thought, privately entertained.
Then again, perhaps he was  a fraid Andy B ell’ s shop had
burned d own. It wasn’ t an idle  fear . His own printer ’ s shop
had  b urned down twelve years before; such establishments
were particularly vulnerable to fire, owing both to the presence
of a small open for ge for melting and recasting type and to the
quantities of paper , ink, and similar flammable substances kept
on the premises.
My stom ach growled softly at th ought of a midday dinner at
Mowbray’ s; I had very pleasant memories of our last—and
only—visit there, which had involved some excellent oyster
stew and an even better chilled white wine, among other
pleasures of the flesh.
It would  be a little time ‘til din ner , though; laborers might
open their dinner pails at noon, but fashionable Edinbur ghdined at the civi lized hour of three o’clock. Possibly we could
acquire a fresh bridie from a street vendor , I thought, hastening
in Jamie’ s wake. Just to tide us over .
Andrew Bell’ s shop was, luckily , still standing. The door
was closed against the draft, but a small bell rang over it to
announce our presence, and a middle-aged gentleman in
shirtsleeves and apron looked up from a basket of slugs he was
sorting.
“A good morning to you, sir . Ma’am,” he said cordially ,
nodding to us, a nd I saw at once that he was not a Scot. Or ,
rather , n ot born in Scotland, for his accent was the soft,
slightly drawling English of the Southern colonies. Jamie
heard it and smiled.
“Mr . Richard Bell?” he asked.
“I am,” said the man, looking rather surprised.
“James Fraser , your servant, sir ,” Jamie said politely ,
bowing. “And may I present my wife, Claire.”
“Y our servant, sir .” Mr . Bell bow ed in return, looking rather
bewildered but with perfect manners.
Jamie reached into the breast o f his coat and withdrew a
small bundle of letters, tied with a pink ribbon.
“I’ve br ought ye word from your wife and daughters,” he
said simply , handing them over . “And I’ve come to see about
sending ye home to them.”
Mr . Bell’ s face went blank, and then all the blood drained
out o f it . I thought he was going  to faint for a moment, but he
didn’ t, merely grasping the edge of the counter for support.
“Y ou-you—home?” he gasped. He had clutched the letters
to his breast, an d now brought them down, looking at them,
his eyes  welling. “How—how did she … My wife. Is she
well?” he asked abruptly , jerkin g up his head to look at Jamie,
sudden fear in his eyes. “Are they all right?”
“They were all bonny as do ves when I saw them in
W ilmingon,” Ja mie assured him. “V erra much desolated byyour absence from them, but well in themselves.”
Mr . Bell  was trying desperately to control his face and his
voice, and the ef fort reduced him to speechlessness. Jamie
leaned over the counter and touched him gently on the arm.
“Go and read y our letters, man,” he suggested. “Our other
business will wait.”
Mr . Bell ’ s mouth opened once or twice, soundless, then he
nodded abruptly and, whirling round, blundered through the
door that led to the back room.
I sighed, and Jamie glanced down at me, smiling.
“It’ s good when something comes right, isn’ t it?” I said.
“It’ s no made right yet,” he said, “but it will be.” He then
pulled h is new spectacles out of his sporran and, clapping
them onto his n ose, flipped up the counter flap and strode
purposefully through.
“It is  my  press!” he exclaimed ac cusingly , circling the
enormous thing like a hawk hovering over its prey .
“I’ll tak e your word for it, but how can you tell?” I came
cautiously after  him, keeping b ack my skirts from the ink-
stained press.
“W ell, i t’ s got my name on it, for the one thing,” he said,
stooping and pointing up at something under it. “Some of
them, anyway .” Leaning upside down and squinting, I made
out Alex. Malcolm  carved on the underside of a small beam.
“Apparently it still works all right,” I observed,
straightening up and looking round the room at the posters,
ballads, and other examples of the printing and engraving arts
displayed there.
“Mmphm.” He tried the moving parts and examined the
press minutely before reluctantly admitting that, in fact, it
seemed in good condition. He still glowered, though.
“And I’ve been paying  the wee bugger all these year s, to
keep it for me!” he muttered. He straightened up, lookingbalefully at the press. I had in the meantime been poking about
the t ables near th e front wall, which held books and pamphlets
for sale,  and picked up one of th e latter , which was titled at the
top Encyclopedia Britannica , and below this, “Laudanum.”
T inctur e of opium, or liquid laudanum, otherwise called the
thebaic tinctur e , is made as follows: take of pr epar ed opium
two ounces, of cinnamon and cloves, each one drachm, of
white wine one p int, infuse them a week without heat, and then
filter it thr ough paper .
Opium a t pr esen t is in gr eat esteem, and is one of the most
valuable of all the simple medi cines. Applied externally , it is
emollient, r elax ing, and discutient, and gr eatly pr omotes
suppuration: if long kept upon the skin, it takes off hair , and
always occasions an itching; sometimes it exulcerates it, and
raises little blisters, if applied to a tender part: sometimes, on
external application, it allays pain, and even occasions sleep:
but it must by n o means be app lied to the head, especially to
the s utur es of th e skull; for it has been known to have the most
terrible effects in this application, and even bring death itself.
Opium taken internally r emove s melancholy , eases pain, and
disposes of sleep; in many cases r emoves hemorr hages,
pr ovokes sweating .
A moderate dose is commonly under a grain…
“Do you know what ‘discutient’ means?” I asked Jamie,
who was reading the type set up in the form on the press,
frowning as he did so.
“I do. It means whatever ye’re  talking about can dissolve
something. Why?”
“Ah. Perhaps that’ s why applying laudanum to the sutures
of the skull is a bad idea.”
He gave me a baf fled look.
“Why would ye do that?”
“I haven ’ t the faintest idea.” I returned to the pamphlets,
fascinated. One of them, titled “The W omb,” had some very
good engravings of a dissected female pelvis and internalor gans, done from varying angle s, as well as depictions of the
fetus in various stages of devel opment. If this was Mr . Bell’ s
work, I thought, he was both a  superb craftsman and a very
diligent observer .
“Have you got a penny? I’d like to buy this.”
Jamie dug into h is sporran and laid a penny on the counter ,
glanced at the pamphlet in my hand, and recoiled.
“Mother of God,” he said, crossing himself.
“W ell, probably  not,” I said mildly . “Certainly a  mother ,
though.” Before he could reply to this, Richard Bell came out
of th e back room , red-eyed but composed, and seized Jamie by
the hand.
“Y ou cannot know what you hav e done for me, Mr . Fraser ,”
he said earnestly . “If you can indeed help me to return to my
family , I—I—w ell, in fact, I do not know what I could
possibly do to s how my gratitude, but be assured that I will
bless your soul forever!”
“I’m mu ch obliged to ye for the thought, sir ,” Jamie said to
him, smiling. “It may be that ye can do me a small service, but
if not, I shall still be most thankful for your blessings.”
“If there is any thing I can do, sir , anything at all!” Bell
assured him fervently . Then a faint hesitation came over his
face—possibly a recollection of  whatever his wife had had to
say about Jamie in her letter . “Anything short of… of treason,
I should say .”
“Och, no . W ell short of treason,”  Jamie assured him, and we
took our leave.
 
I T OOK  A SPOONFUL of the oyster stew and closed my
eyes in ecstasy . W e had come a little early , in order to get a
seat by the window overlooking the street, but Mowbray’ s had
filled up fast, and the clishmaclaver of cutlery and
conversation was almost deafening.“Y ou’re sure he’ s not here?” I said, leaning across the table
to m ake myself heard. Jamie sh ook his head, rolling a sip of
the cold Moselle around his mouth with an expression of bliss.
“Y e’ll ken well enough when he is,” he said, swallowing it.
“All right. What sort of not-quite-treasonous thing are you
planning to make poor Mr . B ell do in return for passage
home?”
“I mean to send  him home in char ge of my printing press,”
he replied.
“What, e ntrust your precious darling to a virtual stranger?” I
asked, amused. He gave me a m ildly dirty look in return, but
finished his bite of buttered roll before answering.
“I dinna expect him to be abusing her . He’ s no going to print
a thousand-run of Clarissa  on her aboard ship, after all.”
“Oh, it’ s a her , is it?” I said, vastly entertained. “And what,
may I ask, is her name?”
He flush ed a little and looked away , taking particular care to
coax a specially succulent oyster into his spoon, but finally
muttered, “Bonnie,” before gulping it.
I l aughe d, but before I could make further inquiries, a new
noise in truded on the racket, a nd people began to put down
their spoons and stand up, craning to see out of the windows.
“That w ill be Andy ,” Jamie told me.
I looked down into the street and saw a small knot of boys
and idle rs, clapping and cheering. Looking up the street to see
what wa s comin g, I beheld one of the biggest horses I had ever
seen. It wasn’ t a draft horse bu t an enormously tall gelding,
close to  seventeen hands, so f ar as my inexpert eye could
judge.
On top of it was a very small man, sitting up straight and
regally ignoring  the cheers of the crowd. He came to a stop
directly below us and, turning round, removed a wooden
square from the saddle behind him. He shook this out,
revealing it to be a folding wooden ladder , and one of thestreet ch ildren ra n forward to ho ld the foot of it while Mr . Bell
—for it couldn’ t  be anyone else—descended to the plaudits of
passersby . He tossed a coin to th e child who’d held the ladder ,
another to a lad who’d taken his horse’ s head, and disappeared
from view .
A few moments  later , he came  through the door into the
main di ning room, taking of f his cocked hat and bowing
graciously to the calls of greetin g from the diners. Jamie raised
a hand, calling “Andy Bell!” in a resonant voice that cut
through the thrum of talk, and the little man’ s head jerked in
our direction, surprised. I watched with fascination as he came
toward us, a slow grin spreading over his face.
I couldn’ t tell whether he had some form of dwarfism or had
merely suf fered badly from malnutrition and scoliosis in his
youth, but his legs were short in proportion to his upper body ,
and his shoulders crooked; he barely topped four feet, and only
the c rown of his  head—this covered by a very fashionable wig
—showed as he passed between the tables.
These a spects of appearance faded into insignificance,
though, as he d rew close and I perceived his most striking
attribute. Andrew Bell had the biggest nose I had ever seen,
and in the cours e of an eventful life, I had seen a number of
prize specimens. It began between his eyebrows, curved gently
down fo r a short distance as though nature had intended him to
have the profile of a Roman emperor . Something had gone
amiss in the execution, though, and to this promising
beginning, something that looked like a small potato had been
af fixed. Knobbly and red, it took the eye.
It took quite a few eyes; as he drew close to our table, a
young lady nearby saw him, gasped audibly , and then clapped
a ha nd o ver her mouth, this precaution being quite insuf ficient
to quell her giggles.
Mr . Bell heard her , and witho ut breaking his stride, he
reached into his pocket, withdr ew an immense papier -mache
nose dec orated with purple stars, which he clapped over hisown, and, fixing the young woman with an icy stare, passed
by .
“My dea r ,” Jam ie said to me, grinning as he rose to his feet
and extending a hand to the litt le engraver , “may I name my
friend, Mr . Andrew Bell? My wife, Andy . Claire is her name.”
“Charmed, madam,” he said, removing the false nose and
bowing low over my hand. “W hen did you acquire this rare
creature, Jamie?  And whatever would such a lovely lass want
with a great, vulgar lout such as you, I wonder?”
“I lu red her into  marriage wi’ descriptions of the beauties of
my printing press,” Jamie said dryly , sitting down and
motioning to Andy Bell to join us.
“Ah,” sa id Andy , with a sharp look at Jamie, who raised his
brows and widened his eyes. “Hmm. I see ye’ve been by the
shop, then.” He nodded at my reticule, from which the top of
the pamphlet I’d bought was protruding.
“W e hav e,” I said hastily , pullin g out the pamphlet. I didn’ t
think  Jamie proposed to squash Andy Bell like a bug for
having m ade free with his printing press, but his relationship
with “Bonnie” was news to me, and I wasn’ t sure quite how
deep his sense of af fronted proprietorship went.
“This is  remarkably fine work,” I said to Mr . Bell, with
complete sincerity . “T ell me, how many dif ferent specimens
did you use?”
He blinked a little but answered readily , and we had a
pleasant—if rather gruesome—conversation regarding the
dif ficulties of dissection in warm weather and the ef fect of
saline solution versus alcohol for preservation. This caused the
people at the next table to end their meal rather hurriedly ,
casting veiled looks of horror as they left. Jamie leaned back
in h is chair , loo king pleasant but fixing Andy Bell with an
unwavering gaze.
The little engraver betrayed no particular discomfort under
this basilisk stare and went on telling me about the response
when he  had published the bound edition of the Encyclopedia–the King had somehow happened to see the plates of the
“W omb” section  and had ordere d those pages to be torn out of
the book, the ignorant German blatherskite!—but when the
waiter came to take his ord er , he ordered both a very
expensive wine and a lar ge bottle of good whisky .
“What, whisky wi’ the stew?” blurted the waiter ,
astonished.
“No,” he said with a sigh, pushing back his wig.
“Concubinage. If that’ s what ye call it when ye rent the
services of a man’ s beloved.”
The waiter shifted his look of astonishment to me, then went
bright red and, choking slightly , backed away .
Jamie fixed a na rrow eye on his friend, now buttering a roll
with aplomb.
“It’ll take more than whisky , Andy .”
Andy Bell sighed and scratched his nose.
“A ye, then,” he said. “Say on.”
 
WE FOUND IAN waiting at the small hotel, chatting
with a couple of draymen in the  street. Seeing us, he took his
leave—and a small package, th rust surreptitiously under his
coat—and came in with us. It was teatime, and Jamie ordered
it to be brought up to our rooms, for the sake of discretion.
W e h ad lashed out, rather , in the matter of accommodations,
and had taken a suite of rooms. The tea was now laid out in the
parlor , an appetizing array of grilled finnan haddie, Scotch
eggs, toast with marmalade, an d scones with jam and clotted
cream, a ccompanying an enorm ous pot of strong black tea. I
inhaled the fragrant steam fro m the table and sighed with
pleasure.
“It’ s goi ng to be rather a wrenc h, going back to no tea,” I
observed, pourin g out for everyo ne. “I don’ t suppose we’ll get
any in America for another , what—three or four years?”“Oh, I wouldna say that,” Jamie said judiciously . “Depends
where w e go back to, aye? Y e can get tea fine in places like
Philadelphia or Charleston. Y e only need to ken a good
smuggler or two, and if Captai n Hickman’ s no been sunk or
hanged by the time we go back…”
I put down my cup and stared at him.
“Y ou do n’ t mean you aren’ t pla nning to go ho—to go back
to the Ridge?” I  had a sudden empty feeling in the pit of my
stomach, remem bering our plans for the New House, the smell
of balsam fir , a nd the quiet of the mountains. Did he really
mean to move to Boston or Philadelphia?
“No,” he  said, surprised. “Of co urse we shall go back there.
But if I mean to  be in the printing trade, Sassenach, we shall
need to be in a city for a time, no? Only ‘til the war is over ,”
he said, encouraging.
“Oh,” I said in a small voice. “Y es. Of course.” I drank tea,
not tasti ng it. How could I hav e been so stupid? I had never
once thought that, of course,  a printing press would be
pointless on Fraser ’ s Ridge. I n part, I supposed, I simply
hadn’ t really believed he would  g et his press b ack, let alone
thought ahead to the logical conclusion if he did.
But now he had his Bonnie back, and the future had
suddenly acquired a disagreeable solidity . Not that cities didn’ t
have considerable advantages, I told myself stoutly . I could
finally acquire a decent set of medical instruments, replenish
my medicines—why , I could even make penicillin and ether
again! W ith a little better appetite, I took a Scotch egg.
“Speaking of smugglers,” Jamie was saying to Ian, “what is
it ye have in your coat? A present for one of the ladies at
Madame Jeanne’ s?”
Ian gave his u ncle a cold look and removed the small
package from his pocket.
“A wee bit o’ French lace. For my mam.”
“Good lad,” Jamie said with approval.“What a sweet t hought, Ian,” I said. “Did you—I mean, was
Madame Jeanne still in situ? ”
He nodded, putting the package back into his coat.
“She is. And ver ra eager to renew her acquaintance wi’ you ,
Uncle,” he added, with a slight ly malicious grin. “She asked
would ye care to come round this evening for a bit of
entertainment.”
Jamie’ s nose twitched as he glanced at me.
“Oh, I think not, Ian. I’ll send a note saying we shall wait
upon he r tomorrow morning at eleven. Though ye’re free to
take up her invit ation yourself, of course.” It was clear that he
was only teasing, but Ian shook his head.
“Nay , I wouldna  go wi’ a whore. Not ‘til it’ s settled between
Rachel and me,” he said serious ly . “One way or the other . But
I sha llna take an other woman to my bed until she tells me that
I must.”
W e both looked at him in some surprise across the teacups.
“Y ou do  mean it, then,” I said. “Y ou feel… er… betrothed
to her?”
“W ell, of course he does, Sassenach,” Jamie said, reaching
for another slice of toast. “He left her his dog.”
 
I R OSE LA TE a nd leisurely next morning, and as Jamie
and Ian were likely to be some time about their business, I
dressed and went shopping. Edinbur gh being a city of
commerce, Jamie had been able to convert our stock of gold—
still quite a lot of it left—to bank drafts and cash, as well as to
make ar rangements for deposition of the cache of letters we
had accumulated since Fort T iconderoga. He had left a fat
purse fo r my use, and I proposed  to spend the day shopping, as
well as collecting my new spectacles.
It w as with thes e perched proudly on my nose and a bag
containing a selection of the be st of the herbs and medicinesavailable from Haugh’ s Apo thecary that I returned to
Howard’ s hotel at teatime, with a rare appetite.
My appetite received a slight check, though, when the
hotel’ s majordomo stepped out of his sanctum, wearing a
slightly pained expression, and a sked if he might have a word,
madam?
“W e do appreciate the honor of General Fraser ’ s…
presence,” he said apologetically , conducting me to a small,
cramped stairwe ll leading to the basement. “A great man, and
a very fine war rior , and of course we are cognizant of the
heroic n ature of  the … er… the manner of his death. It’ s only
that… w ell, I hesitate to menti on it, madam, but a coal-man
this morning mentioned a … smell.”
This last word w as so discreet that he fairly hissed it into
my ear as he us hered me of f th e stair and into the Howard’ s
coal cell ar , where we had made arrangements for the general
to re pose in dign ity until we left for the Highlands. The smell
itself was not ne arly so discreet, and I snatched a handkerchief
from my pocket and clapped it to my nose. There was a small
window high up in one wall, fr om which a dim, smeary light
seeped into the basement. Ben eath this was a wide chute,
under which stood a small mountain of coal.
In solitary dignity , draped with a canvas, the general’ s cof fin
stood w ell apart , lit by a solemn beam from the tiny window .
A beam that g leamed from the small puddle beneath the
cof fin. The general was leaking.
 
“AND SA W THE skull beneath the skin,” I  quoted, tying
a turpentine-soaked rag about my head, just under my nose,
“and br eastless cr eatur es under  gr ound leaned backwar d with
a lipless grin.”
“Apt,” said Andy Bell, giving me a sideways glance. “Y our
own, is it?”“No, a gentlem an named Eliot,” I told him. “As you say ,
though—apt.”
Given the agitation of the hotel  staf f, I thought I had better
take steps without waiting for Jamie and Ian to return, and
after a moment’ s thought, had sent the bootboy on the run to
inquire if Mr . B ell might like to come and observe something
interesting in the medical line?
“The light’ s wretched,” Bell said, standing on tiptoe to peer
down into the cof fin.
“I’ve called for a couple of lanterns,” I assured him. “And
buckets.” “A ye , buckets,” he agreed, looking thoughtful.
“What d ’ye think, though, for what ye might call the longer
term? It’ll be some days to get him intae the Highlands—
maybe weeks, this time o’ year .”
“If w e tidy things up a bit, I thought perhaps you would
know a discreet blacksmith who might be able to come and
patch the lining.” A seam in the lead foil lining the cof fin had
come apart, probably from the jostling involved in getting it
from the ship, but it looked like a fairly simple repair—granted
a bl acksmith with a strong s tomach and a low level of
superstition regarding corpses.
“Mmm.” He had taken out a sketching block and was
making preliminary drawings, light notwithstanding. He
scratched his potatolike nose with the end of his silver pencil,
thinking. “Could do that, aye. But there are other ways.”
“W ell, w e could  boil him down  to the bones, yes,” I said, a
little testily . “Though I hate to t hink what the hotel would say
if I asked for the lend of their laundry cauldrons.”
He laughed at that, to the undisguised horror of the footman
who had appeared on the stairway , holding two lanterns.
“Ah, dinna fash yoursel’, sonny ,” Andy Bell told him,
taking the lanterns. “Naebody here but us ghouls.”
He grinned broadly at the sound of the footman taking the
stairs three at a time, but then turned and eyed me
speculatively .“It’ s a thought, aye? I could take  him back tae my shop. Get
him af f your han ds, and naebody the wiser , sae heavy as your
box ther e is. Mean to say , like, n o one’ s going to want to gaze
upon th e dear departed’ s face once ye get him where he’ s
going, are they?”
I didn’ t take of fense at the suggestion, but shook my head.
“Putting aside the possibility of one or both of us being
taken up as body snatchers, the poor man is  my husband’ s
kinsman. And he didn’ t want to be here in the first place.”
“W ell, n ae one does, surely?” Bell said, blinking. “No much
help for it, though. The skull beneath the skin , a s your man
Eliot so movingly puts it.”
“I meant Edinbur gh, not a cof fin,” I clarified. Fortunately ,
my purchases from Haugh’ s had included a lar ge bottle of
denatured alcohol, which I had brought down, discreetly
wrapped in a rough apron procured from one of the
housemaids. “He wanted to be buried in America.”
“Really ,” Bell murmured. “Qu aint notion. Ah, well. T wo
things I can thin k of, then. Repair the leak, and fill up the box
wi’ a gallon or t wa o’ cheap gin—well, it’ s cheaper than what
ye’ve got there,” he said, seeing  my look. “Or… how long can
ye stay in Edinbur gh, do ye think?”
“W e hadn’ t meant to stay longer than a week—but we might
stretch it a day or two,” I said cautiously , unbundling the bale
of rags the majordomo had given me. “Why?”
He tilted  his head back and forth, contemplating the remains
by lantern light. An apt word, “remains.”
“Maggots,” he said succinctly . “They’ll do a nice, clean job
of it, but they d o take time. Still, if we can take most o’ the
flesh of f—hmm. Got a knife of any sort?” he asked.
I nodded, reaching into my po cket. Jamie had, after all,
given me the knife because he thought I’d need it.
“Got maggots?” I said.
 
I DR OPPED THE misshapen ba ll of lead into a saucer . It
clinked and rolled to a stop, and we all looked at it in silence.
“That’ s what killed him,” I s aid at last. Jamie crossed
himself and murmured something in Gaelic, and Ian nodded
soberly . “God rest him.”
I ha dn’ t eaten much of the e xcellent tea; the smell of
corruption linge red at the back  of my throat, in spite of the
turpentine and the virtual bath I had taken in alcohol, followed
by a  real bath in the hotel’ s tub with soap and water as hot as I
could stand.
“So,” I said, clearing my throat. “How was Madame
Jeanne?”
Jamie looked up from the bullet, his face lightening.
“Oh, verra bonnie,” he said, grinning. “She had a good bit to
say about the st ate of things in France. And a certain amount
to say about one Percival Beauchamp.”
I sat up a little straighter .
“She knows  him?”
“She does indeed. He calls at her establishment now and
then—though no t in the way of business. Or rather ,” he added,
with a sidelong  glance at Ian, “not in the way of her usual
business.”
“Smuggling?” I asked. “Or spying?”
“Possibly both, but if it’ s the latter , she wasna telling me
about it. He brin gs in quite a bit of stuf f from France, though. I
was thinking that maybe Ian and  I would go across, whilst the
general’ s doing whatever he’ s doing—how long did wee Andy
think it would take to make him decent?”
“Anything from three or four days to a week, depending on
how , um, active the maggots are.” Ian and Jamie both
shuddered reflexively . “It’ s just the same thing that happensunder ground,” I pointed out. “It will happen to all of us ,
eventually .”
“W ell, aye, it is, ” Jamie admitted, taking another scone and
ladling q uantities of cream onto it. “But it’ s generally done in
decent privacy so ye havena got to think about it.”
“The general is quite private,” I assured him, with a shade
of ac erbity . “He’ s covered in a g ood layer of bran. No one will
see a thing, unless they go poking about.”
“W ell, that’ s a t hought, isn’ t it?” Ian chipped in, sticking a
finger in the jam . “This is Edinbur gh. The place has a terrible
reputation for body snatching, because of all the doctors
wanting them to cut up for stud y . Had ye best not put a guard
on th e g eneral, just to be sure he makes it to the Highlands wi’
all his pieces?” He stuck the finger in his mouth and raised his
brows at me.
“W ell, in fact, there is  a guard ,” I admitted. “Andy Bell
suggested it, for just that reason .” I didn’ t add that Andy had
made a bid for the general’ s body himself—nor that I had told
Mr . Bell in no uncertain terms what would happen to him if
the general turned up missing.
“Y e said Andy helped ye wi th the job?” Jamie asked
curiously .
“He did. W e got on extremely well. In fact…” I hadn’ t been
going to mention the subject of  our conversation until Jamie
had had a pint  or so of whisky , but the moment seemed
opportune, so I plumped in.
“I was describing various things  to him while we worked—
interesting sur geries and medical trivia, you’ll know the sort of
things.”
Ian murmured something under his breath about ghoulies of
a feather , but I ignored him.
“A ye, so?” Jamie was looking wary; he knew something
was coming but not what it was.“W ell,” I said, t aking a breath, “the long and the short of it
is that he suggested I write a book. A medical book.”
Jamie’ s eyebrows had risen slowly , but he nodded at me to
go on.
“A sort of manual for regular people, not for doctors. W ith
principles of proper hygiene an d nutrition, and guides to the
common sorts of illness, how to make up simple medicines,
what to do for wounds and bad teeth—that sort of thing.”
The brows were still up, but he  kept nodding, finishing the
last bite of scone. He swallowed.
“A ye, well, it so unds a good sort of book—and surely ye’d
be th e pe rson to write it. Did he happen to ‘suggest’ how much
he thou ght it might cost to have such a thing printed and
bound?”
“Ah.” I let out the breath I’d be en holding. “He’ll do three
hundred copies, a maximum of a  hundred fifty pages, buckram
binding, and  distribute them through his shop, in exchange for
the twelve years’ rent he owes you for your printing press.”
Jamie’ s eyes bulged and his face went red.
“And he’ s throwing in the maggots for free. And  the guard,”
I ad ded hastily , shoving the po rt in front of him before he
could speak. He seized the glass and downed it in a gulp.
“That w ee grasper!” he said, when he could speak. “Y e
didna sign anything, did ye?” h e asked anxiously . I shook my
head.
“I did tell him I thought you’d maybe want to bar gain with
him,” I of fered meekly .
“Oh.” His color began to recede toward normal levels.
“I do want to,” I said, looking down at my hands, clasped
together in my lap.
“Y e’d never said anything about wanting to write a book
before, Auntie,” Ian said, curious.“W ell, I hadn’ t really thought a bout it,” I said defensively .
“And it would h ave been terribly dif ficult and expensive to do
while we were living on the Ridge.”
Jamie m uttered, “Expensive,” and poured another glass of
port, which he d rank more slowly , making occasional faces at
the taste as he thought.
“Y e really want this, Sassenach? ” he said at last, and at my
nod, set down the glass with a sigh.
“All right,” he said with resign ation. “But ye’re having a
leather -bound special edition, too, wi’ gilded end pages. And
five hundred copies. I mean, ye’ll want some to take back to
America, won’ t you?” he added, seeing my stunned look.
“Oh. Y es. I would like that.”
“W ell, then.” He picked up the bell and rang for the maid.
“T ell the  young woman to take  away this wretched stuf f and
bring some decent whisky . W e’ll toast your book. And then I’ll
go and speak to the wicked wee man.”
 
I H AD A FRES H QUIRE of good-quality paper . I had
half a dozen stu rdy goose quills, a silver penknife with which
to sharpen them, and an inkwell  provided by the hotel—rather
battered but filled, the majordomo had assured me, with the
very best iron-gall ink. Jamie and Ian had gone to France for a
week, to look into various int eresting leads given them by
Madame Jeanne, leaving me to mind the general and
commence my book. I had all the time and leisure I required.
I too k a sheet of  paper , pristine a nd creamy , placed it just so,
and dipped my quill, excitement thrumming in my fingers.
I closed my eyes in reflex, then opened them again. Where
ought I to begin?
Begin at  the beginning and go on till you come to the end:
then stop . The line from Alice’ s Adventu r es in W onderland
drifted through  my mind, and I smiled. Good advice, Isupposed—but only if you happened to know where the
beginning was, and I didn’ t quite.
I twiddled the quill a bit, thinking.
Perhaps I should have an outline? That seemed sensible—
and a little less daunting than starting straight in to write. I
lowered the quill and held it poised above the paper for a
moment, then picked it up again. An outline would have a
beginning, too, wouldn’ t it?
The ink was beg inning to dry on the point. Rather crossly , I
wiped it  and was just about to  dip it again, when the maid
scratched discreetly at the door .
“Mrs. Fraser? There’ s a gentleman downstairs, askin’ to see
ye,” she  said. From her air of respect, I supposed it couldn’ t be
Andy Bell. Besides, she likely would have said so if it was;
everyone in Edinbur gh knew Andy Bell.
“I’ll come down,” I said, rising. Perhaps my subconscious
would come to some kind of conclusion regarding beginnings
while I dealt with this gentleman, whomever he was.
Whomever he was, he was  a ge ntleman, I saw that at once .
He was also Percival Beauchamp.
“Mrs. Fraser ,” he said, his face lighting with a smile as he
turned at the sound of my step. “Y our servant, madame .”
“Mr . Be auchamp,” I said, allowing him to take my hand and
raise it to his lips. An elegant person of the time would
doubtless have said something like, “I fear you take me at a
disadvantage, sir ,”  wit h anything between haugh tiness and
flirtation. Not being an elegant  person of the time, I merely
said, “What are you  doing here?”
Mr . Beauchamp , on the other hand, had any amount of
elegance.
“Looking for you, dear lady ,” he  replied, and gave my hand
a sli ght squeeze before releasing  it. I repressed a reflexive ur ge
to w ipe it on my dress and nodd ed toward a pair of armchairs
arranged by the window .“Not that I’m not flattered,” I  said, arranging my skirts.
“But don’ t you want my husband? Oh!” I said, another thought
occurring. “Or did you want to consult me medically?”
His lips  twitched as though he thought this an amusing
notion, b ut he shook his head respectfully . “Y our husband is in
France—or so Jeanne LeGrand  tells me. I came to speak to
you.”
“Why?”
He l ifted his sm ooth dark brows at that but didn’ t answer at
once, in stead lif ting a finger in a gesture to the hotel clerk to
summon refresh ment. I didn’ t know if he was merely being
polite or wanted the time to fo rmulate his address, now that
he’d seen me again. In any case, he took his time.
“I have a propo sition for your husband, madame . I would
have spoken with him,” he said,  forestalling my question, “but
he h ad left for  France already when I learned he was in
Edinbur gh, and  I, alas, must leave myself before he will
return. I thought it better to spe ak directly with you, though,
rather th an to explain myself in  a letter . There are things it’ s
wiser no t to commit to writing, you know ,” he added, with a
sudden smile that made him very appealing.
“All right,” I said, settling myself. “Say on.”
 
I L IFTE D THE GLASS of bra ndy and took a sip, then
raised it and looked critically through it.
“No, it’ s just brandy ,” I said. “Not opium.”
“I b eg y our pard on?” He looked involuntarily into his own
glass, just in case, and I laughed.
“I mean,” I clarified, “that good as it is, it’ s not nearly good
enough to make me believe a story like that.”
He didn’ t take of fense but tilted his head to one side.“Can you think of any reason why I should invent such a
tale?”
“No,” I admitte d, “but that doesn’ t mean there isn’ t one,
does it?”
“What I have told you is not impossible, is it?”
I considered that one for a moment.
“Not technically  imp ossible,” I conceded. “Bu t certainly
implausible.”
“Have y ou ever  seen an ostric h?” he asked, and, without
inquiring, poured more brandy into my glass.
“Y es. Why?”
“Y ou must admit that ostriches are frankly implausible,” he
said. “But clearly not impossible.”
“One to you,” I conceded. “But I do think that Fer gus being
the lost heir to the Comte St. Germain’ s fortune is slightly
more implausible than an ostrich. Particularly if you consider
the p art about the marriage licen se. I mean … a lost legitimate
heir? It is France we’re talking about, isn’ t it?”
He laughed at that. His face had flushed with brandy and
amusement, and I could see how  very attractive he must have
been in his yout h. He wasn’ t by any means bad-looking now ,
come to that.
“Do you  mind my asking what y ou do for a living?” I asked
curiously .
He was disconce rted by that and  rubbed a hand over his jaw
before answering, but met my eyes.
“I sl eep with rich women,” he  said, and his voice held a
faint but disturbing trace of bitterness.
“W ell, I  do hope you aren’ t reg arding me in the light of a
business opportunity . The gold-rimmed spectacles
notwithstanding, I really haven’ t got any money .”
He smiled and hid it in his brandy glass.“No, but you w ould be a great deal more entertaining than
the usual woman who does.”
“I’m flattered,” I said politely . W e sipped brandy in silence
for a bit, both thinking how to proceed. It was raining—
naturally—and t he patter of it on the street outside and the hiss
of th e fi re besid e us was soothi ng in the extreme. I felt oddly
comfortable wit h him, but after all, I couldn’ t spend all day
here; I had a book to write.
“All right,” I said. ” Why  have you told me this story? W ait
—there are two parts to that. One, why tell me rather than
Fer gus h imself? And two, what is your personal interest in the
situation, assuming it is  true?”
“I did try to tell  Mr . Fraser—Fer gus Fraser , that is,” he said
slowly . “He declined to speak with me.”
“Oh!” I said, rec alling somethin g. “W as it you who tried to
abduct him, in North Carolina?”
“No, it wasn’ t,”  he said prompt ly , and with every evidence
of sincerity . “I did hear about the occasion, but I don’ t know
who his  assailant was. More th an likely , it was someone he
had ann oyed with his work.” He shrugged that of f and
continued. “As for my personal interest… that runs along with
the reason for my telling your husband—because I’m telling
you  only as your husband is unavailable.”
“And that would be?”
He glan ced quickly round to see that we were not
overheard. No one was near us, but he still lowered his voice.
“I—and the interests I repre sent in France—wish the
rebellion in America to succeed.”
I did n’ t know w hat I’d been expecting, but it wasn’ t that,
and I gawked at him.
“Y ou expect me to believe you’re an American patriot?”
“Not at all,” he  said. “I don’ t care about politics in the
slightest. I’m a man of busine ss.” He eyed me assessingly .
“Have you ever heard of a company called Hortalez et Cie ?”“No.”
“It is ostensibly an importing and exporting business, run
out of Spain. What it actually is  is a facade for the purpose of
funneling mone y to the Americans, without visibly involving
the French government. W e have so far moved many
thousands through it, mostly to buy arms and ammunition.
Madame  LeGran d mentioned the company to your husband
but without telling him what it was. She left it to me to decide
whether to reveal the true nature of Hortalez  to him.”
“Y ou’re a French intelligence agent—is that what you’re
telling me?” I said, the penny dropping at last.
He bowed.
“But you aren’ t French, I don’ t think,” I added, looking hard
at him. “Y ou’re English.”
“I was.” He looked away . “I am a citizen of France now .”
He fell silent, and I leaned back a little in my chair ,
watching him— and wondering. W ondering both how much of
this was true and, in a more d istant way , whether he might
conceivably be an ancestor of mine. Beauchamp was not an
uncommon name, and there was no great physical resemblance
between us. His hands were long-fingered and graceful, like
mine, but the fingers were shaped dif ferently . The ears? His
were somewhat lar ge, though delicately shaped. I really had no
idea what my o wn ears looked like, but assumed that if they
were no ticeably lar ge, Jamie would have mentioned it at some
point.
“What i s it that you want?” I asked quietly at last, and he
looked up.
“T ell your husband what I have told you, if you please,
madame,”  he said, quite se rious for once. “ And suggest to him
that it is not only in the best interests of his foster son to
pursue this matter—but very much in the interests of
America.”
“How is that?”He lifted one shoulder , slim and elegant.
“The Comte St. Germain had e xtensive land holdings in a
part of America  that is current ly held by Great Britain. The
French part of his estate—currently being squabbled over by a
number of claimants—is extremely valuable. If Fer gus Fraser
can be proved to  be Claudel Rakoczy—Rakoczy is the family
name, you understand—and the  heir to this fortune, he would
be a ble t o use it to help in financing the revolution. From what
I kn ow o f him and his activities—and I know a good deal, by
this time—I think he would be amenable to these aims. If the
revolution is successful, then those who backed it would have
substantial influence over whatever government is formed.”
“And you could stop sleeping with rich women for money?”
A wry smile spread over his face.
“Precisely .” He rose and bowed deeply to me. “A great
pleasure to speak with you, madame .”
He had almost reached the door when I called after him.
“Monsieur  Beauchamp!”
“Y es?” He turned and looked back, a dark, slender man
whose face was marked with humor—and with pain, I thought.
“Have you any children?”
He looked completely startled at that.
“I really don’ t think so.”
“Oh,” I said. “I only wondered. Good day to you, sir .” SIC TRANSIT GLORIA MUNDI
 The Scottish Highlands
 
I T W AS A LONG W ALK from the farmhouse at
Balnain. As it was early January in Scotland, it was also wet
and cold. V ery wet. And very  c old. No snow —and I rather
wished there had been, as it m ight have discouraged Hugh
Fraser ’ s insane notion—but it had been raining for days, in
that dism al way  that makes hea rths smoke, and even clothes
that hav e not been outside grow damp, and drives the chill so
far into your bones that you think you’ll never be warm again.
I’d c ome to this  conviction myself some hours ago, but the
only alte rnative to continuing to slog through the rain and mud
was to lie down and die, and  I hadn’ t quite reached that
extremity . Y et.
The creaking of the wheels stopped abruptly , with that
slushing sound that indicated they had sunk once more in the
mud. Under his breath, Jamie said something grossly
inappropriate to  a funeral, and Ian smothered a laugh with a
cough—which became real and went hoarsely on and on,
sounding like the bark of a lar ge, tired dog.
I to ok the flask  of whisky out from under my cloak—I
didn’ t think something with that  kind of alcohol content would
freeze, but I wasn’ t taking any chances—and handed it to Ian.
He gulped, wheezed as though he’d been hit by a truck,
coughed some more, and then handed the flask back, breathing
hard, and nodded thanks. His nose was red and running.
So were  all the noses around me. Some of them possibly
from grief, though I suspected that either the weather or the
catarrh was responsible for mo st of them. The men had all
gathered withou t comment—they’d had practice—around the
cof fin and, with concerted heav ing, managed to get it out of
the ruts and onto a firmer section of road, this covered mostly
in rocks.“How lo ng do you think it’ s been since Simon Fraser last
came home?” I whispered to Jamie, as he came back to take
his p lace beside me toward the end of the funeral procession.
He shrugged and wiped his nose with a soggy handkerchief.
“Y ears. He wouldna really have had cause, would he?”
I supposed not. As a result of the wake held the night before
at th e farmhouse—a place a litt le smaller than Lallybroch but
constructed on much the same l ines—I now knew a great deal
more ab out Sim on Fraser ’ s military career and exploits than I
had befo re, but the eulogy hadn ’ t included a timetable. If he’d
fought everywhere they said he had, though, he would hardly
have had time to change his socks between campaigns, let
alone come home to Scotland. A nd the estate wasn’ t his, after
all; he was the s econd youngest of nine children. His wife, the
tiny bainisq  trudgin g at the head of the procession on her
brother -in-law Hugh’ s arm, had  no household of her own, I
gathered, and lived with Hugh’ s family , she having no children
alive—or nearby , at least—to care for her .
I d id wonder whether she was pleased that we’d brought
him hom e. W ould it not have been better just to know that
he’d die d abroad , doing his duty  and doing it well, than to be
presented with the dismayingly pitiful detritus of her husband,
no matter how professionally packaged?
But she had seemed, if not happy , at least somewhat
gratified at being the center of such a fuss. Her crumpled face
had flushed and seemed to unfold a little during the festivities
of the night, and now she walked on with no sign of flagging,
doggedly stepping over the ruts made by her husband’ s cof fin.
It was Hugh’ s fault. Simon’ s much elder brother and the
owner of Balnain, he was a spindly little old man, barely taller
than his widowed sister -in-law , and with romantic notions. It
was his pronouncement that, instead of planting Simon
decently in the family burying ground, the family’ s most
gallant w arrior s hould be interred in a place more suited to his
honor and the reverence due him.Bainisq , pronou nced “b ann-eeshg,” meant a little old lady;
was a little old man merely an “eeshg”? I wondered, looking at
Hugh’ s back. I thought I wouldn’ t ask until we were back at
the house—assuming we made it there by nightfall.
At long last, Corrimony hove into sight. According to
Jamie, t he name meant “a holl ow in the moor ,” and it was.
W ithin t he cup-shaped hollow in the grass and heather rose a
low dom e; as we grew closer , I saw that it was made from
thousands and thousands of small river rocks, most the size of
a fist, some the size of a person’ s head. And around this dark
gray rain-slicked cairn was a circle of standing stones.
I clutch ed Jamie’ s arm by ref lex. He glanced at me in
surprise, then realized what I was looking at and frowned.
“D’ye hear anything, Sassenach?” he murmured.
“Only the wind.” This had been moaning along with the
funeral procession, mostly drowning out the old man chanting
the cor onach  b efore the cof f in, but as we came out onto the
open moor , it pi cked up speed and rose several tones in pitch,
sending cloaks and coats and skirts flapping like ravens’
wings.
I kept a cautious eye on the stones but sensed nothing as we
drew to a halt b efore the cairn. It was a passage tomb, of the
general kind they called a clava  c airn; I had no  notion what
that sign ified, but Uncle Lamb had had photographs of many
such sites. The passage was meant to orient with some
astronomical object on some significant date. I glanced up at
the l eaden, weeping sky and decided that today was probably
not the day , anyway .
“W e din na ken who was buried there,” Hugh had explained
to us the day before. “But clea rly a great chieftain of some
sort. Mu st ha’ been, the terrible trouble it is to build a cairn
like that!”
“A ye, to  be sure,” Jamie had s aid, adding delicately . “The
great chieftain: he’ s no buried there anymore?”“Oh, no, ” Hugh assured us. “Th e earth took him, long since.
There’ s no but a wee stain of his bones there now . And ye
needna be worrit about there b eing a curse upon the place,
either .”
“Oh, good,” I murmured, but he paid no attention.
“Some lang nebbit opened the tomb a hundred years ago or
more, so if there was to  b e a curse on it, it surely went of f
attached to him.”
This wa s comforting, and in fa ct none of the people now
standing about the cairn seemed at all put of f or bothered by
its p roximity . Though it might j ust be that they had lived near
it for so long that it had become no more than a feature of the
landscape.
There w as a certain amount of p ractical discussion, the men
looking at the cairn and shaking their heads dubiously ,
gesturing in turn toward the ope n passage that led to the burial
chamber , then toward the top o f the cairn, where the stones
had either been removed or had simply fallen in and been
cleared away below . The wom en gravitated closer together ,
waiting. W e had arrived in a fog of fatigue the day before, and
while I had be en introduced to all of them, I had trouble
keeping the proper name attached to the proper face. In truth,
their faces all l ooked similar—thin, worn, and pale, with a
sense of chronic exhaustion about them, a tiredness much
deeper than waking the dead would account for .
I had a s udden recollection of M rs. Bug’ s funeral. Makeshift
and hasty—and yet carried out with dignity and genuine
sorrow on the part of the mourners. I thought these people had
barely known Simon Fraser .
How mu ch better to have rega rded his own last wish as
stated and left him on the battlefield with his fallen comrades,
I tho ught. But w hoever said funerals were for the benefit of
the living had had the right of it.
The sense of failure and futility that had followed the defeat
at Saratoga had made his own of ficers determined toaccomplish something , to make a proper gesture toward a man
they had loved and a warrior th ey honored. Perhaps they had
wanted t o send him home, too, b ecause of their desire for their
own homes.
The same sense of failure—plus a deadly streak of
romanticism—had doubtless made General Bur goyne insist
upon th e gesture; I thought h e likely felt his own honor
required it. And then Hugh Fraser , reduced to a hand-to-mouth
existence in the wake of Culloden and faced with the
unexpected homecoming of hi s younger brother , unable to
produce much in the way of a funeral, but deeply romantic
himself… and the end of it thi s strange procession, bringing
Simon Fraser to a home no longer his and a wife who was a
stranger to him.
And his place will know him no mor e . The line came to
mind as the men made their decision and began to dismount
the c of fin from its wheels. I had drawn closer , along with the
other women, and found I was now standing within a foot or
two of one of the standing stones that ringed the cairn. These
were smaller than the stones on Craigh na Dun—no more than
two or three fee t high. Moved by sudden impulse, I reached
out and touched it.
I ha dn’ t expected anything to happen, and it very luckily
didn’ t. Though had I suddenly  vanished in the midst of the
burial, it would have substantially enlivened the event.
No buzz ing, no screaming, no sensation at all. It was just a
rock. Af ter all, I thought, there was no reason why all  standing
stones should be assumed to mark time portals. Presumably
the anci ent builders had used stones to mark any place of
significance—and surely a cairn  like this one must have been
significant. I wondered what  sort of man—or woman,
perhaps?—had l ain here, leaving no more than an echo of their
bones, so much more fragile than the enduring rocks that
sheltered them.
The cof fin was lowered to the ground and—with much
grunting and puf fing—shoved through the passage into theburial chamber in the center of the tomb. There was a lar ge flat
slab of stone t hat lay against the cairn, this incised with
strange cup-shaped marks, pres umably made by the original
builders. Four of the stronger  men took hold of this and
maneuvered it slowly over the top of the cairn, sealing the hole
above the chamber .
It fe ll wi th a muf fled thud that se nt a few small rocks rolling
down the sides of the cairn. The men came down then, and we
all stood rather awkwardly rou nd it, wondering what to do
next.
There was no p riest here. The funeral Mass for Simon had
been said earlier , in a small, bare stone church, before the
procession to this thoroughly pa gan burial. Evidently , Hugh’ s
researches hadn ’ t discovered anything regarding rites for such
things.
Just when it seemed that we would be obliged simply to turn
round and slog our way back to the farmhouse, Ian coughed
explosively and stepped forward.
The funeral procession was drab in the extreme, none of the
bright tartans that had graced Hi ghland ceremonies in the past.
Even Jamie’ s appearance was subdued, cloaked, and his hair
covered with a black slouch h at. The sole exception to the
general somberness was Ian.
He had provoked stares when he’d come downstairs this
morning, and the staring hadn’ t stopped. W ith good reason.
He’d shaved most of his head a nd greased the remaining strip
of hair into a stif f ridge down th e middle of his scalp, to which
he had attached a dangling ornament of turkey feathers with a
pierced silver sixpence. He was  wea ring a cloak , but under it
had put on his worn buckskins, with the blue-and-white
wampum armlet his wife, Emily , had made for him.
Jamie had looked him slowly  up and down when he
appeared and nodded, one corner of his mouth turning up.
“It w illna make a dif ference, ay e?” he’d said quietly to Ian
as we headed for the door . “Th ey’ll still ken ye for who yeare.”
“W ill th ey?” Ian had said, bu t then ducked out into the
downpour without waiting for an answer .
Jamie had undoubtedly been rig ht; the Indian finery was a
dress reh earsal in preparation for his arrival at Lallybroch, for
we were bound there directly , once Simon’ s body was decently
disposed of and the farewell whisky had been drunk.
It ha d its uses now , though. Ian slowly removed his cloak
and handed it to Jamie, then walked to the entrance of the
passage and turned to face the mourners—who watched this
apparition, bug-eyed. He spread his hands, palms upward,
closed his eyes, put back his head so the rain ran down his
face, and began to chant some thing in Mohawk. He was no
singer , a nd his voice was so hoarse from his cold that many
words broke or disappeared, but  I caught Simon’ s name in the
beginning. The general’ s death song. It didn’ t go on for long,
but when he dr opped his hands, the congregation uttered a
deep, collective sigh.
Ian w alked away , not looking b ack, and without a word the
mourners followed. It was finished. BY THE WIND GRIEVED
 
T HE WEA THER CONTINUED to be terrible, with fitful
gusts of  snow now added to the  rain, and Hugh pressed us to
stay , at least for another few days, until the sky should clear .
“It might well be Michaelmas before that happens,” Jamie
said to him, smiling. “Nay , cousin, we’ll be of f.”
And so we were , bundled in all the clothes we possessed. It
took more than two days to re ach Lallybroch, and we were
obliged to shelter overnight in an abandoned croft, putting the
horses in  the cow byre next to us. There was no furniture nor
peat for the hearth, and half the  roof had gone, but the stone
walls broke the wind.
“I miss my dog,” Ian grumbled, huddling under his cloak
and pulling a blanket over his goose-pimpled head.
“W ould he sit on your heid?” Jamie inquired, taking a
firmer hold on me as the win d roared past our shelter and
threatened to rip away the rest of the threadbare thatch
overhead. “Y e should have thought about it being January ,
before ye shaved your scalp.”
“W ell enough for you,” Ian replied, peering balefully out
from under his blanket. “Y e’ve got Auntie Claire to keep
warm with.”
“W ell, ye might get a wife you rself one of these days. Is
Rollo go ing to sleep with the b oth of ye when ye do?” Jamie
inquired.
“Mmphm,” Ian said, and pulled  the blanket down over his
face, shivering.
I shivere d, too, in spite of Jamie’ s warmth, our combined
cloaks, t hree wo olen petticoats,  and two pairs of stockings. I
had bee n in a n umber of cold places in my life, but there’ ssomething remarkably penetrating  about the Scottish cold. In
spite of my longing for a warm fire and the remembered
coziness of Lallybroch, though,  I was almost as uneasy about
our approaching homecoming as Ian was—and Ian had been
growing more like a cat on hot bricks, the farther we got into
the Highlands. He twitched and muttered to himself now ,
thrashing in his blankets in the darkened confines of the shed.
I had wondered when we landed in Edinbur gh whether we
ought to send w ord of our arrival to Lallybroch. When I’d
suggested this, though, Jamie laughed.
“D’ye think we stand the slight est chance of getting within
ten m iles o’ the  place without everyone hearing of it? Never
fear , Sassenach, ” he’d assured me. “The minute we set foot in
the Highlands, everyone from Loch Lomond to Inverness will
know that Jamie Fraser ’ s comin’ home with his English witch,
and a red Indian with him, to boot.”
“English witch?” I said, not sure whether to be entertained
or of fen ded. “Did they call m e that? When we were at
Lallybroch?”
“Frequently to your face, Sassenach,” he said dryly . “But ye
didna have enough Gaelic then t o know it. They didna mean it
as an  ins ult, a nighean,”  he added more gently . “Nor will they
now . It’ s only that Highlanders call a thing as they see it.”
“Hmm,” I said, a trifle taken back.
“They’ll no be wrong, now , will they?” he’d asked,
grinning.
“Are you implying that I look  like a witch?”
“W ell, not sae much just this minute,” he said, narrowing
one eye judiciously . “First thing in the morning, maybe—aye,
that’ s a more fearsome prospect.”
I h adn’ t  a looking glass, not having thought to acquire one
in Edinb ur gh. I did still have a comb, though, and snuggling
now with my he ad beneath Jamie’ s chin, resolved to stop some
way sho rt of Lallybroch and em ploy it thoroughly , rain or no
rain. Not, I thou ght, that it would likely make much dif ferencewhether I arrived looking like the Queen of England or like a
dandelion gone to seed. It was  Ian’ s homecoming that was
important.
On the other h and… I wasn’ t sure quite what my own
welcome might be. There was unfinished business, to put it
mildly , between myself and Jenny Murray .
W e h ad been good friends once.  I hoped we might be again.
But she had be en the chief engineer of Jamie’ s marriage to
Laoghaire MacKenzie. From the best of motives, no doubt;
she’d worried for him, lonely a nd rootless on his return from
captivity in England. And in all justice, she’d thought me
dead.
What had she thought, I wondered, when I’d suddenly
appeared again? That I had abandoned Jamie before Culloden
and then had second thoughts? There hadn’ t been time for
explanations and rapprochement—and there had  been that
very aw kward m oment when Laoghaire, summoned by Jenny ,
had showed up at Lallybroch, accompanied by her daughters,
taking Jamie and me very much by surprise.
A bubble of lau ghter rose in m y chest at thought of that
encounter , though I certainly hadn’ t laughed at the time. W ell,
perhaps there would be time to  talk now , once Jenny and Ian
had recovered from the shock of their youngest son’ s
homecoming.
I bec ame aware, from subtle shi ftings behind me, that while
the horses were breathing heavi ly and peacefully in their byre
and Ian had finally subsided into phlegm-rattling snores, I
wasn’ t t he only one still lying awake thinking of what might
await us.
“Y ou aren’ t asleep, either , are you?” I whispered to Jamie.
“No,” he said so ftly , and shifted his weight again, gathering
me m ore closely against him. “ Thinking about the last time I
came home. I had such fear—and a verra wee bit of hope. I
imagine it’ s maybe like that for the lad now .”“And for you n ow?” I asked, folding my own hands over
the a rm that enc ircled me, feeling the solid, graceful bones of
wrist an d forearm, gently touching his maimed right hand. He
sighed deeply .
“Dinna ken,” he said. “But it’ll be all right. Y ou’re with me,
this time.”
 
THE WIND DROPPED sometime in the night, and the
day , by some m iracle, dawned clear and bright. Still cold as a
polar bear ’ s bottom, but not r aining. I thought that a good
omen.
Nobody spoke as we cleared th e last high pass that led to
Lallybroch and saw the house b elow . I felt a loosening in my
chest and only then realized ho w long I’d been holding my
breath.
“It h asn’ t changed, has it?” I sa id, my breath white on the
cold air .
“There’ s a new roof on the dovecote,” Ian said. “And
Mam’ s s heep pen is bigger .” He was doing his best to sound
nonchalant, but there was no mistaking the eagerness in his
voice. He nudged his horse and pulled a little in front of us, the
turkey feathers in his hair lifting on the breeze.
It was early afternoon, and the place was quiet; the morning
chores had been done, the evening milking and supper -making
not yet started. I didn’ t see any one outside save a couple of
big, shaggy Highland cattle munching hay in the near pasture,
but the chimneys were smoking and the big white-harled
farmhouse had its usual hospitable, settled air .
W ould Bree and Roger ever g o back here? I wondered
suddenly . She’d mentioned it, when the notion of their leaving
became fact and they had begun to plan.
“It’ s vacant,” she’d said, eyes fixed on the twentieth-
century-style shirt she was making. “For sale. Or it was, when
Roger went there a few years—ago?” She looked up with awry smile; it w asn’ t really possible to discuss time in any
customary way .  “I’d like the kids to live there, maybe. But
we’ll just have to see how… things work out.”
She’d g lanced t hen at Mandy , asleep in her cradle, faintly
blue around the lips.
“It w ill work ou t fine,” I’d said firmly . “Everything will be
just fine.”
Lor d , I prayed now silently , that they might be safe!
Ian h ad swung o f f his horse and was waiting impatiently for
us. As we dismo unted, he headed for the door , but our arrival
had been noted, and it swung wide before he could touch it.
Jenny stopped dead in the doorw ay . She blinked, once, and
her head tilted slowly back as her eyes traveled up the long,
buckskin-covered body , with its roped muscles and small
scars, to the cre sted, feathered head with its tattooed face, so
carefully expres sionless—save for the eyes, whose hope and
fear he could not hide, Mohawk or no.
Jenny’ s mouth twitched. Once… twice … then her face
broke and she began to utter small, hysterical whoops that
turned into unmistakable laughter . She gulped, whooped again,
and laughed so hard that she staggered backward into the
house an d had to sit down on th e bench in the hall, where she
bent double with her arms wrapped round her middle and
laughed until the sound gave out and her breath came in faint,
wheezing gasps.
“Ian,” she said a t last, shaking her head. “Oh, God, Ian. My
wee lad.”
Ian looked entirely taken aback . He looked at Jamie, who
shrugged, his own mouth twitching, then back at his mother .
She gulp ed for air , her chest hea ving, then stood up, went to
him, and  wrapped her arms about him, her tear -streaked face
pressed to his side. His arms went slowly , carefully around her ,
and he held he r to him like something fragile, of immense
value.“Ian,” s he said again, and I saw her small, taut shoulders
suddenly slump. “Oh, Ian. Thank God ye’ve come in time.”
 
SHE W AS SMALLER than I had remembered, and
thinner , her hair with a little more gray in it though still darkly
vibrant—but the  deep-blue cat-eyes were just the same, as was
the natural air of command she shared with her brother .
“Leave t he horses,” she said bri skly , wiping her eyes on the
corner o f her apron. “I’ll have one o’ the lads take care of
them. Y e’ll be frozen and starving—take of f your things and
come into the parlor .” She glanced at me, with a brief look of
curiosity and something else that I couldn’ t interpret—but
didn’ t meet my eyes directly or say more than “Come,” as she
led the way to the parlor .
The house smelled familiar but strange, steeped in peat
smoke and the scent of cooki ng; someone had just baked
bread, and the yeasty smell floated down the hall from the
kitchen. The hall itself was nea rly as cold as the outdoors; all
the r ooms had th eir doors closed tight to keep in the heat from
their fires, and a welcome wave of warmth eddied out when
she opened the door to the parlor , turning to pull Ian in first.
“Ian,” she said, in a tone I’d n ever heard her use before.
“Ian, they’ve come. Y our son’ s come home.”
Ian t he e lder wa s sitting in a lar ge armchair close to the fire,
a warm rug over his legs. He s truggled to his feet at once, a
little uns teady o n the wooden pe g he wore in replacement of a
leg lost in battle, and took a few steps toward us.
“Ian,” Jamie said, his voice soft with shock. “God, Ian.”
“Oh, aye,” Ian said, his own voice wry . “Dinna fash; it’ s still
me.”
Phthisis, they called it. Or doct ors did. It meant “wasting,”
in the Greek. Laymen calle d it by the blunter name
“consumption,” and the reason  why was all too apparent. It
consumed its victims, ate them  alive. A wasting disease, andwaste it  did. Ate flesh and squandered life, profligate and
cannibal.
I’d seen it many  times in Englan d of the thirties and forties,
much more here in the past. But I’d never seen it carve the
living flesh from the bones of someone I loved, and my heart
went to water and drained from my chest.
Ian had always b een whipcord thin, even in times of plenty .
Sinewy and tough, his bones a lways near the surface of his
skin, just as Y oung Ian’ s were. Now…
“I m ay cough, b ut I won’ t break,” he assured Jamie, and,
stepping forward, put his arms round Jamie’ s neck. Jamie
enfolded him very gently , the gingerness of the embrace
growing firmer as he found that  Ian didn’ t break—and closed
his eyes to keep  the tears in check. His arms tightened, trying
involuntarily to keep Ian from the abyss that all too plainly
yawned at his feet.
I c an count all m y bones . Th e Biblical qu ote came unbidden
to my mind. I q uite literally could;  th e cloth of his  shirt lay
over ribs that showed so clearly that I could see the
articulations where each one joined the protruding knobs of his
backbone.
“How lo ng?” I blurted, turning to Jenny , who was watching
the men, her ow n eyes bright with unshed tears. “How long
has he had it?”
She blinked once and swallowed.
“Y ears,” she said, steadily enoug h. “He came back from the
T olbooth in Edinbur gh with the cough, and it never left. It’ s
got worse over the last year , though.”
I nodde d. A chronic case, then; that was something. The
acute fo rm—”galloping consumption,” they called it—would
have taken him in months.
She gav e me back the question I had asked her , but with a
dif ferent meaning.
“How long?” she said, so softly that I barely heard her .“I d on’ t know ,” I said, with equal softness. “But… not
long.”
She nodded; she had known this for a long time.
“Just as  well ye came in time, then,” she said, matter -of-
fact.
Y oung I an’ s eyes had been fix ed on his father from the
moment we entered the room. The shock showed plainly on
his face, but he kept himself in hand.
“Da,” he said, a nd his voice was so hoarse that the word
emer ged in a strangled croak. He cleared it viciously and
repeated, “Da,” coming forward. The elder Ian looked at his
son, and  his face lit with a joy so profound that it eclipsed the
marks of illness and suf fering.
“Oh, Ian,” he said, holding out his arms. “My wee lad!”
 
IT W AS THE Highlands. And  it was Ian and Jenny .
Which meant that matters that m ight have been avoided out of
confusion or delicacy were instead addressed forthrightly .
“I m ay die tom orrow , or not for a year ,” Ian said frankly ,
over jam  bread and tea, hastily magicked out of the kitchen to
sustain the weary travelers until supper should be ready . “I’m
betting o n three months, myself. Five to two, if anyone fancies
a wa ger . Though I dinna ken h ow I’ll collect my winnings.”
He g rinned, the old Ian showing suddenly through his death’ s-
head face.
There w as a murmur of something not quite laughter among
the adults. There were a great many people crammed into the
parlor , f or the announcement that had brought forth bread and
jam had  also caused every inhabitant of Lallybroch to come
boiling out of its rooms and recesses, thundering down the
stairs in their anxiety to greet and reclaim their prodigal.
Y oung I an had nearly been kno cked flat and trampled by his
family’ s af fection, and this, coming on the heels of the shock
of seeing his father , had stunned him into muteness, though hekept smiling, quite helpless in th e face of a thousand questions
and exclamations.
Jenny had rescued him at last from the maelstrom, taking
him by the hand  and pushing him firmly into the parlor with
the elde r Ian, then popping bac k out herself to quell the riot
with a flashing eye and a firm word before ushering the rest of
them in an orderly fashion.
Y oung Jamie—Ian and Jenn y’ s eldest, and Jamie’ s
namesake—now lived at Lallybroch with his wife and
children, as did his sister , Maggie, and her two children, her
husband being a soldier . Y oung  Jamie was out on the estate,
but the women came to sit with  me. All of the children were
clustered round Y oung Ian, staring and asking so many
questions that they collided with  one another , and pushed and
shoved, ar guing  as to who asked what and who should be
answered first.
The children had paid no attenti on to the elder Ian’ s remark.
They already knew Grandda was dying, and the fact was of no
interest by comparison with the fact of their fascinating new
uncle. A  tiny girl with her hair  in stubby plaits sat in Y oung
Ian’ s lap, tracing the lines of his  tattoos with her fingers, now
and then sticking one inadvertently in his mouth as he smiled
and made hesitant answers to his inquisitive nieces and
nephews.
“Y e could have written,” Jamie said to Jenny , with an edge
of reproach in his voice.
“I did,” she said, with her own edge. “A year ago, when his
flesh began to melt away and we kent it was more than a
cough. I asked ye to send Y oung Ian then, if ye could.”
“Ah,” Jamie said, discomfited. “ W e must ha’ left the Ridge
before it came. But did I not write last April, to tell ye we were
coming? I sent the letter from New Bern.”
“If y e di d, I never got it. Nay wonder , with the blockade; we
see no more th an half what we used to that’ s sent fromAmerica. And if ye left last March, it’ s been a long voyage,
no?”
“A bit longer than I expected, aye,” Jamie said dryly .
“Things happened along the way .”
“So I see.” W it hout the least h esitation, she picked up his
right hand and examined the scar and the close-set fingers with
interest. She glanced at me, one eyebrow quirked, and I
nodded.
“It—he was wounded, at Saratoga,” I said, feeling oddly
defensive. “I had to.”
“It’ s a good job, ” she said, gentl y flexing his fingers. “Does
it pain ye much, Jamie?”
“It aches in the cold. Nay bother otherwise, though.”
“Whisky!” she exclaimed, sitting bolt upright. “Here ye are,
frozen t o the bone, and I’ve n ot thought—Robbie! Run and
fetch do wn the  special bottle from the shelf above the
coppers.” A gangling boy who had been hovering on the edge
of the crowd round Y oung Ian gave his grandmother a
reluctant glance, but then, catching the depth char ge of her
eye, shot out of the room to do her bidding.
The room  was more than warm ; with a peat fire simmering
on the hearth and so many p eople talking, laughing, and
exuding body heat, it was on th e ver ge of tropical. But there
was a deep chill around my heart whenever I looked at Ian.
He l ay back in his chair now , still smiling. But exhaustion
was evid ent in the slump of his bony shoulders, the droop of
his eyelids, the clear ef fort it took to keep smiling.
I l ooked  away and found Jenny  looking at me. She glanced
away at once, but I had seen speculation in her eyes, and
doubt. Y es, we’d have to talk.
 
THEY S LEPT W ARM that first night, tired to the point
of collapse, close together and enfolded by Lallybroch. ButJamie he ard the wind on the edg e of waking. It had come back
in the night, a cold moan around the eaves of the house.
He sat up in be d in the dark, hands wrapped around his
knees, li stening. The storm would be coming; he could hear
snow in the wind.
Claire lay beside him, half curled in sleep, her hair a dark
smudge across the white pillow . He listened to her breathe,
thanking God for the sound , feeling guilt at the soft,
unhindered flow of it. He’d been hearing Ian’ s cough all
evening and gone to sleep wi th the sound of that labored
breathing in his mind, if not his ears.
He’d managed from sheer exhau stion to put aside the matter
of Ian’ s illness, but it was there  with the waking, heavy as a
stone in his chest.
Claire sh ifted in her sleep, turn ing half onto her back, and
desire for her we lled up in him like water . He hesitated, aching
for Ian, guilty for what Ian had  already lost and he still had,
reluctant to wake her .
“I feel maybe like you did,” he whispered to her , too low to
wake her . “When ye came throu gh the stones. Like the world
is still there—but it’ s no the world ye had.”
He’d swear she hadn’ t wakened , but a hand came out from
the s heets, groping, and he took  it. She sighed, long and sleep-
laden, and pulled him down beside her . T ook him in her arms
and cradled him, warm on her soft breasts.
“Y ou’re the world I have,” sh e murmured, and then her
breathing changed, and she took him down with her into
safety . MEMORARAE
 
T HEY’D BEEN EA TING breakf ast in the kitchen, just
the t wo Ians, fo r his father had waked coughing before dawn
and fall en back into such a deep sleep afterward that his
mother hadn’ t wanted to waken  him, and he himself had been
hunting over the hills with his brother and nephews all night.
They had stopped on the way back at Kitty’ s house, and Y oung
Jamie had declared they would stay to eat and sleep a bit, but
Ian had been r estless, wanting to come home, though he
couldn’ t have said why .
Perhaps for this, he thought, watching his father shake salt
over his  porridg e in the same way he’d seen him do it for
fifteen years, before he’d left Scotland. He’d never once
thought of it, in all his time awa y , but now that he saw it again,
it was as though he’d never lef t, as though he’d spent every
morning of his life here at this table, watching his father eat
porridge.
He was possessed of a sudde n desire to memorize this
moment, to know and to sense every last thing about it, from
the w orn-smooth  wood under hi s elbows to the stained granite
of th e countertop and the way th e light fell through the tattered
curtains at the window , lightin g the bulge of muscle at the
corner of his father ’ s jaw as he chewed a bit of sausage.
The elder Ian g lanced up suddenly , as though feeling his
son’ s eyes on him.
“Shall w e go out on the moor?” he said. “I’ve a fancy to see
if the red deer are calving yet.”
He w as surprised at his father ’ s strength. They walked for
several miles, talking of nothing—and everything. He knew it
was so they could grow easy wi th each other again and say the
things that had to be said—but he dreaded the saying.They sto pped at last far up on a high stretch of moorland,
where they could see the roll o f the great smooth mountains
and a few wee l ochs, glittering like fish under a pale high sun.
They found a saint’ s spring, a tiny pool with an ancient stone
cross, and drank from the wate r , saying the prayer of respect
for the saint, and then sat down to rest a little way beyond.
“It was a place like this where  I died the first time,” his
father said casually , running a  wet hand over his sweating
face. H e looked rosy and healthy , though so thin. That
bothered Y oung  Ian, knowing he was dying yet seeing him
like this.
“A ye?” he said. “When was that, then?”
“Oh, in France. When I lost my  leg.” The elder Ian glanced
down at his w ooden peg, indif ferent. “One minute I was
standing up to fi re my musket, and the next I was lyin’ on my
back. I didna even ken I’d been hit. Y e’d think ye’d notice
being hit by a six-pound iron ball, wouldn’ t ye?”
His father grinned at him, and he smiled grudgingly back.
“I w ould. Surely ye thought something  must ha’ happened,
though.”
“Oh, aye , I did. And after a moment or two, it came to me
that I must ha’ been shot. But I couldna feel any pain at all.”
“W ell, that was good,” Y oung Ian said encouragingly .
“I k ent then I was dying, aye?” His father ’ s eyes were on
him but looked b eyond him, at that far -of f battlefield. “I wasna
really bothered, though. And I w asna alone.” His gaze focused
then on his son, and he smiled a little. Reaching out, he took
hold of Ian’ s hand—his own wasted to the bone, the joints of it
swollen and knobbled, but the span of his grasp still as big as
his son’ s.
“Ian,” he said, and paused, his  eyes crinkling. “D’ye ken
how odd it is, to say someone’ s name when it’ s yours, as well?
Ian,” he repeated, more gently , “dinna fash. I wasna afraid
then. I’m not afraid now .”I am , Ian thought, but he couldn’ t say that.
“T ell me  about the dog,” his father said then, smiling. And
so he told his father about Rollo. About the sea battle where
he’d thought Rollo drowned o r dead, how it had all come
about that they’d gone to T icon deroga and been at the terrible
battles of Saratoga.
And told  him, without thinking about it, for thinking would
have frozen the words in his throat, about Emily . About
Iseabail. And about the Swiftest of Lizards.
“I—havena told anyone else about that,” he said, suddenly
shy . “About the wee lad, I mean.”
His fath er breathed deep, looking happy . Then coughed,
whipped out a handkerchief, and coughed some more, but
eventually stopp ed. Ian tried not to look at the handkerchief, in
case it should be stained with blood.
“Y e should—” the elder Ian cro aked, then cleared his throat
and spat into the handkerchief with a muf fled grunt. “Y e
should tell your mother ,” he said , his voice clear again. “She’d
be happy to ken ye’ve got a son, no matter the circumstances.”
“A ye, well. Maybe I will.”
It was early for bugs, but the m oor birds were out, poking
about, ta king flight past their h eads and calling out in alarm.
He l istened to th e sounds of hom e for a bit and then said, “Da.
I’ve got to tell ye something bad.”
And sitting by a saint’ s pool, in the peace of the early spring
day , Ian told him what had happened to Murdina Bug.
His father listened with a grave attention, head bowed.
Y oung Ian could see the heavy streaks of gray in his hair and
found the sight both moving and paradoxically comforting. At
least he’ s lived a good life , h e thought. But may be Mrs.  Bug
did, too. W ould I feel worse about it if she’d been a young
girl?  He thought he would, but he felt badly enough as it was.
A little better for the telling, though.The elder Ian ro cked back on his haunches, arms clasped
about his good knee, thinking.
“It w asna your fault, of course ,” he said, with a sidelong
look at his son. “D’ye ken that, in your heart?”
“No,” Ian admitted. “But I’m trying.”
His father smiled at that, but then grew grave again.
“Y e’ll manage. If ye’ve lived with it this long, ye’ll be all
right in the end. But this matter of old Arch Bug, now . He
must be as old as the hills, if he’ s the same one I kent—a
tacksman for Malcolm Grant, he was.”
“That’ s the man. I keep thinking that—he’ s old, he’ll die—
but wha t if he dies and I dinna  ken he’ s dead?” He made a
gesture of frustration. “I dinna want to kill the man, but how
can I not, and h im wandering about, set to do harm to Ra—to
my—well, if I should ever have a wife…” He was
floundering, and his father put a stop to it, grasping his arm.
“Who is  she?” he asked, interest bright in his face. “T ell me
about her .”
And so he told about Rachel. He was surprised that there
was so much to  tell, in fact, considering that he’d known her
only a few weeks and kissed her just the once.
His father sighed—he sighed all the time, it was the only
way he got en ough breath, but this one was a sigh of
happiness.
“Ah, Ian,” he sa id fondly . “I’m happy for ye. I canna say
how happy . It’ s what your mother and I have prayed for , these
many ye ars, that  ye’d have a good woman to love and a family
by her .”
“W ell, it’ s soon to be speaking  of my family ,” Y oung Ian
pointed out. “Considering she’ s a Quaker and likely won’ t wed
me. And considering I’m in Scotland and she’ s wi’ the
Continental army in America, probably bein’ shot at or
infected wi’ plague right this minute.”He’d meant it seriously and was somewhat of fended when
his f ather laughed. But then the  elder Ian leaned forward and
said with utter s eriousness, “Y e needna wait for me to die. Y e
need to go and find your young woman.”
“I canna—”
“A ye, ye can. Y oung Jamie’ s got Lallybroch, the girls are
well we d, and Michael—” He grinned at the thought of
Michael. “Michael will do well enough, I think. A man needs
a w ife, and a good one is the greatest gift God has for a man.
I’d go much easier , a bhailach , if I kent ye were well fettled in
that way .”
“A ye, well,” Y oung Ian murmured. “Maybe so. But I’ll not
go just yet.” OLD DEBTS
 
J AMIE SW ALLOWED THE la st bite of porridge and
took a deep breath, laying down his spoon.
“Jenny?”
“O’ course there’ s more,” she said, reaching for his bowl.
Then sh e caught sight of his face and stopped, eyes narrowing.
“Or is that not what ye had need of?”
“I would na say it’ s a need, precisely . But…” He glanced up
at th e ceiling to  avoid her gaze and commended his soul to
God. “What d’ye ken of Laoghaire MacKenzie?”
He r isked a quic k glance at his sister and saw that her eyes
had gone round, bright with interest.
“Laoghaire, is it?” She sat back  down and began to tap her
fingers t houghtfully on the tabletop. Her hands were good for
her age,  he thought: work-worn, but the fingers still slim and
lively .
“She’ s not wed,” Jenny said. “But ye’ll ken that, I imagine.”
He nodded shortly .
“What is it ye want to know about her?”
“W ell… how she fares, I suppose. And …”
“And who’ s sharing her bed?”
He gave his sister a look.
“Y e’re a lewd woman, Janet Murray .”
“Oh, ay e? W ell, awa’ wi’ ye, then, and ask the cat.” Blue
eyes jus t like his own glittered at him for an instant, and the
dimple showed in her cheek. He knew that look and yielded
with what grace was possible.
“D’ye know?”“No,” she said promptly .
He raised one brow in disbelief. “Oh, aye. Pull the other
one.”
She sho ok her head and ran a finger round the edge of the
honey jar , wiping of f a golden b ead. “I swear on St. Fouthad’ s
toenails.”
He hadn’ t heard that one since he was ten and laughed out
loud, despite the situation.
“W ell, th en, no more to be said, is there?” He leaned back in
his chair , af fecting indif ference. She made a small huf fing
noise, got up, an d began busily to clear the table. He watched
her with narrowed eyes, not sure whether she was messing him
about o nly for the sake of mischief—in which case, she’d
yield in a mome nt—or whether there was something more to
it.
“Why is  it ye w ant to know?” s he asked suddenly , eyes on
the stack of sticky bowls. That brought him up short.
“I didna say I did want  t o know ,” he pointed out. “But since
ye mentioned it—anyone would be curious, no?”
“They would,” she agreed. She straightened up and looked
at him, a long, searching sort o f look that made him wonder
whether he’d washed behind his ears.
“I don’ t  know ,” she said  at last. “And that’ s the truth. I only
heard from her that once that I wrote ye.”
A ye, and just why did ye write me about it?  he wondered,
but didn’ t say so out loud.
“Mmphm,” he said. “And ye e xpect me to believe that ye
left it there?”
 
HE REMEMBERED IT . Standin g here in his old room at
Lallybroch, the one he’d had as a boy , on the morning of his
wedding to Laoghaire.He’d had a new  shirt for the occasion. There wasn’ t money
for much beyond the barest essentials, and sometimes not that
—but Jenny had contrived him  a shirt; he suspected she’d
sacrificed the best of her two shifts for it. He remembered
shaving in the r eflection in his washbasin, seeing the gaunt,
stern face of a stranger emer ge beneath his razor , thinking that
he must rememb er to smile whe n he met Laoghaire. He didn’ t
want to frighten  her , and what he saw in the water was enough
to frighten him .
He thought suddenly of sharing  her bed. He resolutely put
aside th e thought of Claire’ s b ody—he had a great deal of
practice in that—which caused him instead to think suddenly
that it had been years—aye, years! He’d lain with a woman
only twi ce in the last fifteen yea rs, and it was five, six, maybe
seven years since the last time….
He’d suf fered a moment’ s panic at the thought that he might
find himself unable and touched his member gingerly through
his k ilt, only to find that it had already begun to stif fen at the
mere thought of bedding.
He drew a deep  breath, somewhat relieved. One less thing
to worry over , then.
A b rief sound f rom the door jerked his head round to see
Jenny standing there, wearing an unreadable expression. He
coughed and took his hand of f his cock.
“Y e hav en’ t got to do it, Jamie,”  she said quietly , eyes fixed
on his. “If ye’ve thought better of it, tell me.”
He’d ne arly don e it. But he could hear the house. There was
a s ense of bustle in it, a purpose  and a happiness it had lacked
for a  ver y long time. It wasn’ t o nly his own happiness at stake
here—it never had been.
“No,” he’d said abruptly . “I’m fine.” And smiled
reassuringly at her .
As h e went downstairs to meet  Ian at the foot, though, he
heard the rain on the windows and felt a sudden sense of
drowning—an u nwelcome reco llection of his first weddingday and  how they’d held each other up, he and Claire, both
bleeding, both terrified.
“All right, then?” Ian had sai d to him, leaning in, low-
voiced.
“A ye, fine,” he replied, and wa s pleased at how calm his
voice was.
Jenny’ s face appeared briefly ro und the door to the parlor .
She looked worried, but relaxed when she saw him.
“It’ s all right, mo nighean,”  I an  had assured  her , grinning.
“I’ve got a grip on him, in case he takes it into his head to
bolt.” Ia n was in fact grippin g his arm, rather to Jamie’ s
surprise, but he didn’ t protest.
“W ell, drag him in, then,” his sister had said, very dry . “The
priest’ s come.”
He’d go ne in with Ian, taken up his place beside Laoghaire
in fr ont of old Father McCarthy . She glanced up at him briefly ,
then away . W as she frightened?  Her hand was cool in his but
didn’ t shake. He squeezed her fingers gently and she turned
her head, looking up at him then, directly . No, not fright, and
not cand le glow or starshine. T here was gratitude in her gaze
—and trust.
That trust had entered his heart, a small, soft weight that
steadied him, restored at least a few of the severed roots that
had held him to his place. He’d been grateful, too.
He turned at th e sound of footsteps now and saw Claire
coming along the hall. He smiled—noting that he’d done so
without the slightest thought—and she came to him, taking his
hand as she peered into the room.
“Y ours, wasn’ t it? When you were young, I mean.”
“A ye, it was.”
“I thoug ht Jenny told me so—w hen we came here the first
time, I mean.” H er mouth twisted a little. She and Jenny did
speak now , of course, but it was a stilted kind of speaking,
both of them ove rcareful, shy of saying too much or the wrongthing. A ye, well, he was afrai d of saying too much or the
wrong thing himself, but damned if he’d be a woman about it.
“I need to go an d see Laoghaire,” he said abruptly . “W ill ye
kill me if I do?”
She looked surprised. And then, damn her , amused.
“Are you asking my permission?”
“I am not,” he said, feeling sti f f and awkward. “I only—
well, I thought I should tell ye, is all.”
“V ery c onsiderate of you.” She was still smiling, but the
smile had taken on a certain wariness. “W ould you… care to
tell me why  you want to go and see her?”
“I didna say I want  to see her ,” he s aid, a noticeable edge in
his voice. “I said I need to.”
“W ould it be pr esumptuous of me to ask why you need to
see her?” Her eyes were just that bit wider and yellower than
usual; he’d roused the hawk in her . He hadn’ t meant to, at all,
but he wavered for an instant, su ddenly wanting to seek refuge
from his  own confusion in an al mighty row . But he couldn’ t in
conscience do that. Still less co uld he explain the memory of
Laoghaire’ s face on their wedding day , the look of trust in her
eyes, and the nagging feeling that he had betrayed that trust.
“Y e can ask me anything, Sassenach—and ye have,” he
added pointedly . “I’d answer if I thought I could make sense.”
She made a sma ll snif fing noise, not quite “Hmph!” but he
took her meaning clear enough.
“If y ou only wa nt to know who she’ s sleeping with, there
are probably less direct ways of finding out,” she said. Her
voice was carefully level, but her pupils had dilated.
“I dinna care who she’ s sleeping with!”
“Oh, yes, you do,” she said promptly .
“I don’ t!”“Liar , liar , pants on fire,” she said, and on the ver ge of an
explosion, he burst out laughing instead. She looked
momentarily taken back but then joined him, snorting with it
and her nose going pink.
They sto pped in seconds, abashed at being hilarious in a
house that hadn’ t known open la ughter for too long—but were
still smiling at each other .
“Come h ere,” he  said softly , and  held out a hand to her . She
took it at once, her fingers warm  and strong on his, and came
to put her arms around him.
Her hair smelled dif ferent. Still  fresh, and full of the scent
of li ve green things, but dif fer ent. Like the Highlands. Like
heather , maybe.
“Y ou do want to know who it is, you know ,” she said, her
voice warm and tickling throug h the fabric of his shirt. “Do
you want me to tell you why?”
“A ye, I do, and no, I don’ t,” he said, tightening his hold. “I
ken well enough why , and I’m sure you and Jenny and every
other woman in fifty miles thin ks they do, too. But that’ s not
why I need to see her .”
She pus hed a little way back then and brushed the falling
curls out of her eyes to look up  at him. She searched his face
thoughtfully and nodded.
“W ell, do give her my very best regards, then, won’ t you?”
“Why , ye vengeful wee creature. I’d never ha’ thought it of
ye!”
“W ouldn’ t you, indeed?” she said, dry as toast. He smiled
down at her an d ran a thumb gently down the side of her
cheek.
“No,” h e said. “I wouldn’ t. Y e’re no one to hold a grudge,
Sassenach; ye never have been.”
“W ell, I ’m not a Scot,” she ob served, smoothing back her
hair . “It’ s not a matter of natio nal pride, I mean.” She put ahand on his chest before he could answer , and said, quite
seriously , “She never made you laugh, did she?”
“I m ay have sm iled once or twice,” he said gravely . “But
no.”
“W ell, ju st you remember that,” she said, and with a swish
of skirts, was of f. He grinned like a fool and followed her .
When he reached the stairs, she was waiting, halfway down.
“One thing,” she said, lifting a finger at him.
“A ye?”
“If you find out who she’ s sleeping with and don’ t tell me, I
will  kill you.”
 
BALRIGGAN W AS A small place, little more than ten
acres, plus the h ouse and outbuildings. Still, it was bonnie, a
lar ge gray stone cottage tucked into the curve of a hill, a bittie
wee loc h glimmering like a lo oking glass at its foot. The
English had burned the fields a nd the barn during the Rising,
but field s came back. Much m ore easily than the men who
tilled them.
He rode  slowly past the loch, thinking that this visit was a
mistake. It was possible to leave things behind—places,
people, memories—at least for a time. But places held tight to
the t hings that h ad happened in them, and to come again to a
place yo u had once lived was to be brought face-to-face with
what you had done there and who you had been.
Balriggan, though … it hadn’ t been a bad place; he had
loved th e wee loch and the wa y it mirrored the sky , so still
some mornings that you felt you might walk down into the
clouds you saw reflected there, feeling their cold mist rise up
about you, to wrap you in their drifting peace. Or in the
summer evenings, when the surface glimmered in hundreds of
overlapping ring s as the hatch rose, the rhythm of it broken
now and then by the sudden splash of a leaping salmon.The roa d took him closer , and he saw the stony shallows
where he’d shown wee Joan and Marsali how to guddle fish,
all three  of them so intent on their business they’d paid no
heed to the midgies biting, and gone home wet to the waist and
red with bites and sunburn, the wee maids skipping and
swinging from his hands, gleefu l in the sunset. He smiled just
a lit tle—then turned his horse’ s  head away , up the hill to the
house.
The plac e was shabby but in decent repair , he grudgingly
noted. There was a saddle mu le browsing in the paddock
behind the house, elderly but sound-looking. W ell enough.
Laoghaire wasn’ t spending his money on follies or a coach-
and-four , at least.
He set his hand on the gate and felt a twist go through his
wame. The feel of the wood  under his hand was eerily
familiar; he’d lifted it without thinking, at the spot where it
was alw ays inclined to drag on the path. That twist
corkscrewed its  way up to his mouth as he recalled his last
meeting with Ned Gowan, Laog haire’ s lawyer . “What does the
bloody w oman w ant, then? ” he’d demanded, exasperated. T o
which Ned had r eplied cheerfully , “Y our he ad, mou nted above
her gate .”
W ith a brief snort, he went through, closing the gate a bit
harder than necessary , and glanced up at the house.
Movement took  his eye. A man was sitting on the bench
outside t he cotta ge, staring at hi m over a bit of broken harness
on his knee.
An ill-favored wee lad, Jamie thought, scrawny and narrow-
faced as  a ferret, with a walleye and a mouth that hung open as
though in astonishment. Still, Jamie greeted the man
pleasantly , asking was his mistress to home the day?
The lad—seen closer to, he must be in his thirties—blinked
at him, then turned his head to bring his good eye to bear .
“Who’re you, then?” he asked, sounding unfriendly .“Fraser of Broch T uarach,” Jam ie replied. It was a formal
occasion, after all. “Is Mrs.—” H e hesitated, not knowing how
to refer to Laoghaire. His sister had said she persisted in
calling herself “Mrs. Fraser ,” despite the scandal. He hadn’ t
felt he could object—the fault of it being his and he being in
America in any case—but damn ed if he’d call her that himself,
even to her servant.
“Fetch your mistress, if ye please,” he said shortly .
“What d ’ye wa nt wi’ her?” Th e straight eye narrowed in
suspicion.
He hadn’ t expected obstruction and was inclined to reply
sharply , but reined himself in. The man clearly kent something
of h im, and it  was as well if Laoghaire’ s servant was
concerned for her welfare, even if the man’ s manner was
crude.
“I wish to speak with her , if ye’ve no great objection,” he
said, wit h extrem e politeness. “D’ye think ye might make shift
to go and tell her so?”
The man made a rude sound in his throat but put aside the
harness and stood up. T oo late, Jamie saw that his spine was
badly twisted and one leg shorter than the other . There was no
way to apologiz e that would no t make matters worse, though,
and so he only nodded shortly and let the man lurch his way
of f into the hou se, thinking that it was just like Laoghaire to
keep a lame servant for the express purpose of embarrassing
him.
Then he shook himself in irritati on, ashamed of his thought.
What w as it about him that  a hapless woman such as
Laoghaire MacKenzie should bring out every wicked,
shameful trait he possessed? No t that his sister couldn’ t do it,
too, he reflected ruefully . But Jenny would evoke some bit of
bad temper or h asty language from him, fan the flames ‘til he
was roa ring, and then extinguish him neatly with a word, as
though she’d doused him with cold water .
“Go see her ,”  Jenny had said.“All right, then,” he said belligerently . “I’m here.”
“I see that,” said a light, dry voice. “Why?”
He s wung round to face Laogha ire, who was standing in the
doorway , broom in hand, giving him a cool look.
He snatched of f his hat and bowed to her .
“Good d ay to ye. I hope I see y e well the day .” Apparently
so; her face was slightly flushed beneath a starched white
kerch, blue eyes clear .
She looked him over , expressionless save for fair brows
arched high.
“I heard ye were come home. Why are ye here?”
“T o see how ye fare.”
Her brows rose that wee bit higher .
“W ell enough. What d’ye want?”
He’d go ne through it in his mind a hundred times but should
have known that for the waste of ef fort it was. There were
things that could be planned for , but none of them involved
women.
“I’ve co me to say sorry to ye, ” he said bluntly . “I said it
before, and ye shot me. D’ye want to listen this time?”
The brows came down. She glan ced from him to the broom
in h er hand, as though estimating its usefulness as a weapon,
then looked back at him and shrugged.
“Suit yourself. W ill ye come in, then?” She jerked her head
toward the house.
“It’ s a fine day . Shall we walk in the garden?” He had no
wish to  enter the house, with  its memories of tears and
silences.
She rega rded him for a momen t or two, then nodded and
turned toward the garden path , leaving him to follow if he
would. H e notic ed that she kept  a grip on the broom, though,
and was not sure whether to be amused or of fended.They wa lked in silence through the kailyard and through a
gate into the gar den. It was a kitchen garden, made for utility ,
but it had a small orchard at the end of it, and there were
flowers growing between the pea vines and onion beds. She’d
always liked flowers; he rememb ered that with a small twist of
the heart.
She’d put the broom over her shoulder , like a soldier
carrying a rifle, and strolled beside him—in no hurry but not
of fering him an opening, either . He cleared his throat.
“I said I’d come to apologize.”
“So ye did.” She didn’ t turn to look at him but stopped and
poked her toe at a curling potato vine.
“When we… wed,” he said, tr ying to retrieve the careful
speech h e’d thou ght of. “I shoul d not have asked ye. My heart
was cold. I’d no right to of fer ye a dead thing.”
Her nost rils flared briefly , but s he didn’ t look up. Just went
on frowning at the potato vine, as though she suspected it
might have bugs.
“I knew that,” she said at last. “I did hope—” She broke of f,
lips pres sing tig ht as she swallo wed. “I did hope I might be of
help to ye, though. Everyone could see ye needed a woman.
Just not me , I suppose,” she added bitterly .
Stung, he said the first thing that came to his tongue.
“I thought ye needed me.”
She looked up t hen, her eyes gone bright. Christ, she was
going to weep, he knew it. But she didn’ t.
“I’d wea ns to feed.” Her voice w as hard and flat and hit him
like a slap on the cheek.
“So ye did,” he  said, keeping his temper . It was honest, at
least. “They’ve grown now , tho ugh.” And  he’d  fo und dow ries
for both  Marsali  and Joan, too, but he didn’ t suppose he’d be
given any credit for that.“So that ’ s it,” she said, her voice growing colder . “Y e think
ye can talk your way out of paying me now , is that it?”
“No, that is not it , for God’ s sake!”
“Because,” she said, ignoring his denial and swinging round
to face him, brig ht-eyed, “ye can’ t. Y e shamed me before the
whole p arish, Jamie Fraser , luring me into a sinful match wi’
you and then be traying me, laughin’ at me behind your hand
wi’ your Sassenach whore!”
“I didna—”
“And now ye come back from America, fardeled up like an
English popinjay ”—her lip curled in scorn at his good ruf fled
shirt, w hich he’d worn to sho w her respect, God damn it!
—”flauntin’ you r wealth and p layin’ the great yin wi’ your
ancient hussy foamin’ in her silks and satins on your arm, is it?
W ell, I’ ll tell ye—” She swun g the broom down from her
shoulder and drove the handle o f it violently into the ground.
“Y e dinna understand one thing about me, and ye think ye can
awe me into cra wlin’ away like a dyin’ dog and troubling ye
no more ! Think again, that’ s all I’ll say to ye—just think
again!”
He snatched the purse out of his pocket and flung it at the
door of the garden shed, where it struck with a boom and
bounced of f. He had just a moment to regret having brought a
chunk o f gold, and not coins that would jingle, before his
temper flared.
“A ye, ye’re right about that , at least! I dinna understand one
thing about ye! I never have, try as I might!”
“Oh, try as ye might, is it?” sh e cried, ignoring the purse.
“Y e never tried for an instant, Jamie Fraser! In fact—” Her
face cle nched u p like a fist as she fought to keep her voice
under control. “Y e never truly looked  at me. Never—well, no,
I s uppos e ye looked once. Wh en I was sixteen.” Her voice
trembled on the word, and she looked away , jaw clamped
tight. Then she looked back at him, eyes bright and tearless.
“Y e took a beating for me. At Leoch. D’ye recall that?”For an instant, he didn’ t. Then he stopped, breathing
heavily . His hand went instinctively to his jaw , and against his
will he felt the ghost of a smile rise against the anger .
“Oh. A ye. A ye, I do.” Angus Mhor had given him an easier
time th an he might have—but it was a fair beating,
nonetheless. His ribs had ached for days.
She nodded, watching him. Her cheeks were splotched with
red, but she’d calmed herself.
“I th ought ye’d done it becaus e ye loved me. I went on
thinking that, ken, until well afte r we’d wed. But I was wrong,
wasn’ t I?”
Baf flement must have showed on his face, for she made that
small “Mph!” in her nose that m eant she was aggravated. He
knew her well enough to know that , at least.
“Y e piti ed me,” she said flatly . “I didna see that then. Y e
pitied m e at Leoch, not only later , when ye took me to wife. I
thought ye loved me,” she repeated, spacing the words as
though speaking to a simpleton. “When Dougal made ye wed
the Sass enach whore, I thought I’d die. But I thought maybe
you  felt like dyin’, too—and it wasna like that at all, was it?”
“Ah… no,” he s aid, feeling awkward and foolish. He’d seen
nothing of her feelings then. H adn’ t seen a thing but Claire.
But of course L aoghaire had thought he loved her; she was
sixteen. And would have known that his marriage to Claire
was a forced o ne, never realizing that he was willing. Of
course she’d thought she and he were star -crossed lovers.
Except t hat he’d  never looked a t her again. He rubbed a hand
over his face, feeling complete helplessness.
“Y e never told me that,” he said finally , letting his hand
drop.
“What good would it ha’ done?” she said.
So there it was. She’d known—she must have known—by
the time he married her what the truth of it was. But still, she
must have hoped… Unable to find anything to say in reply , his
mind took refuge in the irrelevant.“Who was it?” he asked.
“Who?” Her brow furrowed in puzzlement.
“The lad. Y our father wanted ye punished for wantonness,
no? Who did ye play the loon with, then, when I took the
beating for ye? I never thought to ask.”
The red splotches on her cheeks grew deeper .
“No, ye never would, would ye?”
A barbed silence of accusation f ell between them. He hadn’ t
asked, then; he hadn’ t cared.
“I’m sor ry ,” he said softly , at last. “T ell me, though. Who
was it?”  He hadn’ t cared then in the least but found himself
curious now , if o nly as a way of not thinking of other things—
or not saying th em. They hadn’ t had the past she’d thought,
but the past lay still betwee n them, forming a tenuous
connection.
Her lips  thinned and he though t she wouldn’ t say , but then
they parted, reluctant.
“John Robert MacLeod.”
He frowned, at a loss for a m oment, and then the name
dropped into its proper place in memory and he stared at her .
“John Robert? What, him from Killiecrankie?”
“A ye,” she said. “Him.” Her mouth snapped shut on the
word.
He hadn’ t known the man we ll at all, but John Robert
MacLeod’ s repu tation among young women had been the
subject of a goo d deal of talk among the men-at-arms at Leoch
in h is brief time there. A sly , good-looking slink of a man,
handsome and lean-jawed—and  the fact that he’d a wife and
weans at home in Killiecrankie  seemed to hamper him not at
all.
“Jesus!” he said, unable to sto p himself. “Y e’re lucky ye
kept your maiden-heid!”An ugly  flush washed darkly over her from stays to cap, and
his jaw dropped.
“Laoghaire MacKenzie! Y e werena such a wanton fool to let
him take ye vir gin to his bed!?”
“I d idna ken he  was marrit!” she cried, stamping her foot.
“And it was after ye wed the Sassenach. I went to him for
comfort.”
“Oh, and he gave it ye, I’m sure!”
“Hush your gob!” she shrieke d, and, picking up a stone
watering pot from the bench by the shed, hurled it at his head.
He hadn’ t expected that—Claire threw things at him
frequently , but Laoghaire never had—and was nearly brained;
it struck him in the shoulder as he ducked aside.
The wat ering pot was followed by a hail of other objects
from the  bench and a storm of in coherent language, all manner
of unwomanly swearing, punctuated by shrieks like a teakettle.
A pan of butter milk hurtled toward him, missed its aim, but
soaked him from chest to knees with curds and whey .
He was half la ughing—from s hock—when she suddenly
seized a mattock from the shed wall and made for him.
Seriously alarmed, he ducked and grabbed her wrist, twisting
so she dropped the heavy tool with a thump. She let out a
screech like a ban-sidhe  and whipped her other hand across his
face, half-blinding him with her nails. He snatched that wrist,
too, and  pressed  her back into the wall of the shed, her still
kicking at his sh ins, struggling and writhing against him like a
snake.
“I’m sorry!” He was shouting i n her ear to be heard above
the n oise she was making. “Sorr y! D’ye hear me—I’m sorry !”
The cli shmaclaver stopped hi m hearing anything behind,
though, and he had not the slightest warning when something
monstrous struc k him behind th e ear and sent him staggering,
lights flashing in his head.
He kept his gri p on her wrists as he stumbled and fell,
dragging her down atop him. He wrapped his arms tight roundher , to keep her from clawing him again, and blinked, trying to
clear his watering eyes.
“Free her , MacIfrinn !” The mattock chunked into the earth
beside his head.
He flung himself over , Laoghaire still clutched to him,
rolling madly through the bed s. The sound of panting and
uneven steps, and the mattock came down again, pinning his
sleeve to the ground and scraping the flesh of his arm.
He jerked free, heedless of tearing skin and cloth, rolled
away fro m Lao ghaire, and sprang to his feet, then launched
himself without pause at the weazened figure of Laoghaire’ s
servant, who was in the act of raising the mattock above his
head, narrow face contorted with ef fort.
He butte d the man in the face with a crunch and bore him
flat, punching him in the belly before they hit the ground. He
scrambled atop  the man and went on punching him, the
violence some relief. The man was grunting, whimpering, and
gur gling, and he’d drawn back h is knee to give the bugger one
in the balls to s ettle the matter when he became dimly aware
of Laoghaire, screeching and beating at his head.
“Leave him alone!” she was shrieking, crying and slapping
at him with her hands. “Leave him, leave him, for the love of
Bride, don’ t hurt him!”
He stopped then, panting, feeling suddenly a terrible fool.
Beating a scrawny cripple who meant only to protect his
mistress from obvious attack, manhandling a woman like a
street ruf fian —Christ , what was the matter with him? He slid
of f the man, re pressing an impulse to apologize, and got
awkwardly to his feet, meaning to give the poor bugger a hand
up, at least.
Before he could manage, though, Laoghaire fell to her knees
beside the man, weeping and gr appling at him, finally getting
him partway sitting, his narrow head pressed to her soft round
bosom, she heedless of the blood gushing from his smashednose, pe tting and stroking him, murmuring his name. Joey , it
seemed to be.
Jamie stood swaying a bit, staring at this demonstration.
Blood w as dri pping from his fingers, and his arm was
beginning to burn where the m attock had skinned it. He felt
something stinging run into his eyes and, wiping it away ,
found that his forehead was bleeding; Joey the openmouthed
had evidently inadvertently bitten him when he’d butted the
man. He grimaced with disgust,  feeling the tooth marks in his
forehead, and groped for a handkerchief with which to stanch
the blood.
Meanwhile, foggy as his head fe lt, matters on the ground in
front of him we re becoming clearer by the moment. A good
mistress might try to comfort a wounded servant, but he’d yet
to hear a woman  call a servant mo chridhe . Let alone kiss him
passionately on the mouth, getting her own face smeared with
blood and snot in the process.
“Mmphm,” he said.
Startled, Laoghaire turned a blood-smeared, tearstained face
to him. She’d never looked lovelier .
“Him? ” Jamie  said incredulously , n odding toward the
crumpled Joey . “Why , for God’ s sake?”
Laoghaire glared at him slit-eyed, crouched like a cat about
to s pring. She considered him  for a moment, then slowly
straightened her back, gathering Joey’ s head once more against
her breast.
“Because he needs me,” she said evenly . “And you, ye
bastard, never did.”
 
HE LEFT THE HORSE to gra ze along the edge of the
loch and, stripping of f his cloth es, walked into the water . The
sky was overcast, and the loch was full of clouds.The rock y bottom fell away and he let the gray cold water
take him, his l egs trailing loose behind, his small injuries
chilling into numbness. He put his face under the water , eyes
closed, t o wash the cut on his he ad, and felt the bubbles of his
breath soft and tickling over his shoulders.
He raised his h ead and began to swim, slowly , with no
thought at all.
He lay on his back among the c louds, hair afloat like kelp,
and stare d up into the sky . A spatter of rain dimpled the water
around him, then thickened. It was a soft rain, though; no feel
of the drops striking him, only a sense of the loch and its
clouds bathing his face, his body , washing away the blood and
fret of the last little while.
W ould he ever come back? he wondered.
The water filled his ears with  its own rush, and he was
comforted by the realization that, in fact, he had never left.
He turn ed at last and struck out for the shore, cutting
smooth through the water . It wa s still raining, harder now , the
drops a constan t tapping on hi s bare shoulders as he swam.
Still, the  sinking sun shone und er the clouds and lit Balriggan
and its hill with a gentle glow .
He felt the bottom rise and put his feet down, then stood for
a moment, waist-deep, looking at it for a bit.
“No,” he  said softly , and felt remorse soften into regret and,
at last, the absol ution of resignation. “Y e’re right—I never did.
I’m sorry .”
He w alked out o f the water the n, and with a whistle to the
horse, pulled the wet plaid ove r his shoulders and turned his
face toward Lallybroch. THE CA VE
 
U SEFUL HERBS , I wrot e, and paused—as usual—to
consider . W ritin g with a quill caused one to be both more
deliberate and more economical in writing than doing it with
ballpoint or typewriter . Still, I thought, I’d best just make a list
here and  jot down notes regarding each herb as they came to
me, then make a clean draft when I’d got it all straight and
made sure to include everything, rather than try to do it all in a
single run.
Lavender , peppermint, comfr ey , I wrote without hesitation.
Calendula , feverfew , foxglove, meadow-sweet . Th en w ent bac k
to add a lar ge a sterisk beside foxglove  to remi nd me to add
strong c autions about the use, as all parts of the plant were
extremely poisonous in any but very small doses. I twiddled
the quill , biting my lip in indec ision. Ought it to mention that
one at all, given that this was meant to be a useful medical
guide fo r the common man, not for medical practitioners with
experience in various medicaments? Because, really , you
ought not dose anyone  wi th foxglove unless you’d been
trained… Best not. I crossed it out but then had second
thoughts. Perhaps I’d better mention it, with a drawing, but
also wit h a severe warning tha t it should be used only  by a
physician, in case someone had  the bright idea of remedying
Uncle T ophiger ’ s dropsy permanently….
A shadow fell across the floor in front of me and I looked
up. Jami e was standing there with a most peculiar look on his
face.
“What?” I said, startled. “Has something happened?”
“No,” h e said, and advancing into the study , leaned down
and put his hands on the desk, bringing his face within a foot
of mine.“Have ye ever been in the slightest doubt that I need ye?” he
demanded.
It took roughly half a second of thought to answer this.
“No,” I replied promptly . “T o the best of my knowledge,
you needed me ur gently the mo ment I saw you. And I haven’ t
had reason to think you’ve got any more self-suf ficient since.
What on earth  hap pened to your forehead? T hose look like
tooth—” He lunged across the desk and kissed me before I
could finish the observation.
“Thank ye,” he said fervently , and, un-lunging, whirled and
went out, evidently in the highest of spirits.
“What’ s amiss wi’ Uncle Jamie?” Ian demanded, coming in
on J amie’ s heels. He glanced b ack toward the open door into
the hall,  from the depths of which a loud, tuneless humming
was coming, like that of a trapped bumblebee. “Is he drunk?”
“I don’ t  think so,” I said dubiously , running my tongue
across my lips. “He didn’ t taste of anything alcoholic.”
“A ye, well.” Ian lifted a shoulder , dismissing his uncle’ s
eccentricities. “I  was just up beyond Broch Mordha, and Mr .
MacAllister said  to me that his w ife’ s mother was taken bad in
the n ight, and w ould ye maybe t hink of coming by , if it wasn’ t
a trouble to ye?”
“No trouble at a ll,” I assured him, rising with alacrity . “Just
let me get my bag.”
 
FOR ALL IT was spring, a cold, treacherous season, the
tenants and neighbors seemed remarkably healthy . W ith some
caution, I had resumed my doctoring, tentatively of fering
advice and medicine where it m ight be accepted. After all, I
was no longer t he lady of Lallybroch, and many of the folk
who’d known me before were now dead. Those who weren’ t
seemed generall y glad to see me, but there was a wariness in
their eyes that hadn’ t been there before. It saddened me to see
it, but I understood it, all too well.I ha d left Lallybroch, left Him self. Left them . And while
they af fe cted to believe the sto ry Jamie put about, about my
having thought him dead and fled to France, they couldn’ t help
but feel I had betrayed them by going. I  felt I had betrayed
them.
The eas iness th at had once exi sted between us was gone,
and so I didn’ t routinely visit as I once had; I waited to be
called. A nd in the meantime, when I had  to get out of the
house, I  went foraging on my own or walked with Jamie—
who also had to get out of the house now and then.
One day , when the weather was windy but fine, he took me
farther t han usua l, saying that he  would show me his cave, if I
liked.
“I w ould, very m uch,” I said. I put my hand above my eyes
to shield them from the sun as I looked up a steep hill. “Is it up
there?”
“A ye. Can ye see it?”
I s hook my head . Aside from th e big white rock the people
called Leap o’ the Cask, it co uld have been any Highland
hillside, clustered with gorse, broom, and heather , what ground
showed in between only rocks.
“Come on, then,” Jamie said, and setting foot on an
invisible foothold, smiled and reached a hand to help me up.
It was a hard climb, and I w as panting and damp with
perspiration by the time he pushed aside a screen of gorse to
show me the narrow mouth of the cave.
 
“I W ANT T O go in.”
“No, ye don’ t,” he assured her . “It’ s cold and it’ s dirty .”
She gave him an odd look and half a smile.
“I’d never have guessed,” she said, very dry . “I still want to
go in.”There was no p oint in ar guing with her . He shrugged and
took of f his co at to save its getting filthy , hanging it on a
rowan sapling that had sprouted  near the entrance. He put up
his h ands to the  stones on either  side of the entrance, but then
was unsure; was it there he had  always grasped the stone, or
not? Christ, does it matter?  he chided himself, and, taking firm
hold of the rock, stepped in and swung down.
It was just as cold as he’d known it would be. It was out of
the w ind, at leas t—not a biting c old, but a dank chill that sank
through the skin and gnawed at the bone ends.
He turne d and reached up his hands, and she leaned to him,
tried to climb do wn, but lost her footing and half-fell, landing
in his arms in a  fluster of cloth es and loose hair . He laughed
and turned her round to look, but kept his arms around her . He
was loath to surrender the warmth of her and held her like a
shield against cold memory .
She wa s still, leaning back against him, only her head
moving as she looked from one end of the cave to the other . It
was bare ly eight  feet long, but the far end was lost in shadow .
She lifted her chin, seeing the soft black stains that coated the
rock to one side by the entrance.
“That’ s where my fire was—w hen I dared have one.” His
voice sounded strange, small and muf fled, and he cleared his
throat.
“Where was your bed?”
“Just there by your left foot.”
“Did you sleep with your head at this end?” She tapped her
foot on the graveled dirt of the floor .
“A ye. I could see the stars, if the night was clear . I turned
the other way if it rained.” She heard the smile in his voice and
put her hand along his thigh, squeezing.
“I h oped that,” she said, her own voice a little choked.
“When we learned about the D unbonnet, and the cave… I
thought about you, alone here—and I hoped you could see the
stars at night.”“I co uld,” he wh ispered, and bent his head to put his lips to
her hair .  The shawl she’d pulled over her head had slipped of f,
and her hair smelled of lemon balm and what she said was
catmint.
She made a small hmp  noise in her throat and folded  her
own arms over his, warming him through his shirt.
“I feel as though I’ve seen it before,” she said, sounding a
little surprised. “Though I suppose one cave probably looks a
good deal like any other cave, unless you have stalactites
hanging from the ceiling or mammoths painted on the walls.”
“I’ve never had a talent for de coration,” he said, and she
hmp’ ed a gain, amused. “As for being here… ye’ve been here
many nights wi’ me, Sassenach . Y ou and the wee lass, both.”
Though I didna ken then she was a lassie , h e added silently ,
remembering with a small odd pang that now and then he had
sat there  on the flat rock by the entrance, imagining sometimes
a da ughter warm in his arms, b ut now and then feeling a tiny
son on his kne e and pointing out the stars to travel by ,
explaining to him how the hunti ng was done and the prayer ye
must say when ye killed for food.
But he’d told tho se things to Brianna later—and to Jem. The
knowledge wouldn’ t be lost. W ould it be of use, though? he
wondered suddenly .
“Do folk still hunt?” he asked. “Then?”
“Oh, yes,” she a ssured him. “Every fall, we’d have a rash of
hunters coming in to the hospital—mostly idiots who’d got
drunk and shot each other by mistake, though once I had a
gentleman who’ d been badly trampled by a deer he thought
was dead.”
He laughed, both shocked and comforted. The notion of
hunting while drunken… thoug h he’d seen fools do it. But at
least men still did hunt. Jem would hunt.
“I’m sur e Roger Mac wouldna l et Jem take too much drink
before hunting,” he said. “Even if the other lads do.”Her head tilted a little to and fro, in the way it did when she
was wondering whether to tell him something, and he
tightened his arms a little.
“What?”
“I was just imag ining a gang of second-graders having a tot
of w hisky all round before settin g of f home from school in the
rain,” she said, snorting briefly . “Children don’ t drink alcohol
then—at all. Or at least they aren’ t meant to, and it’ s
scandalous child neglect if they’re allowed.”
“A ye?” That seemed odd; he’d been given ale or beer with
his food  since…  well, as far back as he recalled. And certainly
a dra m o f whisk y against the co ld, or if his liver were chilled
or he had the earache or… It w as true, though, that Brianna
made Jem drink milk, even after he was out of smocks.
The rattle of stones on the hillside below startled him, and
he let go of Claire, turning toward the entrance. He doubted it
was trouble but nonetheless mo tioned to her to stay , hoisting
himself out of the cave mouth and reaching for his coat and
the knife  in its pocket even bef ore he looked to see who had
come.
There w as a woman some way below , a tall figure in cloak
and shawl, down by the big ro ck where Fer gus had lost his
hand. Sh e was looking up, though, and saw him come out of
the cave . She waved to him and beckoned, and with a quick
glance round that assured him sh e was alone, he made his way
half-sliding down the slope to the trail where she stood.
“Feasgar math,”  h e greeted her , shrugging into the coat.
She was fairly young, perhaps  in her early twenties, but he
didn’ t know her . Or thought he didn’ t, until she spoke.
“Ciamar a tha thu, mo athair ,”  she said formally . How do
you do, Father?
He blinked, startled, but then leaned forward, peering at her .
“Joanie?” he said, incredulous. “W ee Joanie?” Her long,
rather solemn face broke into a smile at that, but it was brief.“Y e know me, then?”
“A ye, I do, now I come to see—” He put out a hand,
wanting to embrace her , but sh e stood a bit away from him,
stif f, and  he let the hand drop, clearing his throat to cover the
moment. “It’ s been some time, lass. Y e’ve grown,” he added
lamely .
“Bairns mostly do,” she said, dr y . “Is it your wife ye’ve got
with you? The first one, I mean.”
“It i s,” he replie d, the shock of her appearance replaced by
wariness. He gave her a quick look-over , in case she might be
armed, but couldn’ t tell; her c loak was wrapped round her
against the wind.
“Perhaps ye’d summon her down,” Joan suggested. “I
should like to meet her .”
He rather doubted that. Still, sh e seemed composed, and he
could scarcely refuse to let her meet Claire, if she wished it.
Claire would be watching; he tu rned and gestured toward the
cave, beckoning her , then turned back to Joan.
“How d’ ye come to be here, lass?” he asked, turning back to
her . It was a go od eight miles to Balriggan from here, and
there was nothing near the cave to draw anyone.
“I w as coming t o Lallybroch to see ye—I missed your visit
when ye  came to the house,” sh e added, with a brief flash of
what mi ght have been amusement. “But I saw you and … your
wife … walking, so I came after ye.”
It warm ed him, to think she’d wanted to see him. At the
same tim e, he was cautious. I t had been twelve years, and
she’d be en a child when he left. And she’d spent those years
with Lao ghaire, doubtless hearing no good opinions of him in
that time.
He looked searchingly into her f ace, seeing only the vaguest
memory of the childish featur es he recalled. She was not
beautiful, or even pretty , but ha d a certain dignity about her
that was attractive; she met his gaze straight on, not seeming
to care what he thought of what he saw . She had the shape ofLaoghaire’ s eyes and nose, though little else from her mother ,
being tall, dark, and rawboned, heavy-browed, with a long,
thin face and a mouth that was not much used to smiling, he
thought.
He heard  Claire making her way  down the slope behind him
and turned to he lp her , though keeping one eye on Joanie, just
in case.
“Dinna fash,” Joan said calmly behind him. “I dinna mean
to shoot her .”
“Och? W ell, that’ s good.” Discomposed, he tried to
remember—had she been in the house when Laoghaire shot
him? He thought not, though he’d been in no condition to
notice. She’d certainly known about it, though.
Claire to ok his hand and hopp ed down onto the trail, not
pausing to settle herself but coming forward at once and taking
Joan’ s hands in both her own, smiling.
“I’m hap py to meet you,” she said, sounding as though she
meant it. “Marsali said I was to  give you this.” And, leaning
forward, she kissed Joan on the cheek.
For the first tim e, he saw the girl taken aback. She flushed
and pulled her hands away , turn ing aside and rubbing a fold of
her cloa k under her nose as though taken by an itch, lest
anyone see her eyes well up.
“I—thank you,”  she said, with a hasty dab at her eyes. “Y ou
—my sister ’ s written of you.”  She cleared her throat and
blinked hard, then stared at Claire with open interest—an
interest that was being returned in full.
“Felicite looks like you,” Claire said. “So does Henri-
Christian, just a bit—but Felicite very much.”
“Poor child,” Joan murmured, but couldn’ t repress the smile
that had lit her face at this.
Jamie coughed.
“W ill ye not come down to the house, Joanie? Y e’d be
welcome.”She shook her head.
“Later , maybe. I wanted to speak to ye, mo athair , where no
one could hear . Save your wife,” she added, with a glance at
Claire. “As she’ s doubtless something to say on the matter .”
That sounded mildly sinister , but then she added, “It’ s about
my dowry .”
“Oh, aye? W ell, come away ou t o’ the wind, at least.” He
led them toward the lee of the big rock, wondering what was
afoot. W as the lass wanting to wed someone unsuitable and
her mother was refusing to give her her dowry? Had
something happened to the money? He doubted that; old Ned
Gowan had devised the docume nts, and the money was safe in
a bank in Inverness. And whatever he thought of Laoghaire, he
was sure she’d never do anything to the hurt of her daughters.
A h uge gust of  wind came up the track, whirling up the
women’ s pettico ats like flying le aves and pelting them all with
clouds o f dust and dry heather . They darted into the shelter of
the rock  and stood smiling an d laughing a little with the
intoxication of the weather , brushing of f the dirt and settling
their clothes.
“So, then,” Jamie said, before th e good mood should have a
chance to curdle on them, “who is it ye mean to wed?”
“Jesus Christ,” Joan replied promptly .
He stare d at her for a moment, until he became aware that
his mouth was hanging open and closed it.
“Y ou want to be a nun?” Claire’ s brows were raised with
interest. “Really?”
“I do. I’ve kent for a long time that I’ve a vocation, but…”
She hesitated. “… it’ s… complicated.”
“I daresay it is,” Jamie said, recovering himself somewhat.
“Have y e spoken to anyone ab out it, lass? The priest? Y our
mother?”
Joan’ s lips pressed into a thin line.“Both of them,” she said shortly .
“And w hat did they say?” Claire asked. She was plainly
fascinated, leaning back against the rock, combing back her
hair with her fingers.
Joan snorted. “My mother says,” she said precisely , “that
I’ve lost my mind from reading books—and that’ s all your
fault,” s he added pointedly to J amie, “for giving me the taste
for it. She wants me to wed auld Geordie McCann, but I said
I’d rather be dead in the ditch.”
“How old is  auld Geordie McCann?” Claire inquired, and
Joan blinked at her .
“Five-and-twenty or so,” she said. “What’ s that to do with
it?”
“Just curious,” Claire murmured, looking entertained.
“There’ s a young Geordie McCann, then?”
“A ye, his nephew . He’ s three,” Joan added, in the interests
of strict accuracy . “I dinna want to wed him, either .”
“And the priest?” Jamie intervened, before Claire could
derail the discussion entirely .
Joan drew breath, seeming to grow taller and sterner with it.
“He  s ays that it’ s my duty to stay to hame and tend to my
aged mother .”
“Who’ s swiving Joey the hired m an in the goat shed,” Jamie
added he lpfully . “Y e ken that, I suppose?” From the corner of
his eye, he saw Claire’ s face, w hich entertained him so much
that he was obliged to turn away  and not look at her . He lifted
a hand behind his back, indicating that he’d tell her later .
“Not while I’m in the house, sh e doesn’ t,” Joan said coldly .
“Which is the only reason I am  in the house, still. D’ye think
my conscience will let me leav e, knowing what they’ll be up
to? T his is the first time I’ve go ne further than the kailyard in
three mo nths, an d if it wasna sinful to place wagers, I’d bet ye
my best shift the y’re at it this minute, damning both their souls
to hell.”Jamie cleared his throat, trying —and failing—not to think
of Joey and Lao ghaire, wrapped in passionate embrace on her
bed with the blue-and-gray quilt.
“A ye, well.” He could feel Claire’ s eyes boring into the back
of his neck and felt the blood ris e there. “So. Y e want to go for
a n un, but the priest says ye mu stn’ t, your mother willna give
ye your dowry for it, and your conscience willna let ye do it
anyway . Is that the state o’ things, would ye say?”
“A ye, it is,” Joan said, pleased with his concise summary .
“And, u m, what  is it that you’d like Jamie to do about it?”
Claire in quired, coming round to stand by him. “Kill Joey?”
She sho t Jamie a sidelong yellow-eyed glance, full of wicked
enjoyment at his discomfiture. He gave her a narrow look, and
she grinned at him.
“Of course not!” Joan’ s heavy  brow drew down. “I want
them to wed. Then they’d no be in a state of mortal sin every
time I turned my  back, and  t he priest couldna say I’ve to s tay
at home, not if my mother ’ s got a husband to care for her .”
Jamie rubbed a finger slowly up  and down the bridge of his
nose, try ing to make out just ho w he was meant to induce two
middle-aged reprobates to wed. By force? Hold a fowling
piece on  them? He could, he supposed, but… well, the more
he thought of it, the better he liked the notion …
“Does he want  to marry her , do you think?” Claire asked,
surprising him. It hadn’ t occurred to him to wonder that.
“A ye, he does,” Joan said, with obvious disapproval. “He’ s
always moaning on about it to  me, how much he looooves
her…” S he rolled her eyes. “Not that I think he shouldna love
her ,” she  hastened to add, seeing Jamie’ s expression. “But he
shouldna be telling me  about it, now , should he?”
“Ah … no,” he said, feeling mildly dazed. The wind was
booming past the rock, and the whine of it in his ears was
eating at him, making him feel suddenly as he used to in the
cave, living in so litude for weeks, with no voice but the wind’ sto hear . He shook his head viole ntly to clear it, forcing himself
to focus on Joan’ s face, hear her words above the wind.
“She’ s willing, I think,” Joan was saying, still frowning.
“Though she doesna talk to me  about it, thank Bride. She’ s
fond of him, though; feeds him the choice bits and that.”
“W ell, th en…” He brushed a flying strand of hair out of his
mouth, feeling dizzy . “Why do they not marry?”
“Because of you,” Claire said, sounding a trifle less amused.
“And that’ s where I come into this, I suppose?”
“Because of—”
“The agreement you made with Laoghaire, when I… came
back.” Her attention was focuse d on Joan, but she came closer
and tou ched his hand lightly , not looking at him. “Y ou
promised to support her—and find dowries for Joan and
Marsali—but th e support was to stop if she married again.
That’ s it, isn’ t it?” she said to Joan, who nodded.
“She and Joey m ight make shift to scrape along,” she said.
“He doe s what he can, but… y e’ve seen him. If ye were to
stop the money , though, she’d l ikely have to sell Balriggan to
live—and that would break her heart,” she added quietly ,
dropping her eyes for the first time.
An odd pain se ized his heart—odd because it was not his
own but  he recognized it. It was  sometime in the first weeks of
their marriage, when he’d been digging new beds in the
garden. Laoghai re had brought him out a mug of cool beer and
stood w hile he drank it, then thanked him for the digging.
He’d be en surpr ised and laughed, saying why should she think
to thank him for that?
“Because ye take care for my place,” she’d said simply , “but
ye d on’ t try to take it from me. ” Then she’d taken the empty
mug from him and gone back to the house.
And once, in b ed—and he flushed at the thought, with
Claire s tanding right by him—he’d asked her why she liked
Balriggan so much; it wasna a family place, after all, nor
remarkable in any way . And sh e’d sighed a little, pulled thequilt up to her chin, and said, “It’ s the first place I’ve felt
safe.” She wouldn’ t say more when he asked her , but only
turned over and pretended to fall asleep.
“She’d r ather lo se Joey than Ba lriggan,” Joan was saying to
Claire. “ But she doesna mean to  lose him , eith er . So ye see the
dif ficulty , aye?”
“I do, yes.” Cla ire was looking sympathetic but shot him a
glance indicating that this was—naturally— his  problem. Of
course it was, he thought, exasperated.
“I’ll… do something,” he said, having not the slightest
notion w hat, but how could he refuse? God would probably
strike hi m down for interfering with Joan’ s vocation, if his
own sense of guilt didn’ t finish him of f first.
“Oh, Da! Thank  you!”
Joan’ s f ace broke into a sudden, dazzling smile, and she
threw he rself in to his arms—he barely got them up in time to
catch her; she was a very solid young woman. But he folded
her into the emb race he’d wanted to give her on meeting and
felt the odd pain ease, as this strange daughter fitted herself
tidily in to an empty spot in his heart he hadn’ t known was
there.
The wind was still whipping by , and it might have been a
speck of dust that made Claire’ s eyes glisten as she looked at
him, smiling.
“Just the  one thing,” he said sternly , when Joan had released
him and stood back.
“Anything,” she said fervently .
“Y e’ll pray for me, aye? When ye’re a nun?”
“Every day ,” she assured him, “and twice on Sundays.”
 
THE SU N W AS starting down the sky by now , but there
was still  some time to supper . I should, I supposed, be there toof fer to help w ith the meal preparations; these were both
enormous and laborious, with so many people coming and
going, and Lallybroch could no  longer af ford the luxury of a
cook. But even if Jenny was taken up with nursing Ian,
Maggie and her young daughters and the two housemaids were
more than capable of managing . I would only be in the way .
Or s o I told mys elf, well aware that there was always work for
a spare pair of hands.
But I clambered down the stony hill behind Jamie and said
nothing when he turned away fr om the trail to Lallybroch. W e
wandered down toward the little loch, well content.
“Perhaps I did  have something to do wi’ the books, aye?”
Jamie said, after a bit. “I mean, I read to the wee maids in the
evenings now and again. They’d sit on the settle with me, one
on each  side, wi’ their heads against me, and it was—” He
broke of f with a glance at me a nd coughed, evidently worried
that I might be of fended at the idea that he’d ever enjoyed a
moment in Laoghaire’ s house. I smiled and took his arm.
“I’m sure they loved it. But I really doubt that you read
anything to Joan that made her want to become a nun.”
“A ye, w ell,” he said dubiously . “I did read to them out of
the Lives of the  Saints . Oh, and Fox’ s Book of the Martyrs , too,
even tho ugh the re’ s a good deal of it to do wi’ Protestants, and
Laoghaire said Protestants couldna be martyrs because they
were wicked heretics, and I said bein’ a heretic didna preclude
being a martyr ,  and—” He grinned suddenly . “I think that
might ha’ been the closest thing we had to a decent
conversation.”
“Poor Laoghaire!” I said. “But putting her aside—and do
let’ s—what do you think of Joan’ s quandary?”
He shook his head dubiously .
“W ell, I  can maybe bribe Laoghaire to marry yon wee
cripple, but it would take a deal of money , since she’d want
more tha n she gets from me no w . I havena got that much left
of the gold we b rought, so it would need to wait until I can getback to the Ridge and extract so me more, take that to a bank,
arrange for a draft… I hate to th ink of Joan having to spend a
year at home, trying to keep yon lust-crazed weasels apart.”
“Lust-crazed weasels?” I said, entertained. “No, really . Did
you see them at it?”
“Not exactly ,” he said, coughing. “Y e could see there was an
attraction atween  them, though. Here, let’ s go along the shore;
I saw a curlew’ s nest the other day .”
The wind had q uieted and the sun was bright and warm—
for t he moment. I could see clo uds lurking over the horizon,
and dou btless it would be raini ng again by nightfall, but for
the moment it was a lovely spring day , and we were both
disposed to enjoy it. By unspo ken consent, we put aside all
disagreeable matters and talked of nothing in particular , only
enjoying each other ’ s company , until we reached a shallow ,
grass-covered mound where we could perch and enjoy the sun.
Jamie’ s mind seemed to return now and then to Laoghaire,
though—I supposed he couldn’ t help it. I didn’ t really mind, as
such comparisons as he made were entirely to my benefit.
“Had sh e been my first,” he said thoughtfully at one point,
“I th ink I might have a much d if ferent opinion of women in
general.”
“W ell, y ou can’ t define all wom en in terms of what they’re
like—or what one of them is li ke—in bed,” I objected. “I’ve
known men who, well…”
“Men? W as Frank not your first?” he demanded, surprised.
I put a hand behind my head and regarded him.
“W ould it matter if he wasn’ t?”
“W ell…” Clearly taken aback by the possibility , he groped
for an answer . “I suppose—” He broke of f and eyed me,
meditatively stro king one finger down the bridge of his nose.
One corner of his mouth turned up. “I don’ t know .”
I did n’ t know , myself. On the one hand, I rather enjoyed his
shock at the notion—and at my  age, I was not at all averse tofeeling mildly wanton, if only  in retrospect. On the other
hand…
“W ell, where do you get of f, anyway , casting stones?”
“Y e were my  first,” he pointed out, with considerable
asperity .
“So you said ,” I said, teasing. T o my amusement, he flushed
up like the rosy dawn.
“Y e didna believe me?” he said , his voice rising in spite of
himself.
“W ell, y ou did seem rather well informed, for a so-called
vir gin. T o say nothing of… imaginative.”
“For Go d’ s sake, Sassenach, I grew up on a farm! It’ s a
verra straightforward business, after all.” He looked me
closely up and down, his gaze  lingering at certain points of
particular interest. “And as for imagining things … Christ, I’d
spent m onths—years!—imagini ng!” A certain light filled his
eyes, an d I had the distinct impression that he hadn’ t stopped
imagining in the intervening years, not by any means.
“What are you thinking?” I asked, intrigued.
“I’m thinking that the water in the loch’ s that wee bit chilly ,
but if it didna sh rink my cock straight of f, the feel of the heat
when I plunged  into ye … Of course,” he added practically ,
eyeing me as though estimating the ef fort involved in forcing
me into  the loch, “we wouldn a need to do it in  the water ,
unless ye liked; I could just dunk ye a few times, drag ye onto
the shor e, and— God, your arse looks fine, wi’ the wet linen of
your shift clinging to it. It goes all transparent, and I can see
the weig ht of your buttocks, like great smooth round melons
—”
“I take it bac k—I don’ t want to know what you’re
thinking!”
“Y ou as ked,” he pointed out lo gically . “And I can see the
sweet w ee crease of your arse , too—and once I’ve got ye
pinned under me and ye canna get away… d’ye want it lyingon your back, Sassenach, or bent over on your knees, wi’ me
behind? I could take a good hold either way , and—”
“I am  no t going  into a freezing loch in order to gratify your
perverted desires!”
“All right,” he said, grinning. Stretching himself out beside
me, he reached r ound behind and took a generous handful. “Y e
can gratify them here, if ye like, where it’ s warm.” OENOMANCY
 
L ALL YBROCH W AS A workin g farm. Nothing on a
farm can stop for very long, even for grief. Which is how it
came to be that I was the only person in the front of the house
when the door opened in the middle of the afternoon.
I he ard the soun d and poked m y head out of Ian’ s study to
see who  had come in. A strange young man was standing in
the foyer , gazing round appraisingly . He heard my step and
turned, looking at me curiously .
“Who are you?”  we said simultaneously , and laughed.
“I’m Mi chael,” he said, in a soft, husky voice with the trace
of a Fren ch accent. “And ye’ll be Uncle Jamie’ s faery-woman,
I suppose.”
He was examining me with frank interest, and I felt
therefore free to do the same.
“Is that what the family’ s been calling me?” I asked, looking
him over .
He was a slight man, lacking either Y oung Jamie’ s burly
strength or Y oung Ian’ s wiry height. Michael was Janet’ s twin
but did not resemble her at all,  either . This was the son who
had gon e to France, to becom e a junior partner in Jared
Fraser ’ s wine business, Fraser et Cie . As he took of f his
traveling cloak, I saw that he was dressed very fashionably for
the High lands, though his suit was sober in both color and cut
—and he wore a black crepe band around his upper arm.
“That, or the witch,” he said, smiling faintly . “Depending
whether it’ s Da or Mam who’ s talking.”
“Indeed,” I said, with an edge—but couldn’ t help smiling
back. He was quiet but an engaging young man—well,
relatively young. He must be near thirty , I thought.“I’m sorry for your… loss,” I said, with a nod toward the
crepe band. “May I ask—”
“My wife,” he said simply . “She died two weeks ago. I
should have come sooner , else.”
That took me aback considerably .
“Oh. I … see. But your parents, your brothers and sisters—
they don’ t know this yet?”
He shoo k his head and came forward a little, so the light
from the fanshaped window ab ove the door fell on his face,
and I saw the dark circles under his eyes and the marks of the
bone-deep exhaustion that is grief ’ s only consolation.
“I am so sorry ,” I said, and, moved by impulse, put my arms
around h im. He leaned toward me, under the same impulse.
His body  yielde d for an instant to my touch, and there was an
extraordinary moment in which I sensed the deep numbness
within him, the unacknowledge d war of acknowledgment and
denial. He knew what had happened, what was happening—
but could not feel it. Not yet.
“Oh, dear ,” I sa id, stepping back from the brief embrace. I
touched his cheek lightly , and he stared at me, blinking.
“I will be damned,” he said mildly . “They’re right.”
 
A DOOR OPENED and closed above, I heard a foot on
the stair—and an instant later , Lallybroch awoke to the
knowledge that the last child had come home.
The swi rl of women and childre n wafted us into the kitchen,
where th e men appeared, by on es and twos through the back
door to embrace Michael or clap him on the shoulder .
There w ere outpourings of sympathy , the same questions
and answ ers rep eated several times—how had Michael’ s wife,
Lillie, died? She had died o f the influenza; so had her
grandmother; no , he himself had not caught it; her father sent
his pray ers and concerns for Mi chael’ s father—and eventuallythe prep arations for washing and supper and the putting of
children to bed began, and Michael slipped out of the
maelstrom.
Coming out of the kitchen mys elf to fetch my shawl from
the study , I saw him at the foot of the stair with Jenny , talking
quietly . She touched his face , just as I had, asking him
something in a l ow voice. He half-smiled, shook his head, and,
squaring his shoulders, went upstairs alone to see Ian, who
was feeling too poorly to come down to supper .
 
ALONE AMON G THE Murrays, Michael had inherited
the fugi tive gene for red hair , and burned among his darker
siblings like a coal. He had inherited an exact copy of his
father ’ s soft brown eyes, thoug h. “And a good thing, too,”
Jenny sa id to me privately , “els e his da would likely be sure
I’d b een at it wi’ the goatherd, f or God knows, he doesna look
like anyone else in the family .”
I’d m entioned this to Jamie, wh o looked surprised but then
smiled.
“A ye. S he wouldna ken it, for she never met Colum
MacKenzie face-to-face.”
“Colum? Are you sure?” I looked over my shoulder .
“Oh, aye. The coloring’ s dif ferent—but allowing for age
and good health … There was  a painting at Leoch, done of
Colum w hen he was maybe fifte en, before his first fall. Recall
it, do ye? It hung in the solar on the third floor .”
I closed my eyes, frowning in concentration, trying to
reconstruct the floor plan of the castle.
“W alk me there,” I said. He ma de a small amused noise in
his throat but t ook my hand, tracing a delicate line on my
palm.
“A ye, here’ s the entrance, wi’ the big double door . Y e’d
cross the courtyard, once inside, and then …”He w alked me u nerringly to the exact spot in my mind, and
sure eno ugh, the re was a paintin g there of a young man with a
thin, clever face and look of far -seeing in his eyes.
“Y es, I think you’re right,” I said , opening my eyes. “If he is
as intelligent as Colum, then… I have to tell him.”
Jamie’ s eyes, dark with thought, searched my face.
“W e couldna change things, earlier ,” he said, a note of
warning in my v oice. “Y e likely canna change what’ s to come
in France.”
“Maybe not,” I said. “But wha t I knew—what I told you,
before Culloden. It didn’ t stop Charles Stuart, but you  lived.”
“Not on purpose,” he said dryly .
“No, but your men lived, too—and that was  on purpose. So
maybe—just maybe—it might  help. And I can’ t live with
myself if I don’ t.”
He nodded, sober .
“A ye, then. I’ll call them.”
 
THE CO RK EASED free with a  soft pop! , and Michael’ s
face eas ed, too. He snif fed the darkened cork, then passed the
bottle delicately under his nose, eyes half closing in
appreciation.
“W ell, w hat d’ye say , lad?” his father asked. “W ill it poison
us or no?”
He opened his eyes and gave his father a mildly dirty look.
“Y ou sa id it was important, aye? So we’ll have the
negroamaro. From Apulia,” he added, with a note of
satisfaction, and turned to me. “W ill that do, Aunt?”
“Er… certainly ,” I said, taken back somewhat. “Why ask
me? Y ou’re the wine expert.”
Michael glanced at me, surprised.“Ian said —” he began, but stop ped and smiled at me. “My
apologies, Aunt. I must have misunderstood.”
Everyone turned and looked at Y oung Ian, who reddened at
this scrutiny .
“What exactly did ye say , Ian?” Y oung Jamie asked. Y oung
Ian narrowed his eyes at his bro ther , who seemed to be finding
something funny in the situation.
“I sa id,” Y oung Ian replied, stra ightening himself defiantly ,
“that Auntie Claire had something of importance to say to
Michael, and that he must listen, because she’ s a… a…”
” Ban-sidhe , h e said,” Mic hael ended helpfully . He didn’ t
grin at me, but a deep humor glowed in his eyes, and for the
first tim e I saw what Jamie had meant by comparing him to
Colum MacKenzie. “I wasn’ t sure whether he meant that,
Auntie, or if it’ s only you’re a conjure-woman—or a witch.”
Jenny gasped at the word, and even the elder Ian blinked.
Both of them turned and looked at Y oung Ian, who hunched
his shoulders defensively .
“W ell, I dinna ken exactly  what she is,” he said. “But she ’ s
an Auld One, isn’ t she, Uncle Jamie?”
Something odd seemed to pass through the air of the room;
a sudden live, fresh wind moaned down the chimney ,
exploding the banked fire and showering sparks and embers
onto the  hearth. Jenny got up with a small exclamation and
beat them out with the broom.
Jamie w as sitting beside me; h e took my hand and fixed
Michael with a firm sort of look.
“There’ s no real word for w hat she is—but she has
knowledge of things that will come to pass. Listen to her .”
That settled them all to attention, and I cleared my throat,
deeply embarrassed by my role as prophet but obliged to speak
nonetheless. For the first time, I  had a sudden sense of kinship
with som e of the more reluctant Old T estament prophets. I
thought I knew just  what Jeremiah felt like when told to goand prop hesy th e destruction of Nineveh. I just hoped I’d get a
better reception; I seemed to recall that the inhabitants of
Nineveh had thrown him into a well.
“Y ou’ll know more than I do about the politics in France,” I
said, looking directly at Michae l. “I can’ t tell you anything in
terms of specific events for the  next ten or fifteen years. But
after tha t… things are going to go downhill fast. There’ s going
to be a r evolution. Inspired by th e one that’ s happening now in
America, but not the same. T he King and Queen will be
imprisoned wit h their family , and both of them will be
beheaded.”
A g eneral gasp went up from the table, and Michael
blinked.
“There will be a movement ca lled the T error , and people
will be pulled out of their ho mes and denounced, all the
aristocrats will either be killed or have to flee the country , and
it w on’ t be too good for rich pe ople in general. Jared may be
dead by then, but you won’ t be. And if you’re half as talented
as I think, you will  be rich.”
He snorted a little at that, and there was a breath of laughter
in the room, but it didn’ t last long.
“They’ll build a machine called the guillotine—perhaps it
already exists, I don’ t know . It was originally made as a
humane method of execution, I think, but it will be used so
often that it w ill be a symbo l of the T error , and of the
revolution in general. Y ou don’ t  want to be in France when
that happens.”
“I—how do ye know this?” Michael demanded. He looked
pale and  half belligerent. W ell, here was the rub. I took a firm
grip of Jamie’ s hand under the table and told them how I knew .
There was a dead silence. Only Y oung Ian didn’ t look
dumbfounded—but he knew already , and more or less
believed me. I could tell that most of those around the table
didn’ t. At the same time, they couldn’ t really call me a liar .“That’ s what I know ,” I said, speaking straight to Michael.
“And th at’ s how I know it. Y ou have a few years to get ready .
Move the business to Spain, or Portugal. Sell out and emigrate
to Amer ica. Do anything you like—but don’ t stay in France
for m ore than te n years more. T hat’ s all,” I said abruptly . I got
up and went out, leaving utter silence in my wake.
 
I S HOU LDN’T HA VE been surprised, but I was. I was in
the hen coop, collecting eggs , when I heard the excited
squawk and flutter of the hens outside that announced
someone had come into their yard. I fixed the last hen with a
steely g lare that dared her to peck me, snatched an egg out
from under her , and came out to see who was there.
It w as Jenny , w ith an apronful of corn. That was odd; I
knew the hens had already be en fed, for I’d seen one of
Maggie’ s daughters doing it an hour earlier .
She nod ded to me and tossed the corn in handfuls. I tucked
the last warm e gg into my bask et and waited. Obviously she
wanted to talk to me and had made an excuse to do so in
private. I had a deep feeling of foreboding.
Entirely justifie d, too, for she dropped the last handful of
cracked corn and, with it, all pretense.
“I want to beg a  favor ,” she said  to me, but she avoided my
eye, and I could see the pulse in her temple going like a
ticking clock.
“Jenny ,” I said, helpless either to stop her or to answer her .
“I know—”
“W ill ye  cure Ian?” she blurted, lifting her eyes to mine. I’d
been rig ht about what she meant to ask, but wrong about her
emotion. W orry and fear lay behind her eyes, but there was no
shyness, no embarrassment; she had the eyes of a hawk, and I
knew she would rip my flesh like one if I denied her .
“Jenny ,” I said again. “I can’ t.”“Y e can’ t, or ye won’ t?” she said sharply .
“I can’ t . F or God’ s sake , do you think I wouldn’ t have done
it already if I had the power?”
“Y e might not, for the sake of the grudge ye hold against
me. If that’ s it— I’ll say I’m sor ry , and I do mean it, though I
meant what I did for the best.”
“Y ou… what?” I was honestly confused, but this seemed to
anger her .
“Dinna pretend ye’ve no notion what I mean! When ye
came back before, and I sent for Laoghaire!”
“Oh.” I hadn’ t quite for gotten  tha t, but it hadn’ t seemed
important, in light of everything else. “That’ s … all right. I
don’ t hold it against you. Why did  you send for her , though?” I
asked, b oth out of curiosity a nd in hopes of dif fusing the
intensity of her emotion a little . I’d seen a great number of
people o n the ragged edge of exhaustion, grief, and terror , and
she was firmly in the grip of all three.
She mad e a jerky , impatient motion and seemed as though
she would turn away but didn’ t.
“Jamie hadn’ t told ye about her , nor her about you. I could
see why , maybe,  but I kent if I brought her here, he’d have nay
choice then but to take the bull by the horns and clear up the
matter .”
“She nearly cleared him  up ,” I said, beginning to get
somewhat hot myself. “She shot him , for God’ s sake!”
“W ell, I  didna give her the gun, did I?” she snapped. “I
didna m ean him to say whatever he said to her , nor her to take
up a pistol and put a ball in him.”
“No, but you told me to go away!”
“Why w ouldn’ t I? Y e’d broken his heart once already , and I
thought ye’d do it again! And  you wi’ the nerve to come
prancing back here, fine and blooming, when we’d been …
we’d been—it was that that gave Ian the cough!”“That—”
“When they took him away an d put him in the T olbooth.
But you werena here when th at happened! Y e werena here
when we  starved  and froze and feared for the lives of our men
and our bairns! Not for any of it! Y ou were in France, warm
and safe!”
“I was in Bosto n, two hundred years from now , thinking
Jamie was dead,” I said coldly . “And I can’ t help  Ian.” I
struggled to subdue my own fee lings, uncorked with a rush by
this ripping of s cabs of f the past , and found compassion in the
look of her , he r fine-boned face gaunt and harrowed with
worry , her hands clenched so hard that the nails bit into the
flesh.
“Jenny ,” I said m ore quietly . “Please believe me. If I could
do a nything for Ian, I’d give my soul to do it. But I’m not
magic; I  haven’ t any power . On ly a little knowledge, and not
enough. I’d give my soul  t o do it ,” I repeated, more strongly ,
leaning toward her . “But I can’ t. Jenny… I can’ t.”
She star ed at me in silence. A silence that lengthened past
bearing, and finally I stepped a round her and walked toward
the h ouse. She d idn’ t turn around, and I didn’ t look back. But
behind me, I heard her whisper .
“Y ou have nay soul.” PURGA T OR Y II
 
W HEN IAN FEL T WELL enough, he came out walking
with Jam ie. Som etimes only as far as the yard or the barn, to
lean on the fence and make  remarks to Jenny’ s sheep.
Sometimes he felt well enough to walk miles, which amazed
—and a larmed—Jamie. Still, he  thought, it was good to walk
side by side through the moors and the forest and down beside
the loch , not talking much but side by side. It didn’ t matter
that they walked slowly; they al ways had, since Ian had come
back from France with a wooden leg.
“I’m lo okin’ forward to having back my leg,” Ian had
remarked casually once, when they sat in the shelter of the big
rock where Fer gus had lost hi s hand, looking out over the
small burn that ran down at the foot of the hill, watching for
the stray flash of a leaping trout.
“A ye, th at’ll be good,” Jamie had said, smiling a little—and
a lit tle wry abo ut it, too, recalling when he’d waked after
Culloden and thought his own leg missing. He’d been upset
and tried  to comfort himself with the thought that he’d get it
back eventually , if he made it out of pur gatory and into
heaven. Of course, he’d thoug ht he was dead, too, but that
hadn’ t seemed nearly as bad as the imagined loss of his leg.
“I d inna suppose ye’ll have to wait,” he said idly , and Ian
blinked at him.
“W ait for what?”
“Y our leg.” He realized sudde nly that Ian had no notion
what he’d been thinking, and hastened to explain.
“So I was only thinking, ye wouldna spend much time in
pur gatory—if at all—so ye’ll have it back soon.”Ian grinned at h im. “What makes ye sae sure I willna spend
a thousa nd years in pur gatory? I might be a terrible sinner ,
aye?”
“W ell, aye, ye m ight be,” Jamie admitted. “Though if so, ye
must think the devil of a lot o f wicked thoughts, because if
ye’d been doing  anything, I’d know about it.”
“Oh, ye  think so?” Ian seeme d to find this funny . “Y e
havena s een me in years. I migh t ha’ been doing anything, and
ye’d never ken a thing about it!”
“Of cou rse I would,” Jamie said logically . “Jenny would tell
me. And ye dinna mean to suggest she wouldna ken if ye had a
mistress and six bastard bairns, or ye’d taken to the highways
and been robbing folk in a black silk mask?”
“W ell, possibly she would,” Ia n admitted. “Though come
on, man, there’ s nothing ye co uld call a highway within a
hundred miles. And I’d freeze to death long before I came
across a nyone worth robbin’ in one o’ the passes.” He paused,
eyes nar rowed against the wind, contemplating the criminal
possibilities open to him.
“I could ha’ been stealing cattle,” he of fered. “Though
there’re sae few beasts these day s, the whole parish would ken
it at once should one go missin g. And I doubt I could hide it
amongst Jenny’ s sheep wi’ any hope of its not bein’ noticed.”
He t hought further , chin in hand, then reluctantly shook his
head.
“The sad truth is , Jamie, no one’ s had a thing worth stealin’
in the Highlands  these twenty ye ars past. Nay , theft’ s right out,
I’m afra id. So is fornication, because Jenny would ha’ killed
me already . What does that leav e? There’ s no really anything
to covet…. I su ppose lying and murder is all that’ s left, and
while I’ ve met the odd man I would ha’ liked  to kill, I never
did.” He shook his head regretfully , and Jamie laughed.
“Oh, aye? Y e told me ye killed men in France.”
“W ell, aye, I did, but that was a matter of war—or
business,” he added fairly . “I w as bein’ paid to kill them; Ididna do it out o’ spite.”
“W ell, then, I’m right,” Jamie pointed out. “Y e’ll sail
straight through pur gatory like a rising cloud, for I canna think
of a single lie ye’ve ever told me.”
Ian smiled with great af fection.
“A ye, well, I m ay ha’ told lies now and then, Jamie—but
no, not to you.”
He l ooked down at the worn wooden peg stretched before
him and scratched at the knee on that side.
“I wonder , will it feel dif ferent?”
“How could it not?”
“W ell, th e thing is,” Ian said, wi ggling his sound foot to and
fro, “I can still feel my missing  foot. Always have been able
to, e ver since i t went. Not all the time, mind,” he added,
looking up. “But I do feel it. A verra strange thing. Do ye feel
your fin ger?” he asked curiously , raising his chin at Jamie’ s
right hand.
“W ell… aye, I do. Not all the time, but now and then—and
the nasty  thing is that even thou gh it’ s gone, it still hurts  like
damnation, which doesna seem really fair .”
He coul d have bitten his tongu e at that, for here Ian was
dying, a nd him complaining that the loss of his finger wasn’ t
fair . Ian wheezed with amusement, though, and leaned back,
shaking his head.
“If life was fair , then what?”
They sat in companionable silence for a while, watching the
wind move through the pines o n the hillside opposite. Then
Jamie re ached into his sporran a nd brought out the tiny white-
wrapped package. It was a b it grubby from being in his
sporran but had been tidily preserved and tightly wrapped.
Ian eyed the little bundle in his palm.
“What’ s this?”“My finger ,” Jamie said. “I—well… I wondered whether
ye’d maybe not mind to have it buried with ye.”
Ian look ed at him for a moment. Then his shoulders started
to shake.
“God, d on’ t laugh!” Jamie said, alarmed. “I didna mean to
make ye  laugh!  Christ, Jenny w ill kill me if ye cough up a
lung and die out here!”
Ian was  coughing, fits of it interspersed with long-drawn-
out whe ezes of laughter . T ears of mirth stood in his eyes, and
he p ressed both fists into his c hest, struggling to breathe. At
last, though, he left of f and stra ightened slowly up, making a
sound like a bel lows. He snif fed deep and casually spat a glob
of horrifying scarlet into the rocks.
“I’d rath er die out here laughin’ at you than in my bed wi’
six pries ts say-in’ prayers,” he s aid. “Doubt I’ll get the chance,
though.” He put out a hand, palm up. “A ye, give it here.”
Jamie laid the little white-wrapped cylinder in his hand, and
Ian tucked the finger casually into his own sporran.
“I’ll keep it safe ‘til ye catch me up.”
 
HE CAME DOWN through the  trees and made his way
toward t he edge of the moorland that lay below the cave. It
was sharply cold, with a stif f breeze blowing, and the light
changed over the land like the f licker of a bird’ s wings as the
clouds s lid overhead, long and f leeting. He’d picked up a deer
trail thr ough the heather earlier in the morning, but it had
disappeared in a stony fall ne ar a brae, and now he was
coming back toward the house ; he was behind the hill on
which th e broch stood, this side of it thick with a little wood of
beech and pine. He’d not seen a deer or even a coney this
morning, but wasn’ t bothered.
W ith so many in  the house, they  could use a deer , to be sure
—but he  was happy only to be out of the house, even if he
came back with nothing.He c ouldn’ t look at Ian without wanting to stare at his face,
to comm it him to memory , to impress these last bits of his
brother -in-law upon his mind in the way that he recalled
special vivid moments, there to be taken out and lived through
again a t need. But at the same time, he didn’ t want to
remember Ian as he was now; m uch better to keep what he had
of h im: firelight on the side of Ian’ s face, laughing fit to burst
as h e’d forced J amie’ s arm over in a wrestling match, his own
wiry strength surprising them b oth. Ian’ s long, knob-jointed
hands on the gralloch knife, the wrench and the hot metal
smell of the blood that smeare d his fingers, the look of his
brown hair ruf fling in the wind of f the loch, the narrow back,
bent and  springy  as a bow as he stooped to snatch one of his
toddling bairns or grandchildren  of f their feet and throw them
up giggling into the air .
It w as good they ’d come, he thought. Better than good that
they’d b rought t he lad back in time to speak to his father as a
man, to comfort Ian’ s mind and take his leave properly . But to
live in the same  house with a beloved brother dying by inches
under your nose wore sadly on the nerves.
W ith so many women in the house, squabbling was
inevitable. W ith  so many of the women Frasers, it was like
walking through  a gunpowder mill with a lit candle. Everyone
tried so hard to manage, t o keep in countenance, to
accommodate—but that only made it worse when some spark
finally set the powder keg of f. He wasn’ t only out hunting
because they needed meat.
He spared a sympathetic thought for Claire. After Jenny’ s
anguished request, Claire had taken to hiding in their room or
in Ian’ s study—he had invited her to use it, and Jamie thought
that aggravated Jenny still mor e—writing busily , making the
book Andy Bell had put in her mind. She had great powers of
concentration and could stay inside her mind for hours—but
she had to com e out to eat. And it was always there, the
knowledge that Ian was dying, g rinding like a quern, slow but
relentless, wearing away the nerves.
Ian’ s nerves, too.He and Ian had  been walking—slowly—by the side of the
loch two days before, when Ian  stopped suddenly , curling in
on hims elf like an autumn leaf. Jamie hurried to take him by
the arm  before he could fall, and he lowered him to the
ground, finding a boulder to bra ce his back, pulling the shawl
high ar ound th e wasted shoulders, looking for anything,
anything at all he could do.
“What i s it, a charaid ?” he said, anxi ous, crouching beside
his brother -in-law , his friend.
Ian was coughing, almost silentl y , his body shaking with the
force of  it. At la st the spasm ea sed and he could draw breath,
his face bright with the consumptive flush, that terrible illusion
of health.
“It h urts, Jamie.” The words were spoken simply , but Ian’ s
eyelids were closed, as though he didn’ t want to look at Jamie
while he spoke.
“I’ll carry ye back. W e’ll get ye a bit of laudanum, maybe,
and—”
Ian waved a hand, quelling his anxious promises. He
breathed shallowly for a moment before shaking his head.
“A ye, my chest feels like there’ s a knife in it,” he said
finally . “ But that’ s no what I meant. I’m no bothered so much
about dy ing—but Christ, the slowness of it is killing me.” He
did open his eyes then, meet ing Jamie’ s, and laughed as
silently as he’d coughed, the b arest breath of sound as his
body shook with it.
“This dying hurts me, Dougal. I’d have it over .”  The words
came in to his mind as clearly as if they’d been spoken just
now in front of him, rather than  thirty years before in a dark
church, ruined by cannon fire.  Rupert had said that, dying
slow . “Y ou’r e my chief, man,”  he’d said to Do ugal, imploring.
“It’ s your job.”  And Dougal MacKenzie had d one what love
and duty called for .
He had been holding Ian’ s han d, clasping hard, trying to
force some notion of well-being  from his own calloused palminto Ian’ s thin gray skin. His thumb slid upward now , pressing
on t he wrist wh ere he had seen Claire grip, searching out the
truth of a patient’ s health.
He f elt the skin give, sliding across the bones of Ian’ s wrist.
He thou ght suddenly of the blo od vow given at his marriage,
the s ting of the blade and Claire’ s cold wrist pressed to his and
the blood slick between them. Ian’ s wrist was cold, too, but
not from fear .
He glan ced at his own wrist, b ut there was no trace of a
scar , eith er from  vows or fetters ; those wounds were fleeting,
long-healed.
“D’ye remember when we gave each other blood for
blood?” Ian’ s eyes were closed , but he smiled. Jamie’ s hand
tightened on the bony wrist, a little startled but not truly
surprised that Ian had reached into his mind and caught the
echo of his thoughts.
“A ye, of course.” He couldn’ t he lp a small smile of his own,
a painful one.
They’d been eight years old, the two of them. Jamie’ s
mother a nd her bairn had died t he day before. The house had
been ful l of mourners, his fathe r dazed with shock. They had
slipped out, he and Ian, scram bling up the hill behind the
house, trying not to look at the fresh-dug grave by the broch.
Into the wood, safe under the trees.
Had slo wed then, wandering, come to a stop at last at the
top of the high hill, where som e old stone building that they
called the fort h ad fallen down long ago. They’d sat on the
rubble, wrapped in their plaids against the wind, not talking
much.
“I thoug ht I’d have a new brother ,” he’d said suddenly . “But
I do n’ t. It’ s just  Jenny and me, still.” In the years since, he’d
succeeded in for getting that sma ll pain, the loss of his hoped-
for b rother , the b oy who might h ave given him back a little of
his l ove for his  older brother , W illie, dead of the smallpox.He’d cherished that pain for a little, a flimsy shield against the
enormity of knowing his mother gone forever .
Ian had sat thinking for a bit, th en reached into his sporran
and got out the wee knife his fa ther had given him on his last
birthday .
“I’ll be your brother ,” he’d said, matter -of-fact, and cut
across his thumb, hissing a little through his teeth.
He’d handed the knife to Jamie, who’d cut himself,
surprised that it hurt so much, and then they’d pressed their
thumbs together  and sworn to be brothers always. And had
been.
He took a deep breath, bracing himself against the nearness
of death, the black finality .
“Ian. Shall I…” Ian’ s eyelids lifted, the soft brown of his
gaze sha rpening into clarity at w hat he heard in the thickness
of J amie’ s voice. Jamie cleared his throat hard and looked
away , then looked back, feeling  obscurely that to look away
was cowardly .
“W ill ye have me hasten ye?” he asked, very softly . Even as
he spoke, the cold part of his mi nd sought the way . Not by the
blade, no; it wa s quick and clean, a proper man’ s departure,
but it would cause his sister and the weans grief; neither he nor
Ian had the right to leave a final memory stained with blood.
Ian’ s grip neither slackened nor clung, but of a sudden
Jamie fe lt the pulse he had look ed for in vain, a small, steady
throb against his own palm.
He h adn’ t looked away , but his e yes blurred, and he bent his
head to hide the tears.
Claire… She would know how , but he couldn’ t ask her to do
it. Her own vow kept her from it.
“No,” Ian said. “Not yet, anyway .” He’d smiled, eyes soft.
“But I’m glad to ken ye’ll do it if I need ye to, mo brathair .”
The flic ker of a movement sto pped him in his tracks and
jerked him instantly from his thoughts.It ha dn’ t seen him, though he was in sight. The wind was
toward h im, though, and the deer was busy , nibbling among
the c rusts of dry  heather for sheltered bits of grass and softer
moor plants. He waited, listenin g to the wind. Only the deer ’ s
head and  shoulders were visible behind a gorse bush, though
he thought from the size of the neck that it was a male.
He waite d, feeling the way of it seep back into him. Hunting
red deer  on the moor was dif ferent from hunting in the forests
of North  Carolina. A slower thing altogether . The deer moved
out a little from  behind the gor se bush, intent on its feeding,
and he began, by  imperceptible degrees, to raise his rifle. He’d
had a gunsmith in Edinbur gh straighten the barrel for him but
hadn’ t used it since; he hoped it would aim true.
Hadn’ t used it since he’d cloute d the Hessian with it in the
redoubt. He had a sudden, vivid recollection of Claire
dropping the misshapen bullet t hat had killed Simon into the
china plate, felt the chink and roll of it in his blood.
Another step, two; the deer had found something tasty and
was tugging and chewing with great concentration. Like a
thing completing itself, the muzzle of the rifle settled gently on
its ta r get. A big buck deer , and no more than a hundred yards.
He could feel th e big solid heart , pumping under his own ribs,
pulsing in the tips of his fingers on the metal. The stock
snugged hard into the hollow of his shoulder .
He was just beg inning to squeeze the trigger when he heard
the screa ms from the wood behind him. The gun went of f, the
shot went wild, the deer vanis hed with a crash of breaking
heather , and the screams stopped.
He turned and strode fast into the woods, in the direction
where he’d heard them, his hea rt pounding. Who? A woman,
but who?
He found Jenny without much dif ficulty , standing frozen in
the s mall clearing where he and  she and Ian came when they
were young, to share out stolen  treats and play at knights and
soldiers.She’d been a good soldier .
Maybe s he’d been waiting for him, having heard his gun.
Maybe she just couldn’ t move. She stood straight-backed but
empty-eyed and watched him come, her shawls wrapped like
rusty armor round her .
“Are ye all right, lass?” he asked, setting down his rifle by
the big pine where she’d read to him and Ian in the long
summer nights when the sun barely set from dusk to dawn.
“A ye, fine,” she said, her voice colorless.
“A ye, right,” he said, sighing. Coming close, he insisted
upon tak ing her  hands in his; she didn’ t give them to him but
didn’ t resist. “I heard ye scream.”
“I didna mean anyone to hear .”
“Of cou rse ye didn’ t.” He hesitated, wanting to ask again
was she all right, but that was foolish. He knew fine well what
the t rouble was a nd why she nee ded to come and scream in the
wood, w here no  one would hea r her and ask stupidly was she
all right.
“D’ye want me to go away?” he asked instead, and she
grimaced, pulling at her hand, but he didn’ t let go.
“No. What dif ference does it make? What dif ference does
anything make?” He heard the note of hysteria in her voice.
“At leas t… we brought the lad home in time,” he said, for
lack of anything else to of fer her .
“A ye, ye  did,” she said, with an ef fort at self-control that
shredded like old silk. “And ye brought your wife back, too.”
“Y e blame me for bringing my wife?” he said, shocked.
“Why , for God’ s sake? Should  ye no be happy she’ s come
back? Or d’ye—” He choked of f the next words fast; he’d
been about to de mand whether she resented him still having a
wife when she w as about to lose her husband, and he couldn’ t
say that .
But that wasn’ t what Jenny had meant, at all.“A ye, sh e’ s come back. But for what?” she cried. “What
good is a faery-woman too coldhearted to lift a finger to save
Ian?”
He was so stagg ered by this that he couldn’ t do anything but
repeat “Coldhearted? Claire?” in a dazed fashion.
“I a sked, and she denied me .” His sister ’ s eyes were
tearless, frantic with grief and u r gency . “Can ye not make her
help me, Jamie?”
The life in his sister , always bright and pulsing, thrummed
under hi s fingers  like chained lig htning now . Better if she let it
loose on him, he thought. She couldn’ t hurt him.
” Mo piuthar , sh e’d heal him if she could,” he said, as
gently as possible without lettin g go of her . “She told me ye’d
asked—and she wept in the telling. She loves Ian as much—”
“Don’ t ye dar e  be tellin g me she loves my husb and as much
as I do!” she sh outed, jerking her hands out of his with such
violence that he was sure she meant to strike him. She did,
slapping his face so hard that his eye watered on that side.
“I wasn a going to tell ye that at all,” he said, keeping his
temper . He touched the side of his face gingerly . “I was going
to say that she loves him as much—”
He’d intended to say , “ as she loves me,”  but didn’ t get that
far . She kicked him in the shin hard enough to buckle his leg,
and he stumbled, flailing to kee p his balance, which gave her
the opportunity to turn and fly d own the hill like a witch on a
broomstick, her skirts and shawls whirling out like a storm
around her . DISPOSITIONS
 
C LEANSING OF WOUNDS , I wrote carefully , and
paused, marshaling my though ts. Boiling water , clean rags,
removal of foreign matter . Use of maggots on dead flesh (with
a note of caution regarding blowfly and screwworm larvae?
No, pointless; no one would b e able to tell the dif ference
without a magnifying glass). The stitching of wounds
(sterilization of needle and thread). Useful poultices. Ought I
to put in a separate section on  the production and uses of
penicillin?
I tap ped the quil l on the blotter , making tiny stars of ink, but
finally d ecided against it. This was meant to be a useful guide
for the common person. The common person was not
equipped for the painstaking process of making penicillin, nor
yet l ikely to have an injection apparatus—though I did think
briefly o f the penis syringe Dr . Fentiman had shown me, with
a faint twinge of amusement.
That in turn made me think—briefly but vividly—of David
Rawlings and his jugum penis. Did he really use it himself? I
wondered, but hastily dismissed the vision conjured up by the
thought and flipped over a few sheets, looking for my list of
main topics.
Masturbation , I wrote thoughtfully . If some doctors
discussed it in a negative light— and they most certainly did—
I supposed there was no reason why I shouldn’ t give the
opposing view—discreetly .
I f ound myself s till making inky stars a few moments later ,
thoroughly distracted by the problem of talking discreetly
about the benefits of masturbati on. God, what if I said in print
that women did it?“They’d burn the whole printing, and likely Andy Bell’ s
shop, too,” I said aloud.
There w as a sharp intake of breath, and I glanced up to see a
woman standing in the door of the study .
“Oh, are you loo king for Ian Murray?” I said, pushing back
from the desk. “He’ s—”
“No, it’ s  you I w as looking for .” There was a very odd tone
to her voice, and I stood up , feeling suddenly defensive
without knowing why .
“Ah,” I said. “And you are… ?”
She stepped out of the shadowed hall into the light.
“Y e’ll not know me, then?” Her mouth twitched in an angry
half smile. “Laoghaire MacKenzie… Fraser ,” she added,
almost reluctantly .
“Oh,” I said.
I wo uld have rec ognized her at once, I thought, save for the
incongruity of context. This wa s the last place I would have
expected her to be, and the fact that she was here… A
recollection of what had happened the last time she had come
to Lallybroch made me reach inconspicuously for the letter
opener on the desk.
“Y ou were looking for me,” I repeated warily . “Not Jamie?”
She made a contemptuous gesture, pushing the thought of
Jamie as ide, and reached into th e pocket at her waist, bringing
out a folded letter .
“I’ve come to as k ye a favor ,” she said, and for the first time
I h eard the tremor in her voice . “Read that. If ye will,” she
added, and pressed her lips tight together .
I lo oked warily at her pocket , but it was flat; if she’d
brought a pistol, she wasn’ t carrying it there. I picked up the
letter an d motio ned her to the chair on the other side of the
desk. If she took it into her head  to attack me, I’d have a little
warning.Still, I wasn’ t re ally afraid of her . She was upset; that was
clear . But very much in control of herself.
I opened the letter , and, with the occasional glance to be
sure she stayed where she was, began to read.
15 February 1778
 Philadelphia
 
“Philadelphia?” I said, startled, and looked up at Laoghaire.
She nodded.
“They went there in the summe r last year , himself thinking
‘twould be safer .” Her lips twist ed a little. “T wo months later ,
the British army came a-marc hing into the city , and there
they’ve been since.”
“Himself,” I supposed, was Fer gus. I noted the usage with
interest; evidently Laoghaire had become reconciled to her
older daughter ’ s husband, for she used the word without irony .
Dear Mam,
I must ask you to do something  for love of me and
my childr en. The tr ouble is with Henri-Christian. Because
of hi s oddness o f form, he has always had some tr ouble in
br eathing, parti cularly when suffering fr om the catarr h,
and has snor ed like a grampus since he was born. Now he
has taken to s topping br eath ing altogether when he
sleeps, save he is pr opped up with cushions in a
particular posit ion. Mother Clair e had looked in his
thr oat when she and Da saw u s in New Bern and said
then that his adenoids—this being something in his thr oat
—wer e overlar ge and might give tr ouble in futur e.
(Germain has these, also, and br eathes with his mouth
open a good dea l of the time, but it is not a danger to him
as it is to Henri-Christian.)
I am in mortal terr or that Henri-Christian will stop
br eathing one night and no one will know in time to savehim. W e  take it in turns to sit up with him, to keep his
head jus t right and to wake him when he stops br eathing,
but I  do not know how long we can contrive to keep it up.
Fer gus is worn out with the work of the shop and I with
the work  of the house (I help in  the shop, as well, and so
of cours e does Germain. The lit tle girls ar e gr eat help to
me in the house , bless them, and so willing to car e for
their little br other—but they can not be left to sit up with
him by night alone) .
I h ave had a physician to look at Henri-Christian. He
agr ees that the adenoids ar e likely to blame for the
obstruction of br eathing, and he bled the wee lad and
gave me medicine to shrink them, but this was of no use
at all and only made Henri-Christian cry and vomit.
Mother Clair e–for give me for speaking of her to you, for I
know your feelings, but I must— had said that it might be
necessary to r emove Henri- Christian’ s tonsils and
adenoids at some point, to ease his br eathing, and plainly
this point has been r eached. She did this for the Bear dsley
twins so me time ago on the Ridge, and I would trust no
one else to attempt such an operation on Henri-Christian .
W ill you go to see her , Mam? I think she must be at
Lallybr och now ,  and I will write to her ther e, begging her
to come  to Philadelphia as soo n as possible. But I fear
my inability to communicate the horr or of our situation .
As y ou l ove me,  Mam, please go  to her and ask her to
come as quickly as may be .
Y our most affectionate daughter ,
 Marsali
 
I set down the letter . I fear my inability to communicate the
horr or of our situation . No, she’d done that, all right.
Sleep ap nea, the y called it; the  tendency to stop breathing
suddenly when asleep. It was  common—and much more
common in some sorts of dwarfism, where the respiratory
airways were constricted by the  skeletal abnormalities. Most
people who had it would wake themselves, thrashing andsnorting as they breathed again. But the enlar ged adenoids and
tonsils o bstructing his throat—p robably a hereditary problem,
I though t distrac tedly , for I’d no ted them in Germain and to a
lesser extent in the girls, as well—would aggravate the
dif ficulty , since even if the refle x that causes a person short of
oxygen to breathe kicked in belatedly , Henri-Christian likely
couldn’ t draw the immediate deep breath that would waken
him.
The vision of M arsali and Fer gus—and probably Germain
—taking it in tur ns to sit up in a dark house, watching the little
boy sleep, perhaps nodding of f themselves in the cold and
quiet, je rking aw ake in terror le st he have shifted in his sleep
and stopped breathing… A sick knot of fear had formed under
my ribs, reading the letter .
Laoghaire was watching me, blue eyes direct under her cap.
For once, the anger , hysteria, a nd suspicion with which she
had always regarded me was gone.
“If y e’ll go,” s he said, and swallowed, “I’ll give up the
money .”
I stared at her .
“Y ou think that I—” I began incredulously , but stopped.
W ell, yes, she plainly did  beli eve I would require to be br ibed.
She thought that I had abandoned Jamie after Culloden,
returning only when he had become prosperous again. I
struggled with the ur ge to try to tell her… but that was
pointless, and quite beside the point now , too. The situation
was clear and sharp as broken glass.
She leaned forward abruptly , her hands on the desk, pressed
down so hard that her fingernails were white.
“Please,” she said. “Please.”
I was conscious of strong, co nflicting ur ges: on the one
hand, to smack her , and on the other , to put a sympathetic hand
over hers. I fou ght down both and forced myself to think
calmly for a moment.I wo uld go, of course; I’d have to. It had nothing to do with
Laoghaire, or with what lay between us. If I did not go, and
Henri-Christian died—he well might— I’d neve r be able to live
with my self. If I came in time, I could save him; no one else
could. It was as simple as that.
My heart sank precipitously at the thought of leaving
Lallybroch now . How horrible; how could I, knowing that I
left Ian for the last time, perhaps leaving them all and the place
itself for the last time. But even as I thought these things, the
part of my mind that was a sur geon had already grasped the
necessity and was setting abou t the business of planning the
quickest way to Philadelphia, contemplating how I should
acquire what I needed once there, the possible obstructions
and complicatio ns that might ar ise—all the practical analysis
of how I should do what had so suddenly been asked of me.
And as my min d clicked through these things, the ruthless
logic overwhelm ing shock, subduing emotion, it began to
dawn upon me that this sudd en disaster might have other
aspects.
Laoghaire was waiting, eyes fix ed on me, her mouth firm,
willing me to do it.
“All right,” I sa id, leaning back in my chair and fixing her
in turn with a level look. “Let’ s come to terms, then, shall
we?”
 
“SO,” I SAID, eyes fixed on the  flight of a gray heron as
it cr ossed the loch, “we made a bar gain. I’ll go to Philadelphia
as quickly as I can to take care of Henri-Christian. She’ll
marry Joey , give up the alimony —and give her permission for
Joan to go to the convent. Though I suppose we’d best get it in
writing, just in case.”
Jamie stared at me, speechless. W e were sitting in the long
rough grass at the side of the loch, where I’d brought him to
tell him what had happened—and what was going to happen.“She—Laoghaire—has kept Joan’ s dowry intact; Joan will
have tha t, for traveling and for  her entry to the convent,” I
added. I took a deep breath, hoping to keep my voice steady .
“I’m thi nking that—well, Michael will be leaving in a few
days. Jo an and I could go with h im to France; I could sail from
there on a Fren ch ship, and h e could see her safely to her
convent.”
“Y ou—” he began, and I reach ed to squeeze his hand, to
stop him speaking.
“Y ou ca n’ t go now , Jamie,” I  said softly . “I know you
can’ t.”
He close d his eyes, grimacing,  and his hand tightened on
mine in instincti ve denial of the  obvious. I clung to his fingers
just as tightly , in spite of the fa ct that it was his tender right
hand I held. The thought of being parted from him for any
amount of time or space—let alone the Atlantic Ocean and the
months it might take before we  saw each other again—made
the bottom of my stomach fall away and filled me with
desolation and a sense of vague terror .
He w ould go wi th me if I asked—if I even gave him room
for doubt about what he must do. I must not.
He need ed this so much. Needed what small time remained
with Ian ; needed even more to  be here for Jenny when Ian
died, for  he could be her comfo rt in a way that not even her
children could be. And if he  had needed to go and see
Laoghaire out of guilt over the failure of their marriage—how
much more acute would be his guilt at abandoning his sister ,
yet again, and in her most desperate time of need.
“Y ou can’ t leave,” I whispered, ur gent. “I know , Jamie.”
He open ed his eyes then and looked at me, eyes dark with
anguish.
“I canna let ye go. Not without me.”
“It… wo n’ t be long,” I said, forcing the words past the lump
in my throat—a  lump that ackn owledged both my sorrow inparting from him and the great er sorrow for the reason why
our separation wouldn’ t be a long one.
“I’ve gone farther by myself, after all,” I said, trying to
smile. His mouth moved, wanting to respond, but the trouble
in his eyes didn’ t change.
I lift ed his crippled hand to my lips and kissed it, pressed
my chee k against it, my head turned away—but a tear ran
down m y cheek and I knew he felt the wetness of it on his
hand, fo r his other hand reached for me and drew me into him,
and we sat pressed together for a long, long time, listening to
the win d that stirred the grass  and touched the water . The
heron had set do wn at the far side of the loch and stood on one
leg, waiting patiently amid the tiny ripples.
“W e’ll need a lawyer ,” I said at last, not moving. “Is Ned
Gowan still alive?”
 
MUCH T O MY astonishment, Ned Gowan was  still
alive. H ow old could he possib ly be? I wondered, looking at
him. Eighty-five? Ninety? He was toothless and wrinkled as a
crumpled paper bag, but still ja unty as a cricket, and with his
lawyer ’ s bloodlust quite intact.
He had drawn up the agreem ent of annulment for the
marriage between Jamie and Laoghaire, cheerfully arranging
the annual payments to Laoghai re, the dowries for Marsali and
Joan. He set himself now just as cheerfully to dismantling it.
“Now , the question of Mistress Joan’ s dowry ,” he said,
thoughtfully lick ing the point o f his quill. “Y ou specified, sir ,
in the original document, that this amount—may I say , this
very gener ous  amount—was to be endowed upon the young
woman upon the occasion of he r marriage and to remain her
sole property thereafter , not passing to her husband.”
“A ye, that’ s right,” Jamie said, not very patiently . He’d told
me p rivately that he would prefer to be staked out naked on an
anthill th an to have to deal wit h a lawyer for more than fiveminutes, and we had been deal ing with the complications of
this agreement for a good hour . “So?”
“So she  is not marrying,” Mr . Gowan explained, with the
indulgence due to someone not very bright but still worthy of
respect by reason of the fact that he was paying the lawyer ’ s
fee. “Th e question of whether sh e can receive the dowry under
this contract—”
“She is  marrying,” Jamie said. “She’ s becoming a Bride o’
Christ, ye ignorant Protestant.”
I gla nced at Ned  in some surprise, having never heard that
he was  a Protes tant, bu t he made no demur at this. Mr . Gowan,
sharp as  ever , noticed my surp rise and smiled at me, eyes
twinkling.
“I h ave no religion save th e law , ma’am,” he said.
“Observance of one form of rit ual over another is irrelevant;
God to me is the  personification  of Justice, and I serve Him in
that guise.”
Jamie made a Scottish noise deep in his throat in response to
this sentiment.
“A ye, and a fat lot o’ good that will do ye, and your clients
here ever realize ye’re no a papist.”
Mr . Gow an’ s small dark eyes did not cease to twinkle as he
turned them on Jamie.
“I am  sure ye dinna suggest such a low thing as blackmail,
sir? Why , I hesitate even to name that honorable Scottish
institution, knowing as I do the nobility of your character—
and the fact tha t ye’re no goin g to get this bloody contract
done without me.”
Jamie sighed deeply and settled into his chair .
“A ye, get on with it. What’ s to do about the dowry , then?”
“Ah.” Mr . Gowan turned with alacrity to the matter at hand.
“I have spoken  with the young woman regarding her own
wishes i n the matter . As the original maker of the contract, you
may—with the consent of the other signatory , which, Iunderstand, has been given”—he uttered a dry little cough at
this oblique mention of Laoghaire—”alter the terms of the
original document. Since , as I say , Mistress Joan does not
propose to wed, do you wish to rescind the dowry altogether ,
to keep the existing terms, or to alter them in some way?”
“I w ant to give the money to Jo an,” Jamie said, with an air
of relief at finally being asked something concrete.
“Absolutely?” Mr . Gowan inqui red, pen poised. “The word
‘absolutely’ having a meaning in law other than—”
“Y e said ye talked to Joan. What the devil does she  want,
then?”
Mr . Gow an look ed happy , as he usually did upon perceiving
a new complication.
“She wishes to accept only a s mall portion of the original
dowry , this to be used to provide for her reception into a
convent; such a donation is customary , I believe.”
“A ye?” Jamie raised one eyebrow . “And what about the
rest?”
“She wishes the residue to be given to her mother ,
Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser , but not given absolutely , if you
follow me. Given with conditions.”
Jamie and I exchanged looks.
” What  conditions?” he asked carefully .
Mr . Gowan held up a withere d hand, folding down the
fingers as he enumerated the conditions.
“One, th at the money shall not  be rele ased un til a proper
record of the marriage of Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser and
Joseph B oswell Murray shall be written in the parish register
of Broch  Mordha, witnessed and attested by a priest. T wo, that
a contra ct be signed, reserving and guaranteeing the estate of
Balriggan and all its inclusive goods as the sole property of
Laoghaire MacK enzie Fraser until her death, thereafter being
willed as the aforesaid Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser shall so
dispose in a pro per will. Thirdly , the money shall not be givenabsolutely , but shall be retained  by a trustee and disbursed in
the amount of twenty pounds per annum, paid jointly to the
aforesaid Laogh aire MacKenzi e Fraser and Joseph Boswell
Murray . Fourth, that these annual payments shall be used only
for m atters pertaining to the up keep and improvement of the
estate of Balriggan. Fifth, that payment of each year ’ s
disbursement shall be contingent upon the receipt of proper
documentation regarding the use of the previous year ’ s
disbursement.” He folded down his thumb and lowered his
closed fist, and held up one finger of his other hand.
“Sixth—and lastly—that one James Alexander Gordon
Fraser Murray , of Lallybroch, shall be trustee for these funds.
Are these conditions agreeable, sir?”
“They ar e,” Jamie said firmly , rising to his feet. “Make it so,
if ye please, Mr . Gowan—and now , if no one minds, I am
going away and having a wee dram. Possibly two.”
Mr . Gowan capped his inkwell,  tidied his notes into a neat
pile, and likewise rose, though more slowly .
“I’ll join  ye in that dram, Jami e. I want to hear about this
war of yours in America. It sounds the grandest of
adventures!” COUNTING SHEEP
 
A S T HE TIME GREW SHOR TER, Ian found it
impossible to sleep. The need to go, to find Rachel, burned in
him so that he fe lt hot coals in the pit of his stomach all of the
time. Auntie Claire called it hea rtburn, and it was. She said it
was from bolting his food, though, and it wasn’ t that—he
could barely eat.
He spen t his days with his father , as much as he could.
Sitting i n the corner of the spe ak-a-word room, watching his
father and his elder brother go about the business of
Lallybroch, he couldn’ t understand how it would be possible
to st and up and walk away , to le ave them behind. T o leave his
father forever behind.
During the days, there were things to be done, folk to be
visited, to talk to, and the land  to be walked over , the stark
beauty of it soo thing when his feelings grew too heated to
bear . At night, though, the house lay quiet, the creaking silence
punctuated by his father ’ s dista nt cough and his two young
nephews’ heavy breathing in the room beside him. He began
to f eel the house itself breath e around him, drawing one
ragged, heavy-chested gasp after another , and to feel the
weight of it on his own chest, s o he sat up in bed, gulping air
only to be sure he could. And finally he would slide out of
bed, steal downstairs with his  boots in his hands, and let
himself out of the kitchen door to walk the night under clouds
or st ars, the clea n wind fanning the coals of his heart to open
flame, u ntil he should find his te ars and peace in which to shed
them.
One nig ht he found the door unbolted already . He went out
cautiously , looking round, but saw no one. Likely Y oung
Jamie gone to the barn; one of the two cows was due to calf
any day . He should go and help, maybe … but the burningunder his ribs was painful, he needed to walk a bit first. Jamie
would h ave fetc hed him in any case, had he thought he needed
help.
He turned away from the house and its outbuildings and
headed u p the hill, past the shee p pen, where the sheep lay in
somnolent mounds, pale under the moon, now and then
emitting a soft, sudden bah! , as thou gh start led by some she ep
dream.
Such a dream to ok shape before him suddenly , a dark form
moving against the fence, and he uttered a brief cry that made
the near er sheep start and rust le in a chorus of low-pitched
bahs .
“Hush, a bhailach,”  h is mother sai d softly . “Get t his lot
started, and ye’ll wake the dead.”
He c ould make her out now , a s mall, slender form, with her
unbound hair a soft mass against the paleness of her shift.
“Speak o’ the dead,” he said rather crossly , forcing his heart
down out of his throat. “I thought ye were a ghost. What are ye
doing out here, Mam?”
“Counting sheep ,” she said, a thread of humor in her voice.
“That’ s what ye’re meant to do when ye canna sleep, aye?”
“A ye.” He came and stood beside her , leaning on the fence.
“Does it work?”
“Sometimes.”
They sto od still for a bit, watching the sheep stir and settle.
They sm elled sweetly filthy , of chewed grass and sheep shit
and greasy wool, and Ian found  that it was oddly comforting
just to be with them.
“Does i t work to count them, when ye ken already how
many th ere are?” he asked, aft er a short silence. His mother
shook her head.
“No, I say their names over . It’ s like saying the rosary , only
ye dinna feel the need to be asking. It wears ye down, asking.”Especially when  ye ken the answer ’ s going to be no , Ian
thought, and moved by sudden  impulse, put his arm around
her shou lders. She made a small  sound of amused surprise, but
then rela xed, laying her head a gainst him. He could feel the
small bones of her , light as a bird’ s, and thought his heart
might break.
They stood for a while that way , and then she freed herself,
gently , moving away a little and turning to him.
“Sleepy yet?”
“No.”
“A ye, well. Come on, then.” No t waiting for an answer , she
turned and made her way through the dark, away from the
house.
There was a mo on, half full, an d he’d been out more than
long eno ugh for his eyes to adjust; it was simple to follow ,
even through the jumbled grass and stones and heather that
grew on the hill behind the house.
Where w as she taking him? Or rather , why? For they were
heading uphill, toward the old broch—and the burying ground
that lay nearby . He felt a chill r ound his heart—did she mean
to show him the site of his father ’ s grave?
But she stopped abruptly and st ooped, so he nearly tripped
over her . Straightening up, she turned and put a pebble into his
hand.
“Over here,” she said softly , an d led him to a small square
stone se t in the earth. He thought it was Caitlin’ s grave—the
child who’d come before Y oung Jenny , the sister who’d lived
but one day—but then saw that Caitlin’ s stone lay a few feet
away . This one w as the same size and shape, but—he squatted
by it, and runnin g his fingers ov er the shadows of its carving,
made out the name.
Y eksa’a .
“Mam,” he said, and his voice sounded strange to his own
ears.“Is that right, Ia n?” she said, a little anxious. “Y our da said
he w asna quite c ertain of the spe lling of the Indian name. I had
the stone carver put both, though. I thought that was right.”
“Both?” But his hand had already moved down and found
the other name.
Iseabail .
He swallowed hard.
“That w as right, ” he said very softly . His hand rested flat on
the stone, cool under his palm.
She squatted down beside him, and reaching, put her own
pebble o n the stone. It was what you did, he thought, stunned,
when you came to visit the dead. Y ou left a pebble to say
you’d been there; that you hadn’ t for gotten.
His own pebble was still in his other hand; he couldn’ t quite
bring himself to lay it down. T ears were running down his
face, and his mother ’ s hand was on his arm.
“It’ s all right, mo duine,”  s he  said  softly . “Go to your you ng
woman. Y e’ll always be here wi’ us.”
The steam of hi s tears rose like  the smoke of incense from
his hear t, and he laid the pebble gently on his daughter ’ s
grave. Safe among his family .
It wasn’ t until m any days later , in the middle of the ocean,
that he realized his mother had called him a man. THE RIGHT OF IT
 
I AN DIED JUST after dawn. Th e night had been hellish;
a dozen  times, Ian had come close to drowning in his own
blood, choking, eyes bulging, then rising up in convulsion,
spewing up bits of his lungs.  The bed looked like some
slaughter had taken place, and th e room reeked of the sweat of
a desperate, futile struggle, the smell of Death’ s presence.
In t he end, tho ugh, he had lain quiet, thin chest barely
moving, the sound of his breathing a faint rattle like the
scratch of the rose briers at the window .
Jamie h ad stood back, to give  Y oung Jamie the place at
Ian’ s side as eldest son; Jenny had sat all night on his other
side, wiping away the blood, the evil sweat, all the foul liquids
that oozed from Ian, dissolving his body before their eyes. But
near the  end, in the dark, Ian had raised his right hand and
whispered, “Jam ie.” He hadn’ t opened his eyes to look, but all
of them knew w hich Jamie it w as that he wanted, and Y oung
Jamie had made way , stumbling , so that his uncle could come
and grasp that seeking hand.
Ian’ s bony fingers had closed round his with surprising
strength. Ian had murmured so mething, too low to hear , and
then let go—not in the involunta ry relaxation of death; simply
let go, that business done, and let his hand fall back, open, to
his children.
He did not speak again but seemed to settle, his body
diminishing as life and breath fled from it. When his last
breath came, they waited in dull misery , expecting another ,
and only after a full minute of si lence did they begin to look at
one ano ther covertly , steal glances at the ravaged bed, the
stillness in Ian’ s face—and realize slowly that it was over at
last.
 
DID JENNY MIND? he wondered. That Ian’ s last words
had been to him? But he thought not; the one mercy to a going
such as his brother -in-law’ s had been was that there was time
to take leave. He had made a tim e to speak alone with each of
his child ren, Jamie knew . Comfort them as he could, maybe
leave them with a bit of advice, at the least the reassurance that
he loved them.
He had been sta nding next to Je nny when Ian died. She had
sighed a nd seemed to slump beside him, as though the iron rod
that had run up her back for the last year had suddenly been
pulled out through her head. He r face had showed no sorrow ,
though h e knew  it was there; for that moment, though, she had
only been glad it was over—for Ian’ s sake, for all their sakes.
So s urely they h ad found time, s he and Ian, to say what had
to be said between them, in the months since they knew .
What would he say to Claire in such circumstances? he
wondered suddenly . Probably what he had  said to her , in
parting. “I love you. I’ll see you again .”  He didn’ t see any
way of improving on the sentiment, after all.
He coul dn’ t stay in the house. The women had washed Ian
and laid him out in the parlor and were now embarked on an
or gy of furious cooking and cle aning, for word had gone out
and people were already beginning to come for the wake.
The day had dawned spitting rain, but for the moment, none
was falling. He went out throug h the kailyard and climbed the
little slope to the arbor . Jenn y was sitting there, and he
hesitated for a moment, but the n came and sat down beside
her . She could send him away if she wanted solitude.
She didn’ t; she reached up fo r his hand and he took it,
engulfing hers, thinking how fine-boned she was, how frail.
“I want to leave,” she said calmly .
“I dinna blame ye,” he said, with a glance at the house. The
arbor was covered with new le aves, the green of them freshand soft from the rain, but someone would find them soon.
“Shall we walk down by the loch for a bit?”
“No, I mean I want to leave here. Lallybroch. For good.”
That took him aback more than a bit.
“Y e dinna mean that, I think,” he said at last, cautious. “It’ s
been a shock, after all. Y e shouldna—”
She shook her head and put a hand to her breast.
“Something’ s b roken in me, Jamie,” she said softly .
“Whatever it was that bound me … it binds me nay more.”
He didn’ t know what to say . He’d avoided the sight of the
broch and the burying ground at its foot when he came out of
the house, unable to bear the d ark wet patch of raw ground
there—but now he turned his h ead deliberately and raised his
chin to point at it.
“And ye’d leave Ian?” he asked.
She made a sma ll noise in her throat. Her hand lay against
her b reast still, a nd at this she pressed it flat, fierce against her
heart.
“Ian’ s with me,” she said, an d her back straightened in
defiance of the fresh-dug grave. “He’ll never leave me, nor I
him.” She turned her head and looked at him then; her eyes
were red, but dry .
“He’ll never leave ye, either , Jam ie,” she said. “Y e ken that,
as well as I do.”
T ears welled in his own eyes then, unexpected, and he
turned his head away .
“I ken that, aye,” he muttered, and hoped it was true. Just
now the place in side him where he was accustomed to find Ian
was emp ty , hollo w and echoing as a bodhran . W ould he come
back? Jamie wondered. Or had Ian only moved a bit, to a
dif ferent part of his heart, a place he hadn’ t yet looked? He
hoped—but he wouldn’ t go looking just yet awhile and kent it
was for fear of finding nothing.He w anted to change the subjec t, give her time and space to
think. But it wa s dif ficult to find anything to say that didn’ t
have to do with Ian being dead. Or with death in general. All
loss is one, and one loss becomes all, a single death the key to
the gate that bars memory .
“When Da died,” he said suddenly , surprising himself as
much as her . “T ell me what happened.”
He f elt h er turn to look at him but kept his own eyes on his
hands, t he fingers of his left hand rubbing slowly over the
thick red scar that ran down the back of his right.
“They b rought him home,” she said at last. “L ying in a
wagon. It was D ougal MacKenzie with them. He told me Da
had seen ye bei ng whipped, and all of a sudden he’d fallen
down, a nd when  they picked him  up, one side of his face was
drawn u p in anguish but the other was slack. He couldna
speak, o r walk, and so they took him away and brought him
home.”
She paused, swallowing, her eye s fixed on the broch and the
burying ground.
“I had a doctor to him. He bled Da, more than once, and
burned t hings in  a wee burner and wafted the smoke under his
nose. He tried t o give him medicine, but Da couldna really
swallow . I put d rops of water on  his tongue, but that was all.”
She sighed deeply . “He died the next day , about noon.”
“Ah. He… never spoke?”
She shook her h ead. “He couldna speak at all. Only moved
his m outh now a nd then and made wee gur gling sounds.” Her
chin puc kered a little at the mem ory , but she firmed her lips. “I
could see, though, near the end, he was trying to speak. His
mouth was trying to shape the words, and his eyes were on
mine, trying to make me understand.” She glanced at him.
“He did say , ‘Jamie,’ the once. I  ken that much for sure. For
I t hought he was trying to ask f or you, and I told him Dougal
said ye were al ive and promised that ye’d be all right. That
seemed to comfort him a bit, and he died soon after .”He s wallowed thickly , the sound  of it loud in his ears. It had
begun to rain again, lightly , d rops pattering on the leaves
overhead.
“T aing,”  h e said softly at last. “I wonde red. I wish I could
have said ‘Sorry’ to him.”
“Y e didna need to,” she said just as softly . “He’d ha’ known
it.”
He n odded, unable to speak for a moment. Getting himself
under control, though, he took her hand again and turned to
her .
“I can say ‘Sorry’ to you, though, a piuthar , and I do.”
“For what?” she said, surprised.
“For bel ieving D ougal when he told me… well, when he
said ye’d become an English soldier ’ s whore. I was a fool.” He
looked at his maimed hand, not wanting to meet her eyes.
“A ye, well,” she said, and laid  her hand on his, light and
cool as the new  leaves that fluttered round them. “Y e needed
him. I didn’ t.”
They sat awhile longer , feeling peaceful, holding hands.
“Where d’ye think he is now?” Jenny said suddenly . “Ian, I
mean.”
He glanc ed at the house, then at the new grave waiting, but
of cours e that wasn’ t Ian anym ore. He was panicked for a
moment, his earlier emptiness returning—but then it came to
him, and, without surprise, he knew what it was Ian had said to
him.
“On your right, man.”  On  his right. Guarding his weak
side.
“He’ s just here,” he said to J enny , nodding to the spot
between them. “Where he belongs.”P AR T  S EVEN Reap the Whirlwind
 
  SON OF A WITCH
 
W HEN ROGER AND Buccleigh drove up to the house,
Amanda rushed out to meet the m and returned to her mother ,
waving a blue plastic pinwheel on a stick.
“Mama! Look what I got, look what I  got!”
“Oh, how pretty!” Brianna ben t to admire it and, blowing,
made the toy spin round.
“I do it, I do it!” Amanda grabbed it back, puf fing and
blowing with great determination but making little headway .
“From the side, a leannan , from the side.” W illiam
Buccleigh came  round the car and picked Amanda up, gently
turning her hand so the pinwh eel was perpendicular to her
face. “Now blow .” He put his face close to hers and helped
blow , and the pinwheel whirred like a June bug.
“A ye, that’ s fine, isn’ t it? Y ou  have a go, then, on your
own.” He gave Bree a half-apologetic shrug and carried
Amanda up the path, she industriously puf fing and blowing.
They passed Jem, who stopped to admire the pinwheel. Roger
got out of the ca r with a couple of carrier bags and paused for
a private word with Brianna.
“If we had a dog, I wonder if i t would like him, too?” she
murmured, nodd ing after their g uest, who was now engaged in
animated conversation with both children.
“A man may s mile, and smile, and be a villain,” Roger
replied, watching with a narrowed eye. “And the claims of
instinct quite aside, I don’ t think either dogs or children are
necessarily good judges of character .”
“Mm. D id he tell you anythin g else while you were out
today?” Roger had taken W illiam Buccleigh into Inverness toreplenish his wardrobe, as he po ssessed nothing more than the
jeans, T -shirt, and charity-store jacket in which he’d arrived.
“A few things. I asked him how he’d come here—to
Lallybroch, I mean—and what was he doing hanging about.
He s aid he’d see n me on the street in Inverness and recognized
me, but I’d got in my car and g one before he could make up
his mind  to talk to me. He saw me once or twice more, though,
and asked cautiously round to find out where I lived. He—”
He s topped and looked at her , w ith a half smile. “Bear in mind
what he is and when he came f rom. He thought—and I don’ t
think he was telling me a tale—that I must be an Old One.”
“Really?”
“A ye, really . And on the face of it… well, I did survive
being ha nged, which most people don’ t.” His mouth twisted a
little as he touc hed the scar on his throat. “And I—we—did,
obviously , trave l safely through the stones. I mean… I could
see his point.”
Despite her disquiet, she snif fed with amusement.
“W ell, yes. Y ou mean he was afraid of you?”
Roger s hrugged, helpless. “He was. And I think I believe
him—though I will say that if that’ s the case, he puts up a
good front.”
“W ould you act  afraid if you were going to confront a
powerful supernatural being? Or  would you try to play it cool?
Being a male of the species, as Mama puts it. Or a proper man,
as Da says. Y ou and Da both act like John W ayne if there’ s
anything fishy going on, and t his guy is related to both of
you.”
“Good p oint,” he said, though his mouth twitched at the
“powerful super natural being.” Or possibly the “John W ayne”
part. “And he admitted that he was reeling a bit at the shock of
everything. I could sympathize with that .”
“Mm. And we knew  what we were doing. Sort of. He told
me wha t happe ned when he ca me through—did he tell you
that, too?”They had been walking slowly but had nearly reached the
door; she could hear Annie’ s voice in the hall, asking
something, excl aiming among the children’ s chatter , and the
lower rumble of W illiam Buccleigh’ s voice in reply .
“A ye, he did. He wanted—wants, and wants badly—to get
back to his own time. Clearly I  knew how , and he’d have to
come an d talk to me to find ou t. But only a fool would walk
straight up to a stranger ’ s doo r , let alone a stranger you’d
come close to k illing, much less a stranger who might strike
you dea d on the spot or turn you into a crow .” He shrugged
again.
“So he left his job and took to lurking about the place,
watching. T o see if we were tossing human bones out the back
door , I suppose.  Jem ran into him out by the broch one day ,
and he told him  he was a Nuckelavee—partly to scare him
away , bu t also because if he cam e back and told me there was
a Nu ckelavee up the hill, I might come out and do something
magical about it. And if I did …” He lifted his hands, palms
up.
“If y ou did, you  might be dangerous, but he’d also know
you had the power to send him back. Like the W izard of Oz.”
He looked at her for a moment.
“Anyone less like Judy Garland  than him— ” he began, but
was interrupted by Annie MacDonald demanding to know
what they were hanging about being eaten by midgies for ,
when th ere was  supper on the table? Apologizing, they went
inside.
 
BRIANNA A TE  SUPPER without really noticing what
was on her pla te. Jem was going to spend the night with
Bobby a gain an d go out fishing  on Saturday with Rob on the
Rothiemurchus estate. She felt a small twinge at that; she
remembered her  father patiently teaching Jem to cast, with thehomemade rod and thread line t hat was all they had. W ould he
remember?
Still, it was just as well to have him out of the house. She
and Roger were going to have to sit down with W illiam
Buccleigh and decide how best to get him back to his own
time, and best if Jem wasn’ t lurking around the edges of such a
discussion with his ears flapping. Should they consult Fiona?
she wondered suddenly .
Fiona Graham was the granddaughter of old Mrs. Graham,
who had  kept house for Roger ’ s adoptive father , the Reverend
W akefield. The very proper and  elderly Mrs. Graham had also
been the “caller”—the holder of a very old tradition indeed.
On the fire feast of Beltane, the women whose families had
passed the tradition down to them met at dawn and, clothed in
white, performed a dance that Roger said was an ancient Norse
circle dance. And at the end of it, the caller sang out in words
that non e of them understood an ymore, bringing up the sun, so
that as it rose ab ove the horizon, the beam of light shot straight
through the cleft of the split stone.
Mrs. Graham had died peaceful ly in her sleep years before
—but had left her knowledge, and her role as caller , to her
granddaughter , Fiona.
Fiona had helped Roger when he  came through the stones to
find Brianna— even contributing her own diamond
engagement ring  to help him, after his first attempt had ended
much as  W illiam Buccleigh described his own: in flames in
the center of the circle.
They could get a gemstone without much trouble, she
thought, automatically passing the bowl of salad to Roger .
From what they knew so far , it didn’ t have to be a terribly
expensive stone, or even a lar g e one. The garnets in Roger ’ s
mother ’ s locket had apparently b een enough to keep him from
being killed during his first, abortive try .
She thought suddenly of the burn mark on W illiam
Buccleigh’ s chest and, as she did so, realized that she was
staring a t him— and he was stari ng back at her . She choked ona ch unk of cuc umber , and the subsequent hubbub of back-
thumping and arm-raising and coughing and water -fetching
luckily explained the redness of her face.
Everyone settled  back to their food, but she was aware of
Roger looking sideways at her . She shot him a brief look under
her lashes, with a faint tilt o f the head that said, “Later .
Upstairs,”  and he relaxed, resuming a three-way conversation
with “Uncle Buck” and Jemmy about trout flies.
She wanted to t alk to him about what Buccleigh had said,
and decide what to do about him, as soon as possible. She was
not  goi ng to tell him what W illiam Buccleigh had said about
Rob Cameron.
 
ROGER LA Y IN BED, watching the moonlight on
Brianna’ s sleeping face. It was quite late, but he found himself
wakeful. Odd, for he usually fell asleep in seconds after
making love to her . Fortunately , she did, too; she had tonight,
curling into him like a lar ge, af fectionate shrimp before
lapsing into naked, warm inertness in his arms.
It ha d b een won derful—but tha t wee bit dif ferent. She was
almost always willing, even eager , and that had been no
dif ferent, though she’d made a particular point of dead-bolting
the bedroom door . He’d installed the dead bolt because Jem
had learned to pick locks at the age of seven. It was still
bolted, in fact, and seeing that, he slid carefully out from under
the c overs to un fasten it. Jem was spending the night with his
new bes t friend, Bobby , but if  Mandy needed them in the
night, he didn’ t want the door locked.
The roo m was cool, but pleasantly so; they’d put in
baseboard heaters, which would be barely adequate to the
winter temperatures of the Highlands but fine for late autumn.
Bree slept hot; he’d swear her body temperature rose two or
three degrees when she slept, and she often threw of f the
covers. She lay now , bare to th e waist, arms flung over herhead and  snoring faintly . He cup ped a hand absently under his
balls, wondering idly whether they might have another go. He
thought she wouldn’ t mind, but…
But maybe he shouldn’ t. When he made love to her , he
often too k his time and, at the last, was filled with a barbarous
delight when she yielded her red-thatched quim—willingly , to
be sure, but with  an instant always of hesitation, just one final
breath o f someth ing that was no t quite resistance. He thought
it was a means of assuring herself—if not him—that she had
the righ t to refuse. A stronghold once breached and repaired
has stouter defenses. He didn’ t think she realized consciously
that she did this; he’d never mentioned it to her , wanting no
ghost to rise between them.
It had been a little dif ferent t onight. She’d balked more
noticeably , then yielded with something like ferocity , pulling
him in and raking her nails down his back. And he…
He’d paused for that one instan t, but once safely mounted
had had  the insane ur ge to pillage ruthlessly , to show himself
—if not  her—that she was in deed his, and not her own,
inviolate.
And she’d egged him on.
He n oticed that he hadn’ t taken his hand away and was now
eyeing his wife like a Roman  soldier sizing up one of the
Sabine women for weight and  portabililty . Raptio  was the
Latin word, usually translated as “rape,” though in fact it
meant kidnapping, or seizing. Raptio , raptor , the seizing of
prey . He  could see it both ways , and noticed at this point that
he still  hadn’ t actually removed his hand from his genitals,
which in the meantime had dec ided unilaterally that, no, she
wouldn’ t mind at all.
His ce rebral cortex, rapidly  being overpowered by
something a lot older and much  lower down, hazarded a last
faint no tion tha t it was to do with having a stranger in the
house—especially one like W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie.“W ell, he’ll be gone by Samhain,” Roger muttered,
approaching the  bed. The portal in the stones should be wide
open then, and with some sort of gem in hand, the bugger
ought to be back to his wife in…
He slid beneath the sheets, gath ered his own wife up with a
firm han d on her very warm bott om, and hissed in her ear , “I’ll
get you—and your little dog, too.”
Her body quivered in a soundless subterranean laugh and,
eyes clo sed, she reached down and drew a delicate fingernail
up his very sensitive flesh.
“I’m meeeeeeeelllllllting,” she murmured.
 
HE DID F ALL ASLEEP after that. But waked again,
somewhere in the wee hours, and found himself annoyingly
alert.
It m ust b e him , he thought, slithering out of bed again. I’ll
not sleep sound until we get rid of him . He didn’ t bother being
careful; he could tell from the faint rasp of Brianna’ s snore that
she was dead to  the world. He  pulled his pajamas over his
nakedness and stepped out into the upstairs corridor , listening.
Lallybroch talked to itself at night, as all old houses do. He
was use d to the sudden startling  cracks, as wooden beams in
the r oom cooled at night, and even the creaking of the second-
floor hallway , as though someone was walking rapidly up and
down it.  The rattle of windows w hen the wind was in the west,
reminding him comfortably of Brianna’ s irregular snoring. It
was remarkabl y quiet now , though, wrapped in the
somnolence of deep night.
They’d put W illiam Buccleigh at the far end of the hall,
having decided without speakin g of it that they didn’ t want
him abo ve, on the same floor with the kids. Keep him close;
keep an eye on him.
Roger walked quietly down the hall, listening. The crack
under Buccleigh’ s door was dark, and from inside the room, heheard a deep, regular snore, in terrupted once as the sleeper
turned in bed, muttered some thing incomprehensible, and
dropped back into slumber .
“That’ s all right, then,” Roger muttered to himself, and
turned a way . His cerebral cortex, interrupted earlier , now
patiently resumed its train of thought. Of course it was to do
with hav ing a stranger in the house—and such a stranger . Both
he and Brianna felt obscurely threatened by his presence.
In hi s own case,  there was a solid substratum of anger under
the w ariness, and a good bit of  confusion, too. He had, from
sheer necessity as well as r eligious conviction, for given
W illiam Bucclei gh for his role in the hanging that had taken
his voic e. After all, the man had not tried to kill him
personally and couldn’ t have known what would happen.
But it was a damned sight easier to for give somebody you
knew had been dead for two hundred years than it was to
maintain that for giveness with the bastard living under your
nose, eating your food, and being charming to your wife and
children.
And let us not for get he  is a bastar d, too , Roger thought
savagely , makin g his way down the stairs in the dark. The
family tree he’d shown W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie
revealed him as all correct, p inned down on paper , neatly
bracketed by parents and son. The chart was a lie, though.
W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie was a changeling: the
illegitimate of fspring of Dougal MacKenzie, war chief of Clan
MacKenzie, and Geillis Duncan, witch. And Roger thought
W illiam Buccleigh didn’ t know it.
Safely at the bot tom of the stair , he turned on the light in the
lower ha ll and went to the kitch en to check that the back door
was locked.
They’d d iscussed that one, he an d Brianna, but hadn’ t come
to an  agreement yet. He was for letting sleeping dogs lie; what
good could it do  the man to know the truth of his origins? The
Highlands that had spawned th ose two wild souls was gone,
both now and in W illiam Buccleigh’ s rightful time.Bree had  insisted that Buccleigh had some right to know the
truth—though, challenged, could not say quite what right that
was.
“Y ou  a re who you think you are, and you always have
been,” she’d said at last, frustrated but trying to explain. “I
wasn’ t. Do you think it would have been better if I’d never
known  who my real father was?”
In all honesty , it might hav e been, he thought. The
knowledge, once revealed, had torn both their lives apart,
exposed them both to terrible things. It had taken his voice.
Almost taken his life. Had put h er in danger , gotten her raped,
been responsible for her having killed a man—he hadn’ t
spoken t o her about that; he should. He saw the weight of it in
her e yes sometimes and knew it for what it was. He carried the
same weight.
And yet… would he choose not to  have known wh at he now
knew? N ever to have lived in the past, met Jamie Fraser , seen
the side of Claire that existed only in Jamie’ s company?
It wasn’ t the tree of good and evil in the Garden of Eden,
after all; it was the tree of the knowledge  of good and evil.
Knowledge might be a poisoned gift—but it was still a gift,
and few  people would voluntarily give it back. Which was just
as w ell, he supp osed, since they couldn’ t  gi ve it b ack. And that
had been his  point in the discussion.
“W e don’ t know what harm it c ould do,” he’d ar gued. “But
we don’ t know it couldn’ t  d o harm, and serious harm. A nd
what would be the benefit to the man, to know his mother was
insane, a sorceress, or both, certainly a multiple murderess,
and his father an adulterer an d at the least an attempted
murderer? It was enough of a shock to me  whe n y our mot her
told me about Geillis Duncan, and she’ s eight generations
removed from me. And before you ask, yes, I could have lived
without knowing that.”
She’d bitten her lip at that and nodded, reluctant.“It’ s jus t—I kee p thinking about W illie,” Bree had said at
last, giving up. “Not W illiam Buccleigh, I don’ t mean—my
brother .” She flushed a little, as she always did, self-conscious
at sp eaking the word. “I really wanted him to know . But Da
and Lord  John… they so didn’ t  want him to know , and maybe
they were right. He has a life, a good one. And they said he
couldn’ t keep on having that life if I told him.”
“They w ere right,” Roger had said bluntly . “T o tell him—if
he b elieved it—would force him  to live in a state of deceit and
denial, which would eat him ali ve, or to openly acknowledge
that he’ s the bas tard son of a Scottish criminal. Which is Just.
Not. On. Not in eighteenth-century culture.”
“They w ouldn’ t take his title away ,” Bree had ar gued. “Da
said that by British law , a child born in wedlock is the legal
of fspring of the husband, no ma tter whether the husband was
the real father or not.”
“No, but imagine living with a title ye don’ t think you’re
entitled to , kn owing the blood in your v eins isn’ t the blue
ye’ve al ways thought it was. Ha ving people call ye ‘Lord So-
and-So’ and knowing what they’d call ye if they knew the
truth.” He’d shaken her gently , trying to make her see.
“Either w ay , it would destroy the life he has, as surely as if
you’d set him on a keg of gunpowder and lit the fuse. Y ou
wouldn’ t know when the bang would come, but come it
would.”
“Mmphm,” she’ d said, and the ar gument ended there. But it
hadn’ t been a so und of agreement, and he knew the ar gument
wasn’ t over .
By n ow he had checked all the doors and windows on the
ground floor , ending in his study .
He flipp ed on the light and came into the room. He was
wide aw ake, nerves on edge. Why?  he wondered. W as the
house tr ying to tell him someth ing? He snorted a little. Hard
not to have fancies, in the midd le of the night in an old house,
with the wind rattling the windowpanes. And yet he usuallyfelt very comfortable in this roo m, felt it was his place. What
was wrong?
He g lanced quickly over the desk, the deep windowsill with
the sma ll pot of yellow chrysanthemums that Bree had put
there, the shelves—
He stop ped dea d, heart thumping in his chest. The snake
wasn’ t there. No, no, it was—his roving eye fixed on it. It was
in th e wrong place, though. It wasn’ t in front of the wooden
box that held Claire and Jamie’ s letters but sitting in front of
the books two shelves below it.
He picked it up, automatically stroking the old polished
cherrywood wit h his thumb. Pe rhaps Annie MacDonald had
moved i t? No. She did dust an d sweep in the study , but she
never moved anything from its place. Never moved anything
anywhere, for that matter; he’d seen her pick up a pair of
galoshes careles sly left in the middle of the mudroom, sweep
carefully under them, and set t hem back in the same place,
mud splashes and all. She would never have moved the snake.
Still less would Brianna have moved it. He knew—without
knowing how he knew it—tha t she felt as he did about it;
W illie Fraser ’ s snake guarded his brother ’ s treasure.
He w as lifting d own the box before his train of conscious
thought had reached its logical conclusion.
Alarm bells were going of f rig ht and left. The contents of
the box had been disturbed; the little books were on top of the
letters a t one end of the box, not underneath. He took out the
letters, cursing himself for never having counted them. How
would he know if one was missing?
He sorted them quickly , read and unread, and thought  the
unread pile was about the same ; whoever had been in the box
hadn’ t o pened them, that was something. But whoever it was
had probably wanted to avoid detection, too.
He thumbed hastily through the opened letters and became
aware a t once that one was missing: the one written on
Brianna’ s handmade paper with the embedded flowers. Thefirst one. Jesus, what had it said? W e ar e alive . He
remembered tha t much. And then Claire had told all about the
explosion and the burning of the Big House. Had she said in
that one they w ere going to Scotland? Maybe so. But why in
bloody hell should—
T wo floors above, Mandy sat up in bed and screamed like a
ban-sidhe .
 
HE MADE IT T O Amanda’ s room a half step before
Brianna and scooped the child out of her bed, cradling her
against his pounding heart.
“Jemmy , Jemmy!” she sobbed. “He’ s gone, he’ s gone. He’ s
GONE !!” This last wa s shrieked as she stif fened in Roger ’ s
arms, digging her feet hard into his belly .
“Hey , he y ,” he soothed, trying t o rearrange her and pet her
into calm . “It’ s okay , Jemmy’ s fine. He’ s fine , he’ s only gone
to visit Bobby overnight. He’ll be home tomorrow .”
“He’ s GONE!”  S he squirmed l ike an eel, not trying to get
away but merely possessed by  a paroxysm of frantic grief.
“He’ s not here, he’ s not here!”
“A ye, like I said, he’ s at Bobby’ s house, he—”
“Not her e ,” sh e sa id ur gen tly , and thumped the palm of her
hand repeatedly on the top of her head. “Not here wif me!”
“Here, baby , come here,” Bree s aid ur gently , taking the tear -
streaked child from him.
“Mama, Mama! Jemmy’ s GONE!”  She clung to Bree,
staring desperately , still thumping her head. “He’ s not wif
me!”
Bree frowned at Mandy , puzzled, a hand running over her ,
checking for temperature, swollen glands, tender tummy…
“Not with you,” she repeated, speaking intently , trying to
get Man dy out of her panic. “T ell Mummy what you mean,sweetheart.”
“Not her e !” In  utter desperation, Mandy lowered her head
and butted her mother in the chest.
“Oof!”
The doo r at the end of the hall opened, and W illiam
Buccleigh came out, wearing Roger ’ s woolen dressing gown.
“What in the na me of the Blessed V ir gin’ s all this riot?” he
inquired.
“He took him, h e took him!” Mandy shrieked, and buried
her head in Brianna’ s shoulder .
Despite himself, Roger was feeling infected by Amanda’ s
fear , irr ationally convinced t hat something terrible had
happened.
“Do you know where Jem is?” he snapped at Buccleigh.
“I d o not.” Buccleigh frowned at him. “Is he not in his
bed?”
“No, he  isn’ t!” Brianna snappe d. “Y ou saw him leave, for
heaven’ s sake.” She forced her w ay between the men. “Quit it
right no w , both of you! Roge r , take Mandy . I’m going to
phone M artina Hurragh.” She thrust Amanda, moaning around
the thumb in her mouth, into his arms and hurried for the
stairs, her hastily acquired nightclothes rustling like leaves.
He rock ed Ama nda, distracted,  alarmed, nearly overcome
by h er s ense of panic. She emitted fright and grief like a radio
broadcasting tower , and his own breath came short and his
hands were wet with sweat whe re he clutched her W innie-the-
Pooh nightie.
“Hush, a chuisle,”  he said, pitching his voice as calmly as
he c ould. “Hush, now . W e’ll fix it. Y ou tell Daddy what waked
you up, and I’ll fix it, promise.”
She obe diently t ried to stifle he r sobs, rubbing chubby fists
into her eyes.
“Jemmy ,” she moaned. “I want Jemmy!”“W e’ll get him back straightaway ,” Roger promised. “T ell
me, what made you wake up? Did you have a bad dream?”
“Uh-huh.” She clutched him tighter , her face full of fear .
“W as big wocks, big  wocks. They scweamed at me!”
Ice wate r ran straight through his veins. Jesus, oh, Jesus.
Maybe she did  remember her trip through the stones.
“A ye, I see,” he said, patting he r as soothingly as he could,
for the ferment in his own breast. He did  see. In memory he
saw tho se stones, felt and hear d them again. And, turning a
little, saw the pallor of W illiam Buccleigh’ s face and knew he
heard the ring of truth in Mandy’ s voice, too.
“What happened then, a leannan ? Did you go cl ose to the
big rocks?”
“Not me ; Jem! That man took him and the wocks ate  him!”
At this, she collapsed in tears again, sobbing inconsolably .
“That m an,” Roger said slowly , and turned a little more, so
that W il liam Buccleigh was in her field of view . “Do you
mean this  man, sweetheart? Uncle Buck?”
“No, no nononononono, a other  man!” She straightened up,
staring i nto his face with huge, tear -filled eyes, straining to
make him understand. “Bobby’ s daddy!”
He heard Brianna coming upstairs. Fast, but unevenly; it
sounded as though she was bum ping against the walls of the
staircase, losing her balance as she hurried.
She stumbled into view at the top of the stair , and Roger felt
every hair on his body stand up at the sight of her white,
staring face.
“He’ s gone,” she said, hoarse. “ Martina says he’ s not with
Bobby , she didn’ t expect him tonight at all. I made her go
outside and look—Rob lives thr ee houses down. She says his
truck is gone.”
 ROGER’S HA NDS were numb with cold, and the
steering wheel was slippery with their sweat. He took the turn
of f the highway at such speed that the of f-wheels lifted slightly
and the car tilted. W illiam Buccleigh’ s head thumped the
window .
“Sorry ,” Roger muttered mechan ically , and received a grunt
of acceptance in reply .
“Mind yourself,” Buccleigh said, rubbing his temple. “Y e’ll
have us over in a ditch, and then what?”
Then what, indeed. W ith great e f fort, he eased his foot back
on t he g as. It was near moonset, and a wan quarter moon did
little to light the  landscape, black as pitch around them. The
headlights of the little Morris b arely dented the darkness, and
the f rail beams swung to and fro as they bounced crazily on
the dirt road that led near Craigh na Dun.
“Why t he devil should this trusdair  t ake your son?”
Buccleigh rolled down his window and stuck his head out,
vainly t rying to see farther tha n the view through the dust-
coated w indshield. “And why , for the sake of all holy , bring
him her e?”
“How do I know ?” Roger said through his teeth. “Maybe he
thinks he needs blood to open the stones. Christ , w hy did I
write that?” He pounded a fist on the wheel in frustration.
Buccleigh blinked, very startled, but his gaze sharpened at
once.
“Is that it?” he said, ur gent. “ Is  that how ye do it? Blood?”
“No, dammit!” Roger said. “ It’ s the time of year , and
gemstones. W e think.”
“But ye wrote down blood, with a query mark next it.”
“Y es, but—wha t do you mean? Did you read my notebook,
too, you cunt?”
“Language, son,” said W illiam Buccleigh, grim but cool.
“Of course I did. I read everything in your study I could get
my hands on—and so would you, in my place.”Roger throttled back the panic that gripped him, enough to
manage a curt nod.
“A ye, m aybe I would. And if you’d  taken Jem—I’d kill ye
once I found y ou, but I’d may be understand why . But this
fucker! What does he think he’ s doing , for God’ s sake?”
“Calm y ourself,” Buccleigh advised him briefly . “Y e’ll do
your wean no good if ye lose the heid. This Cameron—is he
one like us?”
“I don’ t know . I don’ t bloody know .”
“There are others, though? It’ s not just in the family?”
“I don’ t know—I think there are others, but I don’ t know for
sure.” Roger struggled to thin k, struggled to keep the car
rolling at a low enough speed to handle the curves of the road,
half over grown with creeping gorse.
He w as trying t o pray but managing nothing but a terror -
stricken, incoherent Lor d, please!  He wis hed Bre e was with
him, but they couldn’ t have brou ght Mandy anywhere near the
rocks, a nd if they should be in  time to catch Cameron … if
Cameron was even here… Bucc leigh would help him, he was
fairly sure of that.
The bac k of his mind harbored a  forlorn hope that there was
some misunderstanding, that Ca meron had mistaken the night
and, rea lizing it, was bringing J em back home, even as Roger
and his bloody five times greatgrandfather tore over a rocky
moor in the dark, headed straight for the most terrible thing
either of them knew .
“Cameron—he read the notebook, too,” Roger blurted,
unable t o bear his own thoughts. “By accident. He pretended
to think  it was all a—a—fictio n, something I’d made up for
fun. Jesus, what have I done ?”
“Look o ut!” Buccleigh threw his arms over his face and
Roger stood on the brake, swe rving of f the road and into a
lar ge rock—bare ly missing the old blue truck that stood on the
road, dark and empty .
 
HE SCRAMBLED UP the hill, scrabbling for handholds
in th e dark, rock s rolling under his feet, gorse prickles piercing
his palms, now and then stabbing under his nails, making him
swear . Far below , he could hear W illiam Buccleigh following.
Slowly—but following.
He bega n to hear them long before he reached the crest. It
was thre e days before Samhain, and the stones knew it. The
sound th at wasn’ t a sound at all vibrated through the marrow
of h is bo nes, ma de his skull ring  and his teeth ache. He gritted
his teeth  together and kept on. By the time he reached the
stones, he was on hands and knees, unable to stand upright.
Dear God , h e thought, God, pr eserve me! Keep me al ive
long enough to find him!
He could barely form thoughts but recalled the flashlight.
He’d br ought it  from the car and now fumbled it out of his
pocket, dropping  it, having to grope frantically over the short
grass in the circ le, finding it at last and squeezing the button
with a finger that slipped o f f four times before finally
achieving the strength to make the connection.
The beam of l ight sprang out, and he heard a muf fled
exclamation of amazement from the dark behind him. Of
course, he thought dazedly , W illiam Buccleigh hadn’ t yet seen
a flashlight. The wavering beam passed slowly round the
circle, back. What was he looking for? Footprints? Something
Jem had dropped, that would show he’d come this way?
There was nothing.
Nothing but the stones. It w as getting worse, and he
dropped the flashlight, clutching  his head with both hands. He
had to move… had to go … go get Jem…
He was dragging himself over the grass, white-blind with
the pain  and nearly mindless, when strong hands grabbed him
by the ankles and hauled him  backward. He thought there
might ha ve been  a voice, but if so, it was lost in the piercing
scream that echoed inside his head, inside his soul, and hecried out his son’ s name as loud as he could to hear something
besides that noise, felt his throat tear from the ef fort, but heard
nothing.
Then the earth moved beneath him and the world fell away .
 
FELL A W A Y QUITE literally . When he came to some
time later , he f ound that he and W illiam Buccleigh were
resting i n a shallow declivity in the side of the hill, forty feet
below the stone circle. They’d f allen and rolled; he could tell
that from  the way he felt and the way Buccleigh looked. There
was a hint of d awn in the sky ,  and he could see Buccleigh,
scratched and torn, sitting hunched beside him, curled into
himself as though his belly hurt.
“What… ?” Roger whispered. He cleared his throat and
tried again to a sk what had happened, but couldn’ t manage
more than a whisper—and even that made his throat burn like
fire.
W illiam Buccleigh muttered something under his breath,
and Rog er realiz ed that he was praying. He tried to sit up and
made it, though his head spun.
“Did ye  drag me free?” he demanded in his harsh whisper .
Buccleigh’ s eyes were closed and stayed that way until he had
finished his prayer . Then he op ened them and glanced from
Roger to the to p of the hill, where the unseen stones still
quired th eir ghas tly song of time  undone—no more from here,
thank goodness, than an eerie whine that set his teeth on edge.
“I d id,” Buccleigh said. “I did na think ye were going to
make it out on your own.”
“I wasn’ t.” Roger lowered himself back onto the ground,
dizzy and aching. “Thanks,” he  added a moment later . There
was a great void inside him, vast as the fading sky .
“A ye, well. Maybe it’ll help t o make up for getting ye
hanged,” Buccleigh said, in an of fhand way . “What now?”Roger s tared up at the sky , rotating slowly overhead. It
made him dizzier , so he closed his eyes and reached out a
hand.
“Now w e go home,” he croaked . “And think again. Help me
up.” V ALLEY FORGE
 
W ILLIAM WORE HIS uniform. It was necessary , he
told his father .
“Denzell Hunter  is a man of great conscience and principle.
I canno t engage to winkle him  out of the American camp
without proper leave of his of ficer . I think he would not come.
But if I can obtain permission—and I think I can—then I
believe he will.”
But to obtain formal permiss ion for the services of a
Continental sur geon, obviously he had to ask formally . Which
meant riding into W ashington’ s new winter quarters at V alley
For ge in a red coat, no matter what happened next.
Lord John had closed his eyes for a moment, plainly
envisioning just what sort of thing might  happen next, but then
opened them and said briskly , “All right, then. W ill you take a
servant with you?”
“No,” W illiam said, surprised. “Why would I need one?”
“T o care  for the horses, to manage your goods—and to be
the eyes in the back of your head,” his father said, giving him
a lo ok indicating that he shoul d already have been aware of
some of this. He therefore did not  say , “Horses?”  or “What
goods?”  but  merely nodded and said, “Thank you, Papa. Can
you find me someone suitable?”
“Suitable” turned out to be one Colenso Baragwanath, a
stunted youth from Cornwall who had come with Howe’ s
troops a s a stable-boy . He did know horses, W illiam would
give him that.
There w ere four  horses and a pack mule, this last laden with
sides of pork, four or five fat turkeys, a bag of rough-skinned
potatoes, another of turnips, and a lar ge keg of cider .“If c onditions there are half as bad as I think they are,” his
father had told him, while overseeing the loading of the mule,
“the commander would lend you the services of half a
battalion in exchange for this, let alone a sur geon.”
“Thank you, Papa,” he said again, and swung into his
saddle, his new captain’ s gor get about his neck and a white
flag of truce folded neatly into his saddlebag.
V alley For ge looked like a gigantic encampment of doomed
charcoal-burners. The place was  essentially a wood lot, or had
been before W ashington’ s soldiers began felling everything in
sight. Hacked stumps were everywhere, and the ground was
strewn with broken branches. Huge bonfires burned in random
spots, and piles of logs were st acked everywhere. They were
building huts as fast as possible—and none too soon, for snow
had begu n falling three or four hours before, and the camp was
already blanketed with white.
W illiam hoped they’d be able to see  the flag of truce.
“Right, up you go and ride ahe ad of me,” he told Colenso,
handing the boy the long stick to which he’d tied the flag. The
youth’ s eyes widened in horror .
“What, me?”
“Y es, yo u,” said W illie impatiently . “Up, or I’ll kick your
arse.”
W illiam’ s back itched between the shoulder blades as they
entered the camp, Colenso cro uched like a monkey on his
horse’ s back, holding the flag as low as he dared and muttering
strange oaths in Cornish. W illiam’ s left hand itched, too,
wanting to go for the hilt of his sword, the handle of his pistol.
But he’d come unarmed. If the y meant to shoot him, they’d
shoot hi m, arme d or not, and to come unarmed was a sign of
good fai th. So he put back his cloak, in spite of the snow , to
show his lack of weapons, and rode slowly into the storm.
 THE PRELIMINARIES went well. No one shot him, and
he was directed to a Colonel Preston, a tall, ragged man in the
remnants of a Co ntinental uniform, who had eyed him askance
but listened with surprising courtesy to his request. Permission
was granted— but this being the American  army , the
permission gran ted was not lice nse to take the sur geon away
but rather license to ask  the sur geon if he would go.
W illie left Colenso with the h orses and mule, with strict
instructions to keep his eyes op en, and made his way up the
little hill where he had been to ld Denzell Hunter likely was.
His heart was beating fast, and not only from the exertion. In
Philadelphia, he had been sure Hunter would come at his
request. Now he wasn’ t quite so sure.
He h ad fought A mericans, knew a great many of them who
were in no respect dif ferent from the Englishmen they’d been
two years previous. But he’d never walked through an
American army camp before.
It se emed chaotic, but all camp s did in their early stages,
and he was able to perceive th e rough order that did in fact
exist among the piles of debris a nd butchered tree stumps. But
there wa s something very dif ferent about the feel of this camp,
something almost exuberant. The men he passed were ragged
in the extreme; not one in ten had shoes, despite the weather ,
and grou ps of them huddled like beggars around the bonfires,
wrapped in blankets, shawls, the remnants of canvas tents and
burlap sacks. And yet they didn ’ t huddle in miserable silence.
They talked.
Conversed amiably , telling jokes, ar guing, getting up to piss
in th e sn ow , to stamp round in circles to get the blood going.
He’d seen a de moralized camp before, and this one wasn’ t .
Which was, all things considered, amazing. He assumed
Denzell Hunter must share this spirit. That being so, would he
consent to leave his fellows? No way to tell, save by asking.
There was no door to knock on. He came round a stand of
leafless oak saplings that had so far escaped the ax and found
Hunter crouched on the ground, sewing up a gash in the leg ofa ma n who lay before him on a blanket. Rachel Hunter held
the man’ s shoulders, her cappe d head bent over him as she
spoke encouragingly to him.
“Did I not tell thee he was qu ick?” she was saying. “No
more than thirty seconds, I said, and so it has been. I counted it
out, did I not?”
“Thee counts in a most leisurely fashion, Rachel,” the
doctor s aid, smiling as he reach ed for his scissors and clipped
the t hread. “A m an might walk three times around St. Paul’ s in
one of your minutes.”
“Stuf f,” she said mildly . “‘T is d one, in any case. Here, sit
thee up and take  some water . Thee does not—” She had turned
toward the bucket that sat be side her and, as she did so,
perceived W illiam standing there. Her mouth opened in shock,
and then  she was up and flying across the clearing to embrace
him.
He h adn’ t expected that , but  wa s deligh ted and returned the
embrace with great feeling. Sh e smelled of herself and of
smoke, and it made his blood run faster .
“Friend W illiam! I thought never to see thee again,” she
said, ste pping ba ck with glowing face. “What does thee here?
For I think thee  has not come to enlist,” she added, looking
him up and down.
“No,” he said, r ather gruf fly . “I have come to beg a favor .
From your brother ,” he added, a little belatedly .
“Oh? Come, then, he is nearly  finished.” She led him to
Denny , still looking up at him in great interest.
“So thee  is indeed a British soldier ,” she remarked. “W e
thought thee must be but feared thee might be a deserter . I am
pleased thee is not.”
“Are you?” he asked, smiling. “ But surely you would prefer
that I abjure my military service and seek peace?”
“Of course I wo uld that thee should seek peace—and find it,
too,” she said matter -of-factly . “But thee cannot find peace inoath-breaking and illegal flight, knowing thy soul steeped in
deceit and fearing for thy life. Denny , look who has come!”
“Y es, I saw . Fri end W illiam, well met!” Dr . Hunter helped
his freshly bandaged patient to his feet and came toward
W illiam, smiling . “Did I hear thee would ask a favor of me? If
it is my power to grant it, it is thine.”
“I w on’ t hold yo u to that,” W illiam said, smiling and feeling
a knot relax at t he base of his neck. “But hear me out, and I
hope you will see fit to come.”
As he had half-expected, Hunter was at first hesitant to
leave the camp. There were no t many sur geons, and with so
much illness due to the cold an d the crowded conditions… it
might b e a week or more befor e he could return to camp …
but W ill iam wisely kept silence, only glancing once at Rachel
and then meeting Denzell’ s eyes straight on.
W ould you have her stay her e thr ough the winter ?
“Thee wishes Rachel to come with me?” Hunter asked,
instantly divining his meaning.
“I will come wit h thee whether he wishes it or not,” Rachel
pointed out. “And both of you know it perfectly well.”
“Y es,” said Denzell mildly , “but it seemed mannerly to ask.
Besides, it is not only a matter of thy coming. It—”
W illiam didn’ t hear the end o f his sentence, for a lar ge
object w as thrus t suddenly between his legs from behind, and
he emitted an unmanly yelp and leaped forward, whirling
round to see who had assaulted him in this cowardly fashion.
“Y es, I was for getting the dog,” Rachel said, still composed.
“He can  walk now , but I doubt he can manage the journey to
Philadelphia on foot. Can thee make shift to transport him,
does thee think?”
He recognized the dog at once. There couldn’ t possibly be
two like him.
“Surely this is I an Murray’ s dog?” he asked, putting out a
tentative fist for the enormous beast to snif f. “Where is hismaster?”
The Hunters exchanged a brief glance, but Rachel answered
readily enough.
“Scotland. He has gone to Scotland on an ur gent errand,
with his  uncle, James Fraser . D oes thee know Mr . Fraser?” It
seemed to W illiam that both Hunters were staring at him rather
intently , but he merely nodded and said, “I met him once,
many years ago. Why did the dog not go to Scotland with his
master?”
Again that glance between them. What was it about
Murray? he wondered.
“The dog was in jured, just before they took ship. Friend Ian
was kind enough to leave his companion in my care,” Rachel
said calm ly . “Can thee procure a wagon, perhaps? I think thy
horse may not like Rollo.”
 
LORD JOHN FITTED the leather strap between Henry’ s
teeth. The boy w as half unconscious from a dose of laudanum
but k new enough still of his surroundings to give his uncle the
bare att empt at a grin. Grey could feel the fright pulsing
through Henry— and shared it. There was a ball of venomous
snakes in his belly , a constant slithering sensation, punctuated
by sudden stabs of panic.
Hunter had insisted upon binding Henry’ s arms and legs to
the bed , that there should be no movement during the
operation. The day was brilliant; sun coruscated from the
frozen snow that rimmed the w indows, and the bed had been
moved to take best advantage of it.
Dr . Hunter had been told of the dowser but declined
courteously to have the man come again, saying that this
smacked of divination, and if he were to ask God’ s help in this
endeavor , he thought he could n ot do so sincerely were there
anything of witchcraft about the process. That had ratheraf fronted Mercy  W oodcock, who puf fed up a bit, but she kept
silence, too glad—and too anxious—to ar gue.
Grey was not s uperstitious but was  o f a pr actical turn of
mind and had ta ken a careful no te of the dowser ’ s location of
the ball he had found. He expl ained this, and with Hunter ’ s
reluctant assent, took out a small ruler and triangulated the
spot on Henry’ s sunken belly , da bbing a bit of candle black on
the place to mark it.
“I think we are  in readiness,” Denzell said, and, coming
close to the bed , put his hands on Henry’ s head and prayed
briefly for guidance and support for himself, for endurance
and healing for Henry , and ended in acknowledging the
presence of God among them. Despite his purely rational
sentiments, Grey felt a small le ssening of the tension in the
room an d sat down opposite th e sur geon, with the snakes in
his belly calmed for the moment.
He took  his nephew’ s limp ha nd in his and said calmly ,
“Just hold on, Henry . I won’ t let go.”
 
IT W AS  QUICK. Grey had seen army sur geons at work
and knew their d ispatch, but even by those standards, Denzell
Hunter ’ s speed and dexterity were remarkable. Grey had lost
all sense  of time, absorbed in the erratic clenching of Henry’ s
fingers, the shrill keen of his screaming through the leather
gag, and the doctor ’ s movements, quickly brutal, then
finicking as he picked delicately , swabbed, and stitched.
As the last stitches went in, Grey breathed, for what seemed
the first  time in hours, and saw  by the carriage clock on the
mantel that barely a quarter of an hour had elapsed. W illiam
and Rac hel Hunter stood by the  mantelpiece, out of the way ,
and he saw with  some interest that they were holding hands,
their knuckles as white as their faces.
Hunter was checking Henry’ s breathing, lifting his eyelids
to p eer a t his pupils, wiping the tears and snot from his face,touching the pulse under his jaw—Grey could see this, weak
and irregular but still pumping, a tiny blue thread beneath the
waxen skin.
“W ell en ough, well enough, and thanks be to the Lord who
has stren gthened me,” Hunter was murmuring. “Rachel, will
thee bring me the dressings?”
Rachel at once detached herself from W illiam and fetched
the neat stack of folded gauze pads and torn linen strips,
together with a glutinous mass of some sort, soaking green
through the cloth that bound it.
“What is that ?” Grey asked, pointing at it.
“A poultice recommended to m e by a colleague, a Mrs.
Fraser . I  have seen it to have laudable ef fects upon wounds of
all kinds,” the doctor assured him.
“Mrs. F raser?” Grey said, surprised. “Mrs. James  Fraser?
Where t he de—I mean, where d id you happen to encounter the
lady?”
“At Fort T iconderoga” was the surprising answer . “She and
her husband were with the Continental army through the
battles at Saratoga.”
The snakes in Grey’ s belly roused abruptly .
“Do you  mean to tell me that Mrs. Fraser is now at V alley
For ge?”
“Oh, no.” Hunter shook his head, concentrated on his
dressing. “If thee will please li ft him a little, Friend Grey? I
require to pass this bandage underneath—ah, yes, exactly
right, I thank thee. No,” he re sumed, straightening up and
wiping h is foreh ead, for it was very warm in the room, with so
many pe ople and  a blazing fire built up in the hearth. “No, the
Frasers have gone to Scotland. Though Mr . Fraser ’ s nephew
was suf ficiently kind as to leave us his dog,” he added, as
Rollo, made curious by the sme ll of blood, now rose from his
spot in the corne r and poked his nose under Grey’ s elbow . He
snif fed interestedly at the splattered sheets, up and down
Henry’ s naked body . He then sneezed explosively , shook hishead, and padded back to lie down, where he promptly rolled
onto his back and relaxed, paws in the air .
“Someone must  remain with him for the next day or so,”
Hunter was saying, wiping his hands on a rag. “He must not be
left alone, lest he cease breathing. Friend W illiam,” he said,
turning t o W illie, “might it be possible to find a place for us to
stay? I should be near for several days, so that I may call
regularly to see how he progresses.”
W illiam assured him that this h ad already been taken care
of: a  mo st respe ctable inn, and—here he glanced at Rachel—
quite near at hand. Might he convey the Hunters there? Or take
Miss Rachel, if her brother should be not quite finished?
It wa s apparent t o Grey that W illie would like nothing better
than a ride through the snow-s parkling city alone with this
comely Quaker , but Mrs. W oodcock put a spoke in that wheel
by obse rving that, in fact, it was Christmas; she had not had
time or opportunity to make m uch of a meal, but would the
gentlemen and lady not honor h er house and the day by taking
a glass of wine, to drink to Lieutenant Grey’ s recovery?
This was generally agreed to a s a capital idea, and Grey
volunteered to sit with his neph ew while the wine and glasses
were being fetched.
W ith so many people suddenly gone, the room felt much
cooler . N early cold, in fact, an d Grey drew both sheet and
coverlet gently up over Henry’ s bandaged stomach.
“Y ou’ll be all right, Henry ,” he whispered, though his
nephew’ s eyes were closed, and he thought the young man
might be asleep—hoped he was.
But he wasn’ t. Henry’ s eyes slowly opened, his pupils
showing the ef fect of the opium ; his creased lids showed the
pain that the opium could not touch.
“No, I won’ t,” he said, in a weak, clear voice. “He got only
one. The second ball will kill me.”
His eyes closed again, as the sound of Christmas cheer came
up the stairs. The dog sighed. 
RACHEL HUNTER PUT one hand to her stomach,
another to her mouth, and stifled a rising eructation.
“Gluttony is a sin,” she said. “But one that carries its own
punishment. I think I may vomit.”
“All sins do,” her brother replie d absently , dipping his pen.
“But thee is not a glutton. I saw thee eat.”
“But I am like to burst!” she protested. “And, besides, I
cannot help but think of the po or Christmas those we left at
V alley For ge will make, by comparison with the… the…
decadence  of our meal tonight.”
“W ell, that is guilt, not gluttony ,  and false guilt at that. Thee
ate no more than would constitute a normal meal; it is only
that thee  hasn’ t had one in mon ths. And I think roast goose is
perhaps not the uttermost word in decadence, even when
stuf fed with oysters and chestnuts. Now , had it been a pheasant
stuf fed w ith truf fles, or a wild boar with a gilded apple in its
mouth …” He smiled at her over his papers.
“Thee has seen such things?” she asked curiously .
“I have, yes. When I worked in London with John Hunter .
He w as much in  society and wo uld now and then take me with
him to attend a case and sometimes to accompany him and his
wife to some gra nd occasion—m ost kind of him. But we must
not judge, thee knows, most particularly by appearance. Even
one who seems most frivolous, spendthrift, or light-minded yet
has a soul and is valuable before God.”
“Y es,” she said vaguely , not really attending. She pulled
back the  curtain from the windo w , seeing the street outside as
a wh ite blur . Th ere was a lante rn hung by the inn’ s door that
cast a small circle of light, but the snow was still falling. Her
own fac e floated  in the dark glass of the window , thin and big-
eyed, and she f rowned at it, pushing a straggle of dark hair
back under her cap.“Does thee think he knows?” she asked abruptly . “Friend
W illiam?”
“Does he know what?”
“His very striking resemblance to James Fraser ,” she said,
letting the curtain fall. “Sure ly thee does not think this
coincidence?”
“I think it is no t our business.” Denny resumed scratching
with his quill.
She heaved an exasperated sigh. He was right, but that
didn’ t m ean she was forbidden to observe and to wonder . She
had been happy—more than happy—to see W illiam again, and
while hi s being a British soldi er was no less than she had
suspected, she had been extremely surprised to find him an
of ficer of high r ank. Much more than surprised to learn from
his villainous-looking Cornish orderly that he was a lord,
though the little creature had been uncertain what kind.
Y et surely no two men could look so alike who did not share
blood in some c lose degree. She had seen James Fraser many
times and admired him for his tall, straight dignity , thrilling a
bit at the fiercen ess in his face,  always feeling that niggle of
recognition when she saw him—but it wasn’ t until W illiam
suddenly stepped out before her at the camp that she realized
why . Y et how could an English lord be in any way related to a
Scottish Jacobite, a pardoned criminal? For Ian had told her
something of his own family history—though not enough; not
nearly enough.
“Thee is thinking of Ian Murray again,” her brother
observed, not looking up from his paper . He sounded resigned.
“I th ought thee a bjured witchcra ft,” she said tartly . “Or does
thee not include mind reading among the arts of divination?”
“I no tice thee does not deny it.” He looked up then, pushing
his spec tacles up his nose wit h a finger , the better to look
through them at her .
“No, I don’ t deny it,” she said, lifting her chin at him. “How
did thee know , then?”“Thee lo oked at the dog and sighed in a manner betokening
an emotion not usually shared between a woman and a dog.”
“Hmph!” she said, disconcerted. “W ell, what if I do  think of
him? Is that not my business, either? T o wonder how he does,
what his family in Scotland ma kes of him? Whether he feels
he has come home there?”
“Whether he will come back?” Denny took of f his
spectacles and rubbed a hand ov er his face. He was tired; she
could see the day in his features.
“He will come back,” she sa id evenly . “He would not
abandon his dog.”
That made her brother laugh, which annoyed her very much.
“Y es, he will li kely come back for the dog,” he agreed.
“And if he comes back with a wife, Sissy?” His voice was
gentle now , and she swung roun d to the window again, to keep
him from  seeing that the quest ion disturbed her . Not that he
needed to see to know that.
“It migh t be best for thee and for him if he did, Rachel.”
Denny’ s voice was still gentle b ut held a warning note. “Thee
knows he is a man of blood.”
“What would thee have me do, then?” she snapped, not
turning round. “Marry W illiam?”
There was a brief silence from the direction of the desk.
“W illiam?” Denny said, sounding mildly startled. “Does
thee feel for him?”
“I—of c ourse I feel friendship for him. And gratitude,” she
added hastily .
“So do I,” her brother obse rved, “yet the thought of
marrying him had not crossed my mind.”
“Thee is a most  annoying person,” she said crossly , turning
round and glaring at him. “Can thee not refrain from making
fun of me for one day , at least?”He o pened his m outh to answer , but a sound from outside
took her attention, and she turne d again to the window , pulling
back the  heavy curtain. Her bre ath misted the dark glass, and
she r ubbed it im patiently with her sleeve in time to see a sedan
chair below . The door of it ope ned and a woman stepped out
into the swirling  snow . She was clad in furs and in a hurry; she
handed a  purse to one of the chair -bearers and rushed into the
inn.
“W ell, that is odd,” Rachel said , turning to look first at her
brother , and then at the small c lock that graced their rooms.
“Who goes a-visiting at nine o’clock on Christmas night? It
cannot be a F riend, surely?”  For Friends did not keep
Christmas and would find the feast no bar to travel, but the
Hunters had no connections—not yet—with the Friends of any
Philadelphia meeting.
A thump of footsteps on the staircase prevented Denzell’ s
reply , an d an instant later the do or of the room burst open. The
fur -clad woman stood on the threshold, white as her furs.
“Denny?” she said in a strangled voice.
Her brot her stood up as though  someone had applied a hot
coal to the seat of his breeches, upsetting the ink.
“Dorothea!” he cried, and in o ne bound had crossed the
room an d was locked in passionate embrace with the fur -clad
woman.
Rachel stood transfixed. The ink was dripping of f the table
onto the painted canvas rug, an d she thought she ought to do
something about that, but didn’ t. Her mouth was hanging
open. She thought she ought to close it, and did.
Quite suddenly she understood the impulse that caused men
to engage in casual blasphemy .
 
RACHEL PICKED UP her brother ’ s spectacles from the
floor an d stood holding them, waiting for him to disentangle
himself. Dor othea , s he thought to herself. So this is the woman—but sur ely this is W illiam’ s cousin?  F or W illiam had
mentioned his cousin to her as they rode in from V alley For ge.
Indeed, the woman had been in the house when Denny
performed the operation on—but then, Henry Grey must be
this woman’ s brother! She had  hidden in the kitchen when
Rachel a nd Den ny came to the  house this afternoon. Why…
Of course: it was not squeamishness or fear but a wish not to
come fa ce-to-face with Denny , and him on his way to perform
a dangerous operation.
She thou ght somewhat better of the woman for that, though
she was not yet disposed to clasp her to her own bosom and
call her  sister . She doubted th e woman felt so toward her ,
either—though in fact, she might not even have noticed
Rachel yet, let alone have conclusions about her .
Denny let go of the woman and stood back, though from the
look on his glo wing face, he could hardly bear not to touch
her .
“Dorothea,” he said. “Whatever does thee—”
But he was forestalled; the young woman—she was very
pretty , Rachel saw now—step ped back and dropped her
elegant ermine cloak on the fl oor with a soft thud. Rachel
blinked. The young woman was wearing a sack. No other
word for it, though now that she looked, she perceived that it
had sleeves. It w as made of some coarse gray fabric, though,
and hung from the young woman’ s shoulders, barely touching
her body elsewhere.
“I will be a Qu aker , Denny ,” she said, lifting her chin a
little. “I have made up my mind.”
Denny’ s face twitched, and Rachel thought he could not
make up his own mind whether to laugh, cry , or cover his
beloved with her cloak again. Not liking to see the lovely thing
lie disregarded on the floor , Rachel bent and picked it up
herself.
“Thee—Dorothea,” he said again, helpless. “Is thee sure of
this? I think thee knows nothing of Friends.”“Certainly I do. Y ou—thee, I m ean—see God in all men,
seek pea ce in God, abjure violence, and wear dull clothes so as
not t o di stract yo ur minds with t he vain things of the world. Is
that not right?” Dorothea inquir ed anxiously . Lady  Dorothea,
Rachel correcte d herself. W illiam had said his uncle was a
duke.
“W ell… more or less, yes,” Denny said, his lips twitching as
he looked her up and down. “Did thee… make that garment?”
“Y es, of course. Is something wrong with it?”
“Oh, no,” he said, sounding somewhat strangled. Dorothea
looked sharply at him, then at Rachel, suddenly seeming to
notice her .
“What’ s wrong with it?” she appealed to Rachel, and Rachel
saw the pulse beating in her round white throat.
“Nothing,” she said, fighting her own ur ge to laugh.
“Friends are allowed to wear clothes that fit, though. Thee
need not purposefully uglify thyself, I mean.”
“Oh, I see.” Lady Dorothea gazed thoughtfully at Rachel’ s
tidy skir t and jacket, which might be of butternut homespun
but most assuredly fit well, and became her , too, if she did say
so.
“W ell, th at’ s goo d, then,” Lady D orothea said. “I’ll just take
it in a bi t here and there.” Dismi ssing this, she stepped forward
again and took Denny’ s hands in her own.
“Denny ,” she said softly . “Oh, Denny . I thought I should
never see you again.”
“I thoug ht so, too,” he said, and Rachel saw a new struggle
taking p lace in his face—one be tween duty and desire, and her
heart ached for him. “Dorothea … thee cannot stay here. Thy
uncle—”
“He doesn’ t know I’ve gone o ut. I’ll go back,” Dorothea
assured him. “Once we’ve settled things between us.”
“Settled things,” he repeated, and, with a noticeable ef fort,
withdrew his hands from hers. “Thee means—”“W ill th ee take a little wine?” Rachel broke in, reaching for
the decanter the servant had left for them.
“Y es, thank you. He’ll have some, too,” Dorothea said,
smiling at Rachel.
“I ex pect he wil l need it,” Rachel murmured, with a glance
at her brother .
“Dorothea …” Denny said h elplessly , running a hand
through his hair . “I know what t hee means. But it is not only a
matter o f thee becoming a Friend—always assuming that to be
… to be… possible.”
She drew herself up, proud as a duchess.
“Do you doubt my conviction, Denzell Hunter?”
“Er… not exactly . I just think that perhaps thee has not
given the matter suf ficient thought.”
“That’ s what you think!” A flu sh rose in Lady Dorothea’ s
cheeks, and she glared at Denny . “I’ll have you—thee, I mean
—know that I’ve done nothing  but  t hin k, ever sinc e you left
London. How the devil do you—thee—think I bloody got
here?”
“Thee c onspired to have thy bro ther shot in the abdomen?”
Denny inquired. “That seems somewhat ruthless, and perhaps
not certain of success.”
Lady Do rothea drew two or three long breaths in through
her nose, eyeing him.
“Now , you see,” she said, in a reasonable tone of voice,
“was I not quite  the perfect Quaker , I would strike you. Thee.
But I have not, have I? Thank you, my dear ,” she said to
Rachel, taking a glass of wine. “Y ou are his sister , I collect?”
“Thee has not,” Denny admitted warily , ignoring Rachel.
“But eve n allowing, for the sake  of ar gument,” he added, with
a gl immer of hi s usual self, “that God has indeed spoken to
thee and  said that thee must join  us, that still leaves the small
matter of thy family .”“There is nothing in your princip les of faith that requires me
to have my father ’ s permissio n to marry ,” she snapped. “I
asked.”
Denny blinked.
“Who?”
“Priscilla Unwin. She’ s a Quaker I know in London. Y ou
know he r , too, I think; she said you’d—thee’d? That can’ t be
right—that you’d lanced a boil on her little brother ’ s bum.”
At t his point, Denny became a ware—perhaps because his
eyes we re sticking out of his head looking at Lady Dorothea,
Rachel thought,  not altogether amused—that his spectacles
were missing. He put out a finger to push them up the bridge
of h is nose, then  stopped and looked about, squinting. W ith a
sigh, Rachel stepped forward a nd settled them onto his nose.
Then she picked up the second glass of wine and handed it to
him.
“She’ s right,” she told him. “Thee needs it.”
 
“PLAINL Y ,” LA DY DOROTH EA said, “we are getting
nowhere.” She did not look l ike a woman accustomed to
getting nowhere , Rachel thought, but was keeping a fair grip
on her temper . On the other ha nd, she was not even close to
giving i n to Denny’ s ur ging that she must go back to her
uncle’ s house.
“I’m not going back,” she sai d, in a reasonable tone of
voice, “because  if I do, you’ll sneak of f to the Continental
army in V alley For ge, where you think I won’ t follow you.”
“Thee would not, surely?” Denny said, and Rachel thought
she divined a th read of hope in the question, but she wasn’ t
sure what kind of hope it was.
Lady Dorothea fixed him with a wide blue stare.
“I have followed  thee across an entire bloody ocean. Y ou—
thee—think a damned army can stop me?”Denny rubbed a knuckle down the bridge of his nose.
“No,” he  admitte d. “I don’ t. That is why I have not left. I do
not wish thee to follow me.”
Lady Dorothea swallowed audibly but bravely kept her chin
up.
“Why?” she said, and her voice shook only a little. “Why do
you not wish me to follow you?”
“Dorothea,” he said, as gently as possible. “Putting aside the
fact that  thy going with me wou ld put thee in rebellion and in
conflict with thy family—it is an army . Moreover , it is a very
poor army , and one lacking every conceivable comfort,
including clothin g, bedding, shoes, and food. Beyond that, it is
an army  on the ver ge of disaster and defeat. It is no fit place
for you.”
“And it is a fit place for your sister?”
“Indeed it is not,” he said. “But—” He stopped short,
obviously realiz ing that he was on the ver ge of stepping into a
trap.
“But the e can’ t stop me coming with thee.” Rachel sprang it
for him, sweetly . She was not quite sure she should help this
strange woman, but she did admire the Lady Dorothea’ s spirit.
“And you can’ t stop me, either ,” Dorothea said firmly .
Denny rubbed three fingers hard between his brows, closing
his eyes as though in pain.
“Dorothea,” he said, dropping his hand and drawing himself
up. “I am called  to do what I do , and it is the Lord’ s business
and mine. Rachel comes with me not only because she is
pigheaded but also because she is my responsibility; she has
no other place to go.”
“I d o, too!” Rac hel said hotly . “Thee said thee would find
me a place of sa fety with Friends, if I wanted. I didn’ t, and I
don’ t.”Before Denny could come back with anything else, Lady
Dorothea held out her hand in a dramatic gesture of command,
stopping him dead.
“I have an idea,” she said.
“I g reatly fear to ask what it is,” Denny said, sounding
entirely sincere.
“I don’ t,” Rachel said. “What?”
Dorothea looked from one to the other . “I have been to a
Quaker meeting. T wo, in fact. I know how it’ s done. Let us
hold a meeting and ask the Lord to guide us.”
Denny’ s mouth fell open, great ly entertaining Rachel, who
was seld om able to dumbfound her brother but was beginning
to enjoy seeing Dorothea do it.
“That—” he began, sounding stunned.
“Is an excellent idea,” Rachel said, already dragging another
chair near to the fire.
Denny could hardly ar gu e. Looking remarkably
discombobulated, he sat, though Rachel noticed that he put her
between Dorothea and himself. She wasn’ t sure whether he
was afra id to be too close to Dorothea, lest the power of her
presence overwh elm him, or whether it was only that sitting
across the hearth from her gave him the best view .
They all settled slowly , shifting a bit for comfort, and lapsed
into silence. Rachel closed her eyes, seeing the warm redness
of the fire inside her lids, feeling the comfort of it on her hands
and fee t. She gave silent thanks for it, remembering the
constant griping of cold in the camp, the nails of her fingers
and toe s on fire with it, and the continual shivering that
lessened but did not stop when she huddled into her blankets at
night an d left her muscles fatigued and sore. It was no wonder
Denny d idn’ t want Dorothea to go with them. She didn’ t want
to g o back, would give almost anything not to go—anything
but Den ny’ s well-being. She hated being cold and hungry , but
it would  be much worse to be warm and well-fed and know
that he suf fered alone.Did Lady Dorothea have any idea what it would be like? she
wondered, and opened her eyes. Dorothea sat quiet but
upright, graceful hands folded in her lap. She supposed Denny
was imagining, as Rachel was, those hands reddened and
marred by chilblains, that lovely face gaunt with hunger and
blotched with dirt and cold.
Dorothea’ s eyes  were shadowed by her lids, but Rachel was
sure she was looking at Den ny . This was a considerable
gamble on Dorothea’ s part, she thought. For what if the Lord
spoke to  Denny  and said it was impossible, that he must send
her awa y? What if the Lord spoke to Dorothea now , she
thought suddenly , or what if He had already? Rachel was quite
taken ba ck at the thought. It wasn’ t that Friends thought that
the L ord spoke o nly to them; it was only that they weren’ t sure
other folk listened very often.
Had she been listening herself? In all honesty , she was
forced to  admit that she had not . And she knew why: out of a
disinclination to  hear what she was afraid she must—that she
must turn away from Ian Murray and abandon the thoughts of
him that warmed her body an d heated her dreams in the
freezing forest, so she woke sometimes sure that if she put out
her h and to the falling snow , it w ould hiss and vanish from her
palm.
She swallowed hard and closed her eyes, trying to open
herself to the truth but trembling in fear of hearing it.
All she heard, t hough, was a steady panting noise, and an
instant later Rollo’ s wet nose nudged her hand. Disconcerted,
she scra tched hi s ears. Surely it wasn’ t seemly to be doing that
in meeti ng, but he would keep nudging her until she complied,
she knew . He half-closed his yellow eyes in pleasure and
rested his heavy head upon her knee.
The dog  loves him , she  tho ught, ru bbing gently through the
thick, co arse fur . Can he be a bad  man, if that is so?  It wasn’ t
God she heard in reply but her brother , who would certainly
say , “While dogs ar e worthy cr eatur es, I think they ar e
per haps no judge of character .”But I am , she thought to herself. I know what he is—and I
know him for what he might be, too . She looked at Dorothea,
motionless in her gray bag of a dress. Lady Dorothea Grey
was prep ared to abandon her fo rmer life, and very likely her
family , t o become a Friend, for Denny’ s sake. Might it not be,
she wondered, that Ian Murray could turn from violence for
hers?
W ell, ther e is a  pr oud thought , she scolded herself. What
sort of power do es thee think thee has, Rachel Mary Hunter?
No one has that sort of power , save the Lor d .
But the Lord d id have it. And  if the Lord should be so
inclined, anythi ng was possible. Rollo’ s tail moved gently ,
thumping thrice upon the floor .
Denzell Hunter straightened a l ittle on his stool. It was the
slightest movem ent, but coming as it did out of utter stillness,
it surpr ised both the women, who lifted their heads like
startled birds.
“I love thee, Do rothea,” he said. He spoke very quietly , but
his soft eyes burned behind his spectacles, and Rachel felt her
chest ache. “W ill thee marry me?” SEVERANCE AND REUNION
 April 20, 1778
 
A S TRANSA TLANTIC VOY AGES went—and after our
ad-ventures with  Captains Roberts, Hickman, and Stebbings, I
considered myself something of a connoisseur of seagoing
disaster—the tri p to America was quite dull. W e did have a
slight brush with an English man-of-war but fortunately outran
her , did run into two squalls a nd a major storm but luckily
didn’ t sink, and while the food w as execrable, I was much too
distracted to do more than kno ck weevils out of the biscuit
before eating it.
Half my mind was on the fu ture: Marsali and Fer gus’ s
precarious situat ion, the danger of Henri-Christian’ s condition,
and the logistics of dealing with  it. The other half—well, to be
fair , seven-eighths—was still at Lallybroch with Jamie.
I felt raw and br uised. Severed in some vital part, as always
when pa rted from  Jamie for very  long, but also as though I had
been violently ejected from my home, like a barnacle ripped
from its rock and heedlessly tossed into boiling surf.
The greater part of that, I tho ught, was Ian’ s impending
death. Ian was so much a part of Lallybroch, his presence there
so m uch a const ant and a comfo rt to Jamie all these years, that
the s ense of his loss was in a way the loss of Lallybroch itself.
Oddly enough, Jenny’ s words, hurtful as they might have
been, didn’ t really trouble me; I  knew only too well the frantic
grief, the desperation that one turned to rage because it was the
only wa y to stay alive. And in truth, I understood her feelings,
too, beca use I shared them: irrational or not, I felt that I should
have bee n able to help Ian. Wha t good was all my knowledge,
all my skill, if I couldn’ t help when help was truly vital?
But there was a further sense of loss—and a further nagging
guilt—in the fact that I could no t be there when Ian died, that I
had had to leave him for the last time knowing that I would not
see him  again, unable to of fer comfort to him, or to be withJamie or  his family when the blo w fell, or even simply to bear
witness to his passing.
Y oung Ian felt this, too, to an e ven greater degree. I often
found him sitting near the stern, staring into the ship’ s wake
with troubled eyes.
“D’ye th ink he’ s gone yet?” he  asked me abruptly on one
occasion when I’d come to sit beside him there. “Da?”
“I don’ t  know ,” I told him honestly . “I’d think so, on the
basis of  how ill he was—but people do sometimes hang on
amazingly . When is his birthday , do you know?”
He s tared at me  in baf flement. “It’ s in May sometime, near
Uncle Jamie’ s. Why?”
I s hrugg ed and pulled my shaw l tighter against the chill of
the wind.
“Often people who are very ill,  but are near their birthday ,
seem to wait un til it’ s passed before dying. I read a study of it
once. For some reason, it’ s more  likely if the person is famous
or well known.”
That made him laugh, though painfully .
“Da’ s ne ver been that.” He sig hed. “Right now I wish I’d
stayed fo r him. I know he said t o go—and I wanted to go,” he
added fairly . “But I feel bad that I did.”
I sighed, too. “So do I.”
“But you  had to go,” he proteste d. “Y e couldna let poor wee
Henri-Christian choke. Da would understand that. I know he
did.”
I smiled at his earnest attempt to make me feel better .
“He understood why you needed to go, too.”
“A ye, I know .” H e was silent for a bit, watching the furrow
of the wake; it was a brisk day and the ship was traveling well,
though t he sea was choppy , dotted with whitecaps. “I wish—”
he s aid suddenly , then stopped and swallowed. “I wish Dacould ha’ met Rachel,” he said, low-voiced. “I wish she could
meet him.”
I ma de a sympathetic sound. I remembered all too vividly
the year s during which I had watched Brianna grow , aching
because she would never know her father . And then a miracle
had happened—but it wouldn’ t happen for Ian.
“I know you told your da about Rachel—he told me you had
and was so happy to know about her .” That made him smile a
little. “Did you tell Rachel about your father? Y our family?”
“No.” He sounded startled. “No, I never did.”
“W ell, you’ll just have to—what’ s wrong?” His brow had
furrowed, and his mouth turned down.
“I—nothing, really . It’ s only , I just thought—I never told
her anyt hing. I mean, we—didna really talk, aye? I mean, I
said thin gs to her now and the n, and her me, but just in the
ordinary way of things. And t hen we—I kissed her , and…
well, tha t was all about it.” He made a helpless gesture. “But I
never asked her . I was just sure.”
“And now you’re not?”
He shook his head, brown hair flying in the wind.
“Oh, no, Auntie; I’m as sure of what’ s between us as I am
of… of…” He looked about i n search of some symbol of
solidity on the heaving deck, but then gave up. “W ell, I’m
surer of how I feel than I am that the sun will come up
tomorrow .”
“I’m sure she knows that.”
“A ye, she does,” he said, in a  softer voice. “I know she
does.”
W e sat for a bit in silence. Then I stood up and said, “W ell,
in that case—perhaps you ought  to say a prayer for your father
and then go and sit near the bow .”
 I HAD BEEN in Philadelphi a once or twice in the
twentieth century , for medical conferences. I hadn’ t liked the
place then, finding it grubby and unwelcoming. It was
dif ferent now , but not much m ore attractive. The roads that
weren’ t cobbled were seas of mud, and streets that would
eventually be lined with run-do wn row houses with yards full
of rubbis h, broken plastic toys, and motorcycle parts were now
edged with ramshackle shanties with yards full of rubbish,
discarded oyster shells, and tethered goats. Granted, there were
no black-suited feral policemen visible, but the petty criminals
were sti ll the same, and still visible, despite the very obvious
presence of the British army; red coats swarmed near the
taverns, and marching columns went past the wagon, muskets
on their shoulders.
It was spring. I’d give it that much. There were trees
everywhere, tha nks to W illiam Penn’ s dictum that one acre in
five sho uld be left in trees—even the avaricious politicians of
the twentieth century hadn’ t quite succeeded in deforesting the
place, though probably only because they couldn’ t figure out
how to make a profit at it without being caught—and many of
the trees  were in bloom, a confe tti of white petals drifting over
the horses’ backs as the wagon turned into the city proper .
An army  patrol was set up on the main road into the city;
they had  stopped us, demanding passes from the driver and his
two male passengers. I had put  on a proper cap, didn’ t meet
anyone’ s eye, and murmured that I was coming in from the
country to tend my daughter , wh o was about to give birth. The
soldiers glanced briefly into the lar ge basket of food I had on
my lap, but did n’ t even look a t my face before waving the
wagon o n. Respectability had its uses. I wondered idly how
many spymasters had thought of using elderly ladies? Y ou
didn’ t hear about old women a s spies—but then again, that
might merely indicate how good they were at it.
Fer gus’ s printshop was not in the most fashionable district
but not far of f , and I was pleased to see that it was a
substantial red-brick building, standing in a row of solid,
pleasant-looking houses like it. W e had not written ahead tosay I was coming; I would hav e arrived as soon as the letter .
W ith a rising heart, I opened the door .
Marsali was standing at the cou nter , sorting stacks of paper .
She glanced up as the bell above the door rang, blinked, then
gaped at me.
“How are you, d ear?” I said, and, putting down the basket,
hurried to put up the flap of th e counter and take her in my
arms.
She looked like death warmed o ver , though her eyes lit with
a pa ssionate relief upon seeing  me. She nearly fell into my
arms an d burst into uncharacte ristic sobs. I patted her back,
making soothing  sounds and feeling somewhat alarmed. Her
clothes hung limp on her bones, and she smelled stale, her hair
unwashed for too long.
“It will be all right,” I repeated firmly for the dozenth time,
and she stopped sobbing and st ood back a bit, groping in her
pocket for a grubby handkerchief. T o my shock, I saw that she
was pregnant again.
“Where’ s Fer gus?” I asked.
“I dinna ken.”
“He’ s left you?!” I blurted, horrified. “Why , that wretched
little—”
“No, no,” she said hurriedly , almost laughing through her
tears. “H e’ s not left me, not at all. It’ s only he’ s in hiding—he
changes his place every few day s, and I dinna ken just which
one he’ s in right now . The weans will find him.”
“Why is  he in hiding? Not that I need to ask, I suppose,” I
said, with a glan ce at the squat black printing press that stood
behind the counter . “Anything specific, though?”
“A ye, a wee pa mphlet for Mr . Paine. He’ s got a series of
them going, ken, called ‘The American Crisis.’ “
“Mr . Paine—the Common Sense fellow?”“A ye, that’ s him,” she said, snif fing and dabbing. “He’ s a
nice ma n, but ye dinna want to drink with him, Fer gus says.
Ken how some m en are sweet and loving when they’re drunk,
but some get fou’ and it’ s up wi’ the bonnets o’ bonnie
Dundee and them not even Scots for an excuse?”
“Oh, tha t sort. Y es, I know it well. How far along are you?”
I ask ed, changing the subject b ack to one of general interest.
“Shouldn’ t you sit down? Y ou oughtn’ t to be on your feet for a
long time.”
“How far… ?” She looked surprised and put a hand
involuntarily where I was looking, to her slightly swollen
stomach. Then she laughed. “Oh, that.” She burrowed under
her apron and r emoved a bulging leather sack she had tied
around her waist.
“For escaping,” she explained. “In case they fire the house
and I have to make a run for it wi’ the weans.”
The sac k was surprisingly heavy when I took it from her ,
and I heard a muf fled clicking down at the bottom, beneath the
layer of papers and children’ s small toys.
“The Ca slon Italic 24?” I asked,  and she smiled, shedding at
least ten years on the spot.
“All exc ept ‘X.’  I had to hammer that one back into a lump
and trade it to a goldsmith for enough money for food, after
Fer gus left. There’ s still an ‘X ’ in there, mind,” she said,
taking back the bag, “but that one’ s real lead.”
“Did you have to use the Goudy Bold 10?” Jamie and
Fer gus had cast two full sets of type from gold, these rubbed in
soot and covered with ink until they were indistinguishable
from the  many sets of genuine lead type in the type case that
stood demurely against the wall behind the press.
She shook her head and reached to take the bag back again.
“Fer gus took that wi’ him. He meant to bury it somewhere
safe, just in ca se. Y e look fair fashed wi’ travel, Mother
Claire,” she went on, leaning forward to peer at me. “W ill I
send Joanie down to the ordinary for a jug o’ cider?”“That would be wonderful,” I said, still reeling a little from
the revelations of the last few minutes. “Henri-Christian,
though—how is he? Is he here?”
“Out bac k wi’ his friend, I think,” she said, rising. “I’ll call
him in. He’ s tha t wee bit tired, poor mite, from not sleepin’
well, and he’ s got such a throat he sounds like a costive
bullfrog. Doesna dampen him much, though, I’ll tell ye that.”
She smiled, despite her tiredness, and went through the door
into the living quarters, calling “Henri-Christian!” as she went.
“In case  they fir e the house.” W ho?  I wondered, feeling a
chill. The British army? Loyalists? And however was she
managing, running a business and a family alone, with a
husband in hiding and a sick child who couldn’ t be left alone
while he slept? The horr or of our situation , she’d said in her
letter to Laoghaire. And that had been months ago, when
Fer gus was still at home.
W ell, sh e wasn’ t alone now . Fo r the first time since I’d left
Jamie in  Scotland, I felt something more than the pull of grim
necessity in my situation. I’d write to him this evening, I
decided. He might—I hoped he would—leave Lallybroch
before my letter reached him there, but if so, Jenny and the
rest of the family would be gla d to know what was going on
here. An d if by chance Ian was  still alive… but I didn’ t want
to think of that; knowing that his death meant Jamie’ s release
to co me to me made me feel like a ghoul, as though I wished
for his death to come sooner . Th ough in all honesty , I thought
Ian himself might wish it to be sooner rather than later .
These m orbid th oughts were interrupted by Marsali’ s return,
Henri-Christian scampering beside her .
“Grandmer e!”  he shouted, seeing me, and leapt into my
arms, nearly knocking me over . He was a very solid little boy .
He nuzz led me af fectionately , a nd I felt a remarkable rush
of w arm joy at seeing him. I kissed and hugged him fiercely ,
feeling t he hole left in my heart by Mandy and Jem’ s departure
fill u p a bit. Isolated from Marsali’ s family in Scotland, I hadnearly for gotten  that I still had four lovely grandchildren left
and was grateful to be reminded of it.
“W ant to  see a trick, Grandmer e ?” Henri-Christian croaked
eagerly . Marsali  was right; he did sound like a constipated
bullfrog. I nodded, though, and, hopping of f my lap, he pulled
three sm all leather bags stuf fed with bran out of his pocket and
began at once to juggle them with amazing dexterity .
“His da taught him,” Marsali said, with a certain amount of
pride.
“When I’m big like Germain, Da will teach me to pick
pockets, too!”
Marsali gasped and clapped a hand over his mouth.
“Henri-Christian, we dinna ever speak o’ that,” she said
sternly . “Not to anybody . D’ye hear?”
He glanced at me, bewildered, but nodded obediently .
The chil l I had felt earlier retu rned. W as Germain picking
pockets professionally , so to speak? I looked at Marsali, but
she shook her head slightly; we’d talk about it later .
“Open your mouth and stick out  your tongue, sweetheart,” I
suggested to Henri-Christian. “Let Grannie see your sore
throat—it sounds very ouchy .”
“Owg-owg-owg,” he said, grinning widely , but obligingly
opened up. A faint putrid smell wafted out of his wide-open
mouth, and even lacking a lighted scope, I could see that the
swollen tonsils nearly obstructed his throat altogether .
“Goodness grac ious,” I said, turning his head to and fro to
get a better view . “I’m amazed that he can eat, let alone sleep.”
“Sometimes he can’ t,” Marsali said, and I heard the strain in
her voice. “Often enough, he canna manage to swallow
anything but a bit o’ milk, and even that’ s like knives in his
throat, poor bairn.” She crouched beside me, smoothing the
fine dark  hair of f Henri-Christia n’ s flushed face. “Can ye help,
d’ye think, Mother Claire?”“Oh, yes,” I said, with much  more confidence than I
actually felt. “Absolutely .”
I felt the tension drain out of her like water , and, as though
it were a literal draining, tears began to run quietly down her
face. She pulled Henri-Christian’ s head into her bosom so he
couldn’ t see her cry , and I reached out to embrace both of
them, la ying my cheek against her capped head, smelling the
stale musky tang of her terror and exhaustion.
“It’ s all right no w ,” I said softly ,  rubbing her thin back. “I’m
here. Y ou can sleep.”
 
MARSALI SLEPT the rest of th e day and all through the
night. I was tired from the journey but managed to doze in the
big chair by the kitchen fire, Henri-Christian cradled in my
lap, sno ring hea vily . He did sto p breathing twice during the
night, and while I got him star ted again with no dif ficulty , I
could see that something had to be done at once.
Consequently , I  had a brief nap in the morning and, having
washed my face and eaten a bit, went out in search of what I’d
need.
I had  the most rudimentary of medical instruments with me,
but the fact was, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy didn’ t
really require anything complex in that line.
I w ished  that Ian had come int o the city with me; I could
have used his he lp, and so could Marsali. But it was dangerous
for a man of his age; he couldn’ t enter the city openly without
being stopped and questioned by British patrols, likely arrested
as a suspicious character—which he most assuredly was.
Beyond that… he’d been afire to look for Rachel Hunter .
The task of find ing two people—and a dog—who might be
almost a nywhere between Canada and Charleston, with no
means of communication other  than the foot and the spoken
word, w ould have daunted anyone less stubborn than a person
of Frase r blood. Agreeable as he might be, though, Ian was ascapable as Jamie of pursuing a chosen course, come hell, high
water , or reasonable suggestions.
He did, as he’d pointed out, h ave one advantage. Denny
Hunter was presumably still an  army sur geon. If so, he was
obviously with  the Continental army—some part of the
Continental army . So Ian’ s notion was to discover where the
closest part of the army might be just now and begin his
inquiries there. T o which end h e proposed to skulk round the
edges of Philadelphia, creeping into taverns and shebeens on
the outs kirts, and, by means of local gossip, discover where
some part of the army presently was.
The most I had been able to pers uade him to do was to send
word to  Fer gus’ s printshop telling us where he was bound,
once he’d discovered anything that gave him a possible
destination.
In the meantime, all I could do w as say a quick prayer to his
guardian angel— a most overworked being—then have a word
with my own (w hom I envisioned as a sort of grandmotherly
shape with an a nxious expression) and set about doing what
I’d come to do.
I now walked through the muddy streets, pondering the
procedure. I had done a tonsillectomy only once—well, twice,
if yo u counted the Beardsley tw ins separately—in the last ten
years. It was normally a straightforward, quick procedure, but
then again, it wasn’ t normally performed in a gloomy
printshop on a dwarf with a  constricted airway , a sinus
infection, and a peritonsillar abscess.
Still… I needn’ t do it in the printshop, if I could find a
better -lighted place. Where would that be? I wondered. A rich
person’ s house, most likely; one where candle wax was
squandered pro fligately . I’d been in many such houses,
particularly during our time in Paris, but knew no one even
moderately well-to-do in Philadelphia. Neither did Marsali; I’d
asked.
W ell, one thing at a time. Before I worried any more about
an o perating theater , I needed to  find a blacksmith capable offine work, to m ake the wire-loop instrument I required. I
could, in  a pinch, cut the tonsils with a scalpel, but it would be
more than dif ficult to remove th e adenoids, located above the
soft pala te, that  way . And the last thing I wanted was to be
slicing and poking round in Henri-Christian’ s severely
inflamed throat in the dark with  a sharp instrument. The wire
loop wo uld be sharp enough but was unlikely to damage
anything it bumped into; only th e edge surrounding the tissue
to b e removed would cut, and  then only when I made the
forceful scoopin g motion that w ould sever a tonsil or adenoid
neatly .
I w onde red une asily whether he had a strep infection. His
throat was bright red, but other infections could cause that.
No, we’ d have to take our chanc es with the strep, I thought.
I had  set some penicillin bowls to brew , almost the moment I
arrived. There was no way of  telling whether the extract I
might ge t from them in a few da ys was active or not—nor , if it
was, just how  a ctive. But it was better than nothing, and so
was I.
I d id have one undeniably useful thing—or would, if this
afternoon’ s quest was successful. Nearly five years ago, Lord
John Gr ey had sent me a glass bottle of vitriol and the pelican
glassware necessary to distill ether using it. He’d procured
those items from an apothecary in Philadelphia, I thought,
though I couldn’ t recall the name. But there couldn’ t be  many
apothecaries in Phila delphia, and I proposed to visit all of
them until I found what I was looking for .
Marsali had said there were two  lar ge apothecary’ s shops in
town, and only a lar ge one would have what I needed to make
ether . What was the name of th e gentleman from whom Lord
John Grey had acquired my p elican apparatus? W as he in
Philadelphia at all? My mind w as a blank, either from fatigue
or fr om simple for getfulness; th e time when I had made ether
in m y sur gery on Fraser ’ s R idge seemed as distant and
mythical as Noah’ s Flood.I fou nd the first  apothecary and got from him some useful
items, including  a jar of leeches—though I boggled a little at
the thought of putting one ins ide Henri-Christian’ s mouth;
what if he managed to swallow the thing?
On t he other ha nd, I reflected, he was a four -year -old boy
with a very imaginative elder brother . He’d probably
swallowed much  worse things th an a leech. W ith luck, though,
I would n’ t need them. I had also got two cautery irons, very
small ones. It was a primitive and painful way of stopping
bleeding—but, in fact, very ef fective.
The apothecary  had not had any vitriol, though. He had
apologized for the lack, sayin g that such things must be
imported from England, and with the war… I thanked him and
went on to the second place. Where I was informed that they
had had some vitriol but had so ld it some time previous, to an
English lord, though what he w anted with such a thing, the
man behind the counter couldn’ t begin to imagine.
“An Eng lish lor d?” I said, surp rised. Surely it couldn’ t be
Lord John. Though, come to that, it wasn’ t as though the
English aristocracy was flockin g to Philadelphia these days,
save those members who were s oldiers. And the man had said
“a lord,” not a major or a captain.
Nothing ventured, nothing gained; I asked and was
obligingly told that it was a Lo rd John Grey , and that he had
requested the vitriol be delivered to his house on Chestnut
Street.
Feeling a little li ke Alice down t he rabbit hole—I was still a
bit light headed from lack of s leep and the fatigues of the
journey from Scotland—I asked the way to Chestnut Street.
The door to the  house was op ened by an extraordinarily
beautiful young woman, dressed  in a fashion that made it clear
she was no serv ant. W e blinked at each other in surprise; she
plainly hadn’ t been expecting m e, either , but when I inquired
for L ord John, s aying I was an old acquaintance, she readily
invited me in, sa ying that her un cle would be back directly , he
had only taken a horse to be shod.“Y ou wo uld thin k he’d send the  boy ,” the young woman—
who g ave her name as Lady Dorothea Grey—said
apologetically . “Or my cousin. But Uncle John is most
particular about his horses.”
“Y our cousin?” I asked, my slo w mind tracing the possible
family connections. “Y ou don’ t mean W illiam Ransom, do
you?”
“Ellesmere, yes ,” she said, loo king surprised but pleased.
“Do you know him?”
“W e’ve met once or twice,” I said. “If you don’ t mind my
asking—how do es he come to be in Philadelphia? I… er…
had un derstood that he was paroled with the rest of
Bur goyne’ s arm y and had gone to Boston in order to sail home
to England.”
“Oh, he is!” she said. “Paroled, I mean. He came here,
though, first, to see his father—that’ s Uncle John—and my
brother .” Her lar ge blue eyes c louded a little at the mention.
“Henry’ s very ill, I’m afraid.”
“I’m so sorry to hear it,” I said, sincerely but briefly . I was
much m ore interested in W illiam’ s presence here, but before I
could as k anythi ng further , there was a quick, light step on the
porch and the front door opened.
“Dottie?” said a familiar voice. “Have you any idea where
—oh, I beg you r pardon.” Lord John Grey had come into the
parlor an d stopped, seeing me. Then he actually saw me, and
his jaw dropped.
“How nice to see you again,” I said pleasantly . “But I’m
sorry to hear that your nephew is ill.”
“Thank you,” he said, and, eyei ng me rather warily , bowed
low over my hand, kissing it gracefully . “I am delighted to see
you again, Mrs. Fraser ,” he added, sounding as though he
actually meant it. He hesitated for a moment, but of course
couldn’ t help asking, “Y our husband… ?”
“He’ s in Scotland,” I said, feeling rather mean at
disappointing him. It flickered across his face but waspromptly erased —he was a gentleman, and a soldier . In fact,
he was wearing an army uniform, which rather surprised me.
“Y ou’ve returned to active duty , then?” I asked, raising my
brows at him.
“Not exa ctly . Dottie, have you n ot called for Mrs. Figg yet?
I’m sure Mrs. Fraser would like some refreshment.”
“I’d only just co me,” I said has tily , as Dottie leapt up and
went out.
“Indeed,” he said, courteously repressing the why?  that
showed plainly on his face. He m otioned me to a chair and sat
down himself, wearing a rather odd expression, as though
trying to think how to say something awkward.
“I am  delighted to see you,” he said again, slowly . “Did you
—I do not wish  to sound in any way ungracious, Mrs. Fraser ,
you must excuse me—but… d id you come to bring me a
message from your husband, perhaps?”
He coul dn’ t help  the small ligh t that sprang up in his eyes,
and I felt almost apologetic as I shook my head.
“I’m sorry ,” I said, and was surprised to find that I meant it.
“I’ve co me to beg a favor . Not on my own behalf—for my
grandson.”
He blinked at that.
“Y our grandson,” he repeated blankly . “I thought that your
daughter … oh! Of course, I was for getting that your
husband’ s foster son—his family is here? It is one of his
children?”
“Y es, that’ s right.” W ithout more ado, I explained the
situation, describing Henri-Christian’ s state and reminding him
of his generosity in sending me the vitriol and glass apparatus
more than four years before.
“Mr . Sholto—th e apothecary on W alnut Street?—told me
that he had sold you a lar ge bottle of vitriol some months ago.
I w onde red—do you by any chance still have it?” I made noef fort to  keep the eagerness out of my voice, and his
expression softened.
“Y es, I do,” he said, and, to my surprise, smiled like the sun
coming out from behind a clou d. “I bought it for you, Mrs.
Fraser .”
 
A B ARGAIN W AS struck at o nce. He would not only
give me the v itriol but also purchase any other medical
supplies I might require, if I wo uld consent to perform sur gery
on his nephew .
“Dr . Hun ter removed one of the balls at Christmas,” he said,
“and that improved Henry’ s condition somewhat. The other
remains embedded, though, and—”
“Dr . Hunter?” I interrupted him. “Not Denzell Hunter , you
don’ t mean?”
“I do mean that,” he said, surprised and frowning a little.
“Y ou do not mean to say you know him?”
“I d o indeed m ean that,” I s aid, smiling. “W e worked
together often, both at T iconderoga and at Saratoga with
Gates’ s army . But what is he doing in Philadelphia?”
“He—” he began, but was inter rupted by the sound of light
footsteps coming down the stair . I had been vaguely conscious
of footsteps overhead as we talked but had paid no attention. I
looked toward the doorway now , though, and my heart leapt at
the s ight of Rac hel Hunter , who was standing in it, staring at
me with her mouth in a perfect “O” of astonishment.
The nex t moment she was in my arms, hugging me fit to
break my ribs.
“Friend Claire!”  she said, letting go at last. “I never thought
to see— that is, I am so pleased— oh, Claire! Ian. Has he come
back with thee?” Her face was alive with eagerness and fear ,
hope and  wariness chasing each other like racing clouds across
her features.“He has ,” I assured her . “He’ s not here, though.” Her face
fell.
“Oh,” she said in a small voice. “Where—”
“He’ s gone to look for you,” I said gently , taking her hands.
Joy blazed up in her eyes like a forest fire.
“Oh!” she said, in a completely dif ferent voice. “Oh!”
Lord John coughed politely .
“Perhaps it would be unwise fo r me to know exactly where
your nephew is, Mrs. Fraser ,” he observed. “As I assume he
shares your husband’ s principle s? Just so. If you will excuse
me, then , I will go and tell Henry of your arrival. I suppose
you wish to examine him?”
“Oh,” I said, rec alled suddenly to the matter at hand. “Y es.
Y es, of course. If you wouldn’ t mind…”
He smil ed, glancing at Rachel, whose face had gone white
at seeing  me but who was now t he shade of a russet apple with
excitement.
“Not at all,” he said. “Come upstairs when you are at
leisure, Mrs. Fraser . I’ll wait for you there.” RA THER MESSY
 
I  MISSED BRIANNA all the time, in greater or lesser
degree depending upon the circumstance. But I missed her
most particularly now . She could, I was sure, have solved the
problem of getting light down Henri-Christian’ s throat.
I h ad him laid o n a table at the front of the printshop now ,
taking e very adv antage of such light as came in there. But this
was Philadelphia, not New Bern. If the sky wasn’ t overcast
with clouds, it was hazed w ith smoke from the city’ s
chimneys. And the street was narrow; the buildings opposite
blocked most of what light there was.
Not that it mat tered that much, I told myself. The room
could ha ve been blazing with sun, and I still couldn’ t have
seen a thing in the inner reach es of Henri-Christian’ s throat.
Marsali had a small mirror with which to direct light, and that
would perhaps help with the tonsils—the adenoids would have
to be done by touch.
I co uld feel th e soft, spongy edge of one adenoid, just
behind t he soft palate; it took sh ape in my mind as I carefully
fitted th e wire loop around it, handling it with great delicacy
so as not to let the edge cut either my fingertips or the body of
the s wollen adenoid. There was going to be a gush of blood
when I sliced through it.
I had Henri-Christian braced at an angle, Marsali holding
his i nert body al most on his side. Denzell Hunter kept his head
steady , clamping the pad soaked in ether firmly over his nose.
I had  no  means of suction other than my own mouth; I’d have
to tu rn him quic kly after I made  the cut and let the blood run
out of his mouth before it ran down his throat and choked him.
The tiny cautery iron was heating, its spade-shaped tip thrust
into a pan of hot coals. That might be the trickiest part, I
thought, pausing  to steady myself and steady Marsali with anod. I didn’ t w ant to burn his  tongue or the inside of his
mouth, and it would be slippery….
I t wisted  the handle sharply and  the little body jerked under
my hand.
“Hold him tight,” I said calm ly . “A little more ether ,
please.”
Marsali’ s breath was coming hard, and her knuckles were
white as  her face. I felt the ad enoid separate cleanly , come
adrift, an d scooped it between my fingers, pulling it out of his
throat before it could slip down into his esophagus. T ilted his
head qu ickly to the side, smelling the sheared-metal smell of
hot blood. I dropped the severed bit of tissue into a pan and
nodded to Rachel, who pulled t he cautery iron from its coals
and put it carefully into my hand.
I s till had my o ther hand in his mouth, keeping the tongue
and uvula out of the way , a finger on the site of the ex-
adenoid, markin g my place. The cautery iron seared a white
line of pain dow n my finger as I slid it down his throat, and I
let o ut a small hiss but didn’ t move my finger . The scorched
scent of burning blood and tis sue came hot and thick, and
Marsali made a small, frantic no ise but didn’ t loosen her hold
on her son’ s body .
“It is well, Friend Marsali,” Rachel whispered to her ,
clasping her shoulder . “He breathes well; he is not in pain. He
is held in the light, he will do well.”
“Y es, he  will,” I said. “T ake the iron now , Rachel, if you
will? Dip the loop in the whisky please, and give me that
again. One down, three to go.”
 
“I HA VE NEVER seen anything like it,” Denzell Hunter
said, for perhaps the fifth time. He looked from the pad of
fabric in  his hand to Henri-Christian, who was beginning to
stir and whimp er in his mothe r ’ s arms. “I should not have
believed it, Claire, had I not seen it with my own eyes!”“W ell, I  thought you’d better s ee it,” I said, wiping sweat
from my face w ith a handkerchief. A sense of profound well-
being filled me. The sur gery ha d been fast, no more than five
or six minutes, and Henri-Christian was already coughing and
crying, coming out of the ether .  Germain, Joanie, and Felicite
all watched wide-eyed from the doorway into the kitchen,
Germain keepin g tight hold of his sisters’ hands. “I’ll teach
you to make it, if you like.”
His face, already shining with happiness at the successful
sur gery , lit up at this.
“Oh, Claire! Such a gift! T o be able to cut without giving
pain, to keep a patient quite still without restraint. It—it is
unimaginable.”
“W ell, it ’ s a long way from perfect,” I warned him. “And it
is very dangerou s—both to make and to use.” I’d distilled the
ether the day before, out in the woodshed; it was a very
volatile compound, and there was a better than even chance
that it would explode and burn  the shed down, killing me in
the p rocess. All had gone well, though the thought of doing it
again made me feel rather hollow and sweaty-palmed.
I lifted the dropping bottle and shook it gently; more than
three-quarters full, and I had another , slightly lar ger bottle as
well.
“W ill it be enough, does thee think?” Denny asked,
realizing what I was thinking.
“It depends what we find.” Henri-Christian’ s sur gery ,
despite the technical dif ficulties, had been very simple. Henry
Grey’ s w ouldn’ t be. I had exami ned him, Denzell beside me to
explain what he had seen and done during the earlier sur gery ,
which h ad removed a ball lodg ed just under the pancreas. It
had caused local irritation and scarring but had not actually
damaged a vital or gan very badly . He hadn’ t been able to find
the other ball, as it was lodged very deeply in the body ,
somewhere unde r the liver . He feared that it might lie near the
hepatic portal vein and thus had n’ t dared to probe hard for it,
as a hemorrhage would almost certainly have been fatal.I wa s reasonably sure that th e ball hadn’ t damaged the
gallbladder or bile duct, though, and given Henry’ s general
state and symptomology , I suspected that the ball had
perforated the small intestine but had seared the internal
entrance wound shut in its wake; otherwise, the boy would
almost surely have died within days, of peritonitis.
It m ight be ency sted in the wall of the intestine; that would
be t he best situ ation. It might be lodged actually within the
intestine itself, and that wouldn’ t be good at all, but I couldn’ t
say how bad it might be until I got there.
But we did have ether . And the sharpest scalpels Lord
John’ s money could buy .
 
THE WI NDOW , after what seemed to John Grey to be an
excruciatingly prolonged discussion between the two
physicians, remained partly open. Dr . Hunter insisted on the
benefit of fresh air , and Mrs. Fraser agreed with this because
of the ether fum es but kept talki ng about something she called
germs, w orrying that these would come in through the window
and cont aminate her “sur gical field.” She speaks as though she
views it as a battlegr ound , he thou ght, but  then looked clo sely
at her face and realized that indeed she did.
He had never s een a woman look like that, he thought,
fascinated despite his worry for Henry . She had tied back her
outrageous hair and wrapped he r head carefully in a cloth like
a N egro  slave woman. W ith her  face so exposed, the delicate
bones made stark, the intentness of her expression—with those
yellow e yes darting like a hawk ’ s from one thing to another—
was the most unwomanly thing  he had ever seen. It was the
look of a general marshaling his troops for battle, and seeing
it, he felt the ball of snakes in his belly relax a little.
She knows what she’ s doing , he thought.
She looked at h im then, and he straightened his shoulders,
instinctively awaiting orders—to his utter amazement.“Do you want to stay?” she asked.
“Y es, of  course. ” He felt a little breathless, but there was no
doubt in his voice. She’d tol d him frankly what Henry’ s
chances were—not good, but there was  a chance—and he was
determined to be with his nephew , no matter what happened. If
Henry died, he would at least die with someone who loved
him there. Though, in fact, he w as quite determined that Henry
would not die. Grey would not let him.
“Sit over there, then.” She nodded him to a stool on the far
side of the bed,  and he sat down, giving Henry a reassuring
smile as he did so. Henry looked terrified but determined.
“I c an’ t live like  this anymor e,”  he’ d said the night before,
finally making up his mind to allow the operation. “I just
can’ t.”
Mrs. W oodcock had insisted upon being present, too, and
after a close ca techism, Mrs. Fraser had declared that she
might ad minister the ether . This mysterious substance sat in a
dropping bottle on the bureau, a  faint sickly odor drifting from
it.
Mrs. Fraser gave Dr . Hunter something that looked like a
handkerchief, and raised another to her face. It was  a
handkerchief, Grey saw , but one with strings af fixed to its
corners. She tied these behind h er head, so the cloth covered
her nose and mouth, and Hunter obediently followed suit.
Used as Grey w as to the swift brutality of army sur geons,
Mrs. Fraser ’ s preparations seem ed laborious in the extreme:
she swabbed Henry’ s belly repeatedly with an alcoholic
solution she had concocted, talking to him through her
highwayman’ s m ask in a low , soothing voice. She rinsed her
hands—and made Hunter and Mrs. W oodcock do the same—
and her instruments, so that th e whole room reeked like a
distillery of low quality .
Her mo tions were in fact quit e brisk, he realized after a
moment. But her hands moved with such sureness and… yes,
grace, that was the only word…  that they gave the illusion ofgliding like a p air of gulls upo n the air . No frantic flapping,
only a sure, ser ene, and almost mystic movement. He found
himself quieting as he watched them, becoming entranced and
half for getting the ultimate pu rpose of this quiet dance of
hands.
She mov ed to the head of the bed, bending low to speak to
Henry , smooth the hair away from his brow , and Grey saw the
hawk’ s eyes soften momentarily into gold. Henry’ s body
relaxed slowly under her touch; Grey saw his clenched, rigid
hands uncurl. She had yet another mask, he saw , this one a
stif f thin g made of basket wit hes lined with layers of soft
cotton cloth. She fitted this gently to Henry’ s face and, saying
something inaudible to him, took up her dropping bottle.
The air filled a t once with a pungent, sweet aroma that
clung to  the back of Grey’ s throat and made his head swim
slightly . He blinked, shaking hi s head to dispel the giddiness,
and realized that Mrs. Fraser had said something to him.
“I beg your pardon?” He looked up at her , a great white bird
with yellow eyes—and a gleaming talon that sprouted
suddenly from her hand.
“I said,” she repeated calmly through her mask, “you might
want to sit back a little farther . It’ s going to be rather messy .”
 
WILLIAM, RACHEL, and Dorothea sat on the edge of
the porc h like birds on a fence rail, Rollo sprawled on the
brick walk at their feet, enjoying the spring sun.
“It’ s bloody quiet up there,” W illiam said, glancing uneasily
at the window a bove, where Henry’ s room lay . “D’you think
they’ve started yet?” He thought, but didn’ t say , that he would
have expected to hear Henry ma king a certain amount of noise
if they had, despite Rachel’ s description of her brother ’ s
account of the marvels of Mr s. Fraser ’ s ether . A man lie
quietly a sleep while someone cut open his belly with a knife?
All stuf f, he would have said. But Denzell Hunter wasn’ t aman who could be easily be guiled—though he supposed
Dottie had somehow manage d it. He gave his cousin a
sideways glance.
“Have you written Uncle Hal y et? About you and Denny , I
mean?” He knew she hadn’ t—she’d told Lord John, perforce,
but pers uaded hi m to let her break the news to her father—but
wanted to distract her if he could. She was white to the lips,
and her hands ha d bunched the f abric over her knees into nests
of c reases. He s till hadn’ t got u sed to seeing her in dove and
cream instead of her usual b rilliant plumage—though he
thought in fact that the quiet colors suited her , particularly as
Rachel had assured her that she might still wear silk and
muslin if she liked, rather than sacking material.
“No,” Dottie said, giving him a  look that thanked him for
the distraction, even while acknowledging that she knew what
he was doing. “Or , yes, but I haven’ t sent it yet. If all’ s well
with Henry , I’ll write at once with the news and add the bit
about D enny and me at the bottom, as a postscript. They’ll be
so overjoyed about Henry that perhaps they won’ t notice—or
at least won’ t be as upset about it.”
“I ra ther think they’ll notice,” W illiam said thoughtfully .
“Papa did.” Lord John had gone  quite dangerously quiet when
told and  had given Denzell Hunt er a look suggesting swords at
dawn. B ut the fact was that Denny had saved Henry’ s life once
and was  now helping—with luck and Mrs. Fraser—to save it
again. A nd Lord  John was, abov e all, a man of honor . Besides,
W illiam thought  that his father was actually relieved to finally
know w hat it was that Dottie h ad been up to. He hadn’ t said
anything directly to W illiam regarding W illiam’ s own role in
her adventure—yet. He would.
“May th e Lord hold thy brothe r in his hand,” Rachel said,
ignoring W illiam’ s remark. “And mine and Mrs. Fraser , as
well. But what if all should not go as we wish? Thee will still
have to  tell thy parents, and they may see news of thy
impending marriage as adding insult to injury .”“Y ou are  the most tactless plain -spoken creature,” W illiam
told her , rather irritably , seeing Dottie go whiter still at the
reminder that Henry might die in the next minutes, hours, or
days. “Henry will be fine. I know it. Denny is a great
physician, and Mrs. Fraser… sh e’ s … er…” In all honesty , he
wasn’ t sure what Mrs. Fraser w as, but she scared him a little.
“Denny says she knows what she’ s doing,” he ended lamely .
“If Henry dies, nothing will matter ,” Dottie said softly ,
looking at the toes of her shoes. “Not to any of us.”
Rachel made a s mall, sympathetic sound and reached to put
her arm round D ottie’ s shoulder . W illiam added his own gruf f
clearing of the throat and for an instant thought the dog had
done the same.
Rollo’ s intent, though, was not sympathetic. He had lifted
his h ead suddenly , and the hack les half-rose at his neck, a low
growl rumbling through his chest. W illiam glanced
automatically in  the direction the dog was looking and felt a
sudden tightening of his muscles.
“Miss Hunter ,” he said casually . “Do you know that man?
The one  down there, near the e nd of the street, talking to the
butter -and-egg woman?”
Rachel shaded her eyes with h er hand, looking where he
nodded, but shook her head.
“No. Why? Is he  what’ s troubling the dog, does thee think?”
She prodded Rollo in the side with her toe. “What’ s amiss,
then, Friend Rollo?”
“I don’ t know ,” W illiam said honestly . “It might be the cat;
one ran across the road just behind the woman. But I’ve seen
that man before; I’m sure of it. I saw him by the roadside,
somewhere in New Jersey . He asked me if I knew Ian Murray
—and where he might be.”
Rachel gave a little gasp at that, making W illiam look
sideways at her in surprise.
“What?” he said. “Do you know where Murray is?”“No,” she said sharply . “I have not seen him since the
autumn, at Saratoga, and I have  no notion where he is. Does
thee kno w this man’ s name?” she added, frowning. The man
had disappeared  now , walking of f down a side street. “For that
matter , is thee sure he is the same?”
“No,” W illiam admitted. “But I think so. He had a staf f with
him, and so did this man. And there’ s something about the way
he stands—a little stooped. The man I met in New Jersey was
very old, and thi s one walks the same way .” He didn’ t mention
the m issing fingers; no need to remind Dottie of violence and
mutilation just this minute, and h e couldn’ t see the man’ s hand
at this distance anyway .
Rollo had left o f f growling and settled himself with a brief
grunt, but his yellow eyes were still watchful.
“When do you mean to be married, Dottie?” W illiam asked,
wishing to keep her mind oc cupied. A strange smell was
coming from the window above  them; the dog was wrinkling
his nose, shaking his head in a confused sort of way , and
W illiam didn’ t blame him. It wa s a nasty , sickly kind of thing
—but he could distinctly smell  blood, as well, and the faint
stink of shit. It w as a battlefield smell, and it made his insides
shift uneasily .
“I w ant to be married before the fighting starts again in
earnest,” his cousin answered seriously , turning to face him,
“so that I can go  with Denny—and Rachel,” she added, taking
her prospective sister -in-law’ s hand with a smile.
Rachel returned the smile, but briefly .
“What a strange thing,” she said to both of them, but her
hazel eyes were fixed on W illiam , soft and troubled. “In only a
little while we shall be enemies again.”
“I h ave never felt myself you r enemy , Miss Hunter ,” he
replied, just as softly . “And I shall always be your friend.”
A smile touched her lips, but the trouble stayed in her eyes.
“Thee k nows what I mean.” He r eyes slid from W illiam to
Dottie, o n her other side, and it occurred to W illiam with a joltthat his cousin was about to wed a rebel—to become one
herself, in fact. That he must in  fact soon be directly at war
with a part of his own family . The fact that Denny Hunter
would n ot take up arms would not protect him—or Dottie. Or
Rachel. All three of them were guilty of treason. Any of them
might be  killed, captured, imprisoned. What would he do, he
thought suddenl y , appalled, if he had to see Denny hanged one
day? Or even Dottie?
“I know what you mean,” he said quietly . But he took
Rachel’ s hand, and she gave it him, and the three of them sat
in silence, linked, awaiting the verdict of the future. INK-ST AINED WRETCH
 
I  MADE MY W A Y T O the printshop, dead tired and in
that state of mi nd in which on e feels drunk—euphoric and
uncoordinated. I was in truth somewhat physically drunk, too;
Lord John had i nsisted upon plying both Denzell Hunter and
myself with his best brandy , seeing how done up we both were
in the wake of the sur gery . I hadn’ t said no.
It w as one of the most hair -raising pieces of sur gery I’d
done in the ei ghteenth century . I’d done only two other
abdominal sur geries: the successful removal of Aidan
McCallum’ s appendix, under th e influence of ether—and the
very unsuccessful cesarean I’d performed with a garden knife
upon th e murde red body of M alva Christie. The thought of
that gave me the usual pang of sadness and regret, but it was
oddly tempered. What I remembered now , walking home in
the cool  evenin g, was the feeli ng of the life I’d held in my
hands—so brief, so fleeting—but ther e , unmistakable and
intoxicant, a brief blue flame.
I’d held Henry Grey’ s life in my hands two hours before and
felt that blaze again. Once more  I’d willed all my strength into
the burning of th at flame—but this time had felt it steady and
rise in my palms, like a candle taking hold.
The bullet had entered his inte stine but had not encysted.
Instead, it remained embedded but mobile, not able to leave
the bod y but moving enough to irritate the lining of the
intestine, which was badly ulcerated. After a quick discussion
with Denzell Hunter—who was so fascinated with the novelty
of examining a person’ s working insides while they lay
unconscious that he could barely keep his mind on the
business at hand, exclaiming in  awe at the vivid colors and
pulsating throb of live or gans—I had decided that the
ulceration was too extensive. T o excise it would narrow thesmall intestine dramatically and risk scarring—constricting it
further and perhaps obstructing it altogether .
W e’d done a modest resection in stead, and I felt a twinge of
something between laughter and dismay at the recollection of
Lord Jo hn’ s face when I severed the ulcerated segment of
intestine and dropped it with a splat  on the floor at his feet. I
hadn’ t d one it on purpose; I’d simply needed both my hands
and Denzell’ s to control the blee ding, and we’d lacked a nurse
to help.
The boy wasn’ t out of the woods, not by a long chalk. I
didn’ t know whether my penicillin would be ef fective, or
whether he might develop some hideous infection despite it.
But he was  awake, and his vital signs were surprisingly strong
—perhaps, I thought, because of Mrs. W oodcock, who had
gripped his hand and stroked his face, ur ging him to wake with
a fierce tenderness that left her feelings for him in no doubt
whatever .
I d id wonder bri efly what the fu ture held for her . Struck by
her unusual name, I’d inquired cautiously about her husband
and was  sure that it was he whose amputated leg I’d tended on
the retreat from T iconderoga. I thought it very likely he was
dead; if so, what might happen between Mercy W oodcock and
Henry G rey? She was a free woman, not a slave. Marriage
wasn’ t unthinkable—not even as unthinkable as such a
relationship wou ld be in the United States two hundred years
in the future: ma rriages involving black and mulatto women of
good family to white men were , if not common in the Indies,
not a matter of p ublic scandal, either . Philadelphia was not the
Indies, though, and from what Dottie had told me of her
father…
I w as simply to o tired to think about it, and I needn’ t—
Denny Hunter had volunteered t o stay with Henry through the
night. I dismissed that particu lar pair from my mind as I
wandered down the street, weaving slightly . I hadn’ t eaten
anything since breakfast, and it was nearly dark; the brandy
had sunk directly through the walls of my empty stomach and
entered my bloodstream, and I hummed gently to myself as Iwalked. It was the twilight hour , when things float on the air ,
when curved cobblestones seem insubstantial and the leaves of
trees hang heavy as emeralds, glowing with a green whose
fragrance enters the blood.
I sho uld walk fa ster; there was a curfew . Still, who would
arrest me? I was too old for patrolling soldiers to molest me, as
they would a young girl, and of the wrong sex to be
suspicious. Should I meet a patr ol, they wouldn’ t do more than
abuse m e and tell me to go home—which I was doing, in any
case.
It struck  me quite suddenly th at I could move the things
Marsali describ ed circumspectl y as “Mr . Smith’ s job”: the
written letters circulated by the  Sons of Liberty that passed
between villages, between tow ns, that whirled through the
colonies like leaves driven by a spring storm, were copied and
sent on, sometimes printed and distributed within the towns, if
a bold printer could be found to do the work.
There was a loose network through which these things
moved, but it was always prone to discovery , with people
arrested and imprisoned frequently . Germain carried such
papers o ften, an d my heart was in my throat when I thought of
it. An agile boy was less noticeable than a young man or a
tradesman going about his business—but the British were not
fools and would certainly sto p him if he looked at all
suspicious. Whereas I…
T urning the possibilities over in my mind, I reached the
shop and  went in, to the smell of a savory supper , the greetings
of excited children, and someth ing that drove all thought of
my pote ntial new career as a spy from my mind: two letters
from Jamie.
 
20 Mar ch, A.D. 1778
 Lallybr och
My dear est Clair e;Ian is dead. It ha s been ten days since the Event, and
I tho ught I shou ld now be able to write calmly . Y et to see
those W or ds written on the  Page just now s mote me with
the most unexpected Grief; T ears ar e running down the
sides of my Nose, and I was for ced to stop to mop my
Face with a Handker chief befor e continuing. It was not
an e asy Death a nd I should be r elieved that Ian is now at
Peace, a nd glad for his T ranslat ion into Heaven. So I am.
But I am also desolate, in a W ay that I have never been
befor e. Only the Thought of bein g able to confide in you,
my Soul, gives me Comfort .
Y oung J amie has the Estate, as he should; Ian’ s W ill
has been r ead o ut, and Mr . Gowan will see it executed.
Ther e is not mu ch beyond the Land and Buildings; only
the smallest Bequests to the other Childr en, these lar gely
of p ersonal Items. My Sister he  has confided to my Car e
(he having inquir ed befor e his Death whether I was
willing. I told hi m he knew bette r than to ask. He said he
did, but thought to inquir e wh ether I felt myself also
equal to  the T ask, and laughed like a Loon. Dear God, I
shall miss him) .
Ther e wer e some trifling Deb ts to be paid; I have
dischar ged them, as we agr eed I should .
Jenny worries me. I know she g rieves Ian with all her
Heart, but she d oes not weep mu ch, but only sits for long
Periods, looking  at Something th at only she sees. Ther e is
a Calmn ess about her that is almost eerie, as though her
Soul has flown with Ian, leavi ng only the Shell of her
Body behind. Though since I m ention Shells, it occurs to
me that per haps  she is like a Chamber ed Nautilus, like
the one that Law r ence Sterne showed us in the Indies. A
lar ge, beautiful Shell, made of many Chambers, but all
empty , save the innermost one, i n which the small Animal
hides itself in safety .
Since I speak o f her , though—she bids me tell you of
her Remorse r egar ding Things said to you. I told her we
had spoken of it between us, and that your Compassionwould not hold it against her , r ealizing the desperate
Cir cumstances in which she spoke .
On the Morning  of Ian’ s Death , she spoke to me with
appar ent Rationality , and said  she thought she would
leave Lallybr och, that with his Death, nothing holds her
her e. I was, as you may suppose, much astonished to hear
this, but did not try to question or dissuade her , assuming
this to be only the Counsel of a Mind deranged by
Sleeplessness and Grief .
She has since r epeated this Sentiment to me, though,
with firm Assurance that she is indeed in her right Mind.
I am going to France for a short T ime—both to
accomplish som e private T ransactions that I will not
write of her e, and to assur e myself befor e departing for
America that both Michael and Joan ar e settled, they
having left together , the Day foll owing Ian’ s Burial. I said
to Jenny that she must think car efully whilst I am absent
—but th at if she is in Fact convinced that this is what she
wants, I  will bring her to Ameri ca. Not to stay with us (I
smile, imagining your Face, which is transpar ent, even in
my Mind) .
She would have a Place, though, with Fer gus and
Marsali, wher e she would be of Use, and yet would not be
r eminded daily of her Loss—and  wher e she would be in a
Position to help and support Y oung Ian, should he r equir e
such Help (or at least to know how he does, if he does
not) .
(It a lso occurs to me—as it sur ely has to her—that
Y oung J amie’ s W ife will now be  the Lady of Lallybr och,
and that ther e is not Room for T wo such. She is wise
enough to know what the Diffic ulties of such a Situation
would b e, and kind enough to wish to avoid them, for the
Sake of her Son and his W ife.)
In a ny Case, I pr opose to depart for America by the
End of this Month, or as near to that as Passage may be
obtained. The Pr ospect of being Reunited with you
lightens my Heart and I r emain for everY our Devoted Husband,
 Jamie
 
 
Paris
 1 April
My dear est W ife;
I am  r eturned ve ry late to my new Lodging in Paris
tonight. In fact, I found the Door  bolted against me on my
Return, and was obliged to sho ut for the Landlady , who
was somewhat ill-temper ed at being r oused fr om her Bed.
I wa s the mor e ill-temper ed in my T urn, at finding no Fir e
laid, no Supper kept, and Nothing upon the Bedframe
save a moldy T ick and thr eadbar e Blanket which would
not serve to shelter the meanest Beggar .
Further Shouts earned me Not hing save Abuse (fr om
behind a safely lock’d Door), and my Pride would not
suffer me to off er Bribes even would my Purse do so. I
r emain thus in my barr en Garr et, fr ozen and starving
(this piti ful Pictur e is her e drawn for the craven Purpose
of solici ting your Sympathy , and to convince you of how
poorly I Far e without you) .
I a m determined  to depart this Place as soon as it be
Light, and seek whether better Lodging can be found
without excessive Damage to my Purse. Meanwhile, I
shall endeavor to for get both Cold and Hunger in
pleasant Converse with you, hoping that the Effort of
writing will summon your Image befor e me and lend me
the Illusion of your Company .
(I have possessed myself of adequate Light by stealing
Downstairs in my Stockings and snatching two silver
Candlesticks fr om the fr ont Parlor , whose deceitful
Grandeur seduced me into assuming Residence her e. I
shall r eturn the Candlesticks to morr ow—when Madamer eturns the extortionate Fe e for this miserable
Accommodation.)
T o mor e pleasant Subjects: I have seen Joan, now
secur e in her Convent, and appar ently content (why , no,
since yo u ask; I did not  attend the W edding of her Moth er
to Jo seph Murray—who is, it tu rns out, a second Cousin
to Ian. I sent a handsome Pr es ent and my good W ishes,
which ar e sincer e). I will visit M ichael tomorr ow; I look
forwar d to seeing Jar ed again  and will give him your
kindest Regar ds .
In the Meantime, I sought Sustenance this Morning in
a Coffeehouse in Montmartr e, and was ther e fortunate to
encounter Mr . L yle, whom I ha d met in Edinbur gh. He
gr eeted me most kindly , inquir ed after my Fortunes, and
after some small Conversation of a personal Natur e,
invited me to a ttend the Meeting of a certain Society ,
whose Members  include V oltair e, Dider ot, and others
whose O pinions ar e hear d in the Cir cles I seek to
influence .
I we nt thus by Appointment at two o’clock to a House,
wher e I was adm itted and found all within most grandly
appointed, it being the Paris Residence of Monsieur
Beaumar chais .
The Company ther e gather ed was mixt indeed; it ran
the Gamut fr om the shab biest of Coffee-house
Philosophers to the most elegant Ornaments of Parisian
Society , the Character common to them all being only a
love of T alk. Some Pr etentions to Reason and Intellect
wer e ma de, to be sur e, but not insisted on. I could not ask
a fa ir er W ind for my maiden V oyage as a political
Pr ovocateur—and W ind, you will see, is a most apt Image
in considering the Events of the Day .
After so me inco nsequent Babbl e over the r efr eshment
T ables (had I been for ewarned of Conditions her e, I
should have taken Car e to stuff my Pockets
surr eptitiously w ith Cakes, as I saw mor e than one of my
fellow Guests doing), the Company withdr ew into a lar geRoom a nd took Seats, for the Purpose of witnessing a
formal Debate between two Parties .
The Matter under Debate was that popular Thesis,
Resolved: that the Pen be mightier than the Swor d, with
Mr . L yle and his Adher ents defending the Pr oposition, M.
Beaumar chais and his friend s stoutly averring the
Counter . The T alk was lively , w ith much Allusion to the
W orks of Rousseau and Montaigne (and not a little
personal Disparagement of th e Former , owing to his
immoral V iews on Marriage), but eventually Mr . L yle’ s
Party pr evailed in their ar guments. I thought of showing
the Society my R ight Hand, as Evidence for the Counter -
pr oposition (a Sample of my Penmanship must have
pr oved t he Case to the Satisfaction of All), but Forbor e,
being but an Observer .
I found  Oppor tunity later to appr oach Monsieur
Beaumar chais, and made such an Observation to him in
Jest, by way of f ixing his Attention. He was most impr est
by sight of my missing Digi t, and inform’d of the
Occasion of it (or rather , wh at I chose to tell him),
became most animated and insistent that I accompany his
Party to  the house of the Duch ess de Chaulnes, whence
he w as obliged for Supper , as th e Duke is known to have
a gr eat Inter est in Matters pertaining to the Aboriginal
Inhabitants of the Colonies .
Y ou will be wondering, no do ubt, what Connexion
exists between  Aboriginal Savages and your most elegant
Sur gery? Have Patience for a few Lines longer .
The ducal Residence is place d in a Str eet with a
sweeping Drive upon which I per ceived several fine
Carriages ahea d of M. Beau mar chais’ s. Imagine my
Delight upon being informed that the Gentleman who
descended just befor e us was none other than M.
V er gennes, the For eign Minister .
I congratulated myself upon my good Fortune in so
soon encountering so many Persons suited to my
Purpose, and did my best to ingratiate myself with them—
to th is End, tell ing T ales of my T ravels in America, andborr owing in the Pr ocess not a few Stories fr om our Good
Friend Myers .
The Com pany w as most gratifyingly astonished, being
particularly attentive to the Story of our Meeting with the
Bear and with Nacognaweto and his Fellows. I made
much of your valiant Efforts w ith the Fish, which much
amused the Party , though the Ladies appear ed most
Shocked at my Description of your Indian Attir e. Mr .
L yle, to the Co ntrary , was agog to hear mor e of your
Appearance in leather T r ouserings—I judged him by this
a confirm’d Lecher and a Repr obate, a Judgement
verified later in the Evening by  a Passage I observ’d in
the Ha llway between Mr . L yle and Mademoiselle
Erlande, who I per ceive to be most wanton in her own
Conduct .
In a ny Case, t his Story led Mr . L yle to draw the
Attention of the Company to my Hand, and ur ge me to tell
them the Story which I had unfolded to him in the
Afternoon, of how I came to lose my Finger .
Seeing that the Company had r eached such a Pitch of
Enjoyment—being well lubricated with Champagne,
Holland Gin, and lar ge quantities of Hock—that they
hung upon my W or ds, I spar ed no Pains in weaving them
a T ale of Horr or calculated to leave them shivering in
their Beds .
I had (I said) been taken Captive by the dr eadful
Ir oquois while journeying fr om T r enton to Albany . I
described in gr eat Detail the frightful Appearance and
bloodthirsty Ha bit of these Sav ages—which r equir ed no
gr eat Exaggera tion, to be sur e—and dwelt at Length
upon the fearful T ortur es which  the Ir oquois ar e wont to
inflict upon their hapless V ictims. La Comtesse Poutoude
swooned at my r ecounting of th e grisly Death of Father
Alexandr e, and the r est of the Party was much affected .
I told them of T wo Spears, who I trust will not object to
my Slandering his Character in a good Cause, the mor e
so as he will ne ver hear of it. This Chief, I said, being
determined to put me to the T ortur e, caused me to bestripped naked, and most cruelly whip’d. W ith Thought of
our good Friend Daniel, who has turned the same
Misfortune to his Advantage, I raised my Shirt and
Displayed my Scars. (I felt somewhat the Whor e, but it
has been my Observation that most Whor es pursue this
Pr ofession fr om Necessity , and I comfort myself that it is
much the same.) The r eaction of  my Audience was all that
could be hoped, and I continued  my Narrative, secur e in
the Knowledge that fr om this Point, they would believe
Anything .
Ther eafter (I said), two of the Indian Braves br ought
me fainting into the Chief ’ s Pr esence, and secur ed me
extended flat upon a lar ge Stone, whose Surface bor e
sinister W itness to pr evious Sacrifice conducted ther eon .
A h eathen Priest or Shaman then appr oached me,
uttering hideous Cries and shaking a Stick decorated by
many waving Scalps, which caused me to fear that my
own Ha ir might pr ove of such Attraction by V irtue of its
unusual Colour as shortly to be added to his Collection (I
had not powder ’d my Hair , th o’ fr om lack of Powder ,
rather than For ethought). This Fear was much enhanced
when the Shaman dr ew forth a lar ge Knife and advanced
upon me, Eyes glittering with Malice .
At this Point, the  Eyes of my Hear ers wer e glittering as
well, being enlar ged to the size  of Saucers by Reason of
their Att ention to my Story . Man y of the Ladies cried out
in Pity for my desperate Situation, and the Gentlemen
utter ed fier ce Execrations of the  foul Savages r esponsible
for my Plight .
I t old them then  how the Shama n had driven his Knife
straight thr ough my Hand, causing me to lose
Consciousness by Reason of Fear and Pain. I awoke (I
continued) to find my fourth Finger sever ’d completely ,
and Blood pouring fr om my wounded Hand .
But most horrifying of all was the sight of the Ir oquois
Chief, seated upon the carved  T runk of a giant T r ee,
tearing t he Flesh fr om the sever e d Digit with his T eeth, as
one might gobble the Meat of a Chicken’ s Leg .At this point in my narrative, La Comtesse swooned
again, and—not to be outdone—the Honorable Miss
Elliott launched into a full-fledg’d fit of the Hysterics,
which fortunately saved me fr om having to invent the
Means of my Escape fr om the Savages. Pr ofessing myself
undone by the Memories of my T rials, I accepted a Glass
of W ine (I was sweating pr etty fr eely by this time), and
escaped fr om the Party instead, assailed by Invitations on
all Sides .
I am much pleased by the Effec ts of my first Foray . I
am further uplifted by Reflection that should Age or
Injury pr event my making a Livelihood by means of
Swor d, Plow , or Printing Pr ess , I might still find useful
Employment as a scribbler of Romances .
I e xpect  Marsali will wish to know in gr eat Detail the
Appearance of the Gowns worn by the Ladies pr esent, but
I must beg her Forbearance for the Moment. I do not
pr etend not to have observ’d the Matter (though I might
so p r otest, if I thought by so doin g to r elieve your Mind of
Appr ehensions c oncerning any supposed V ulnerability to
the W iles of Fe mininity . Know ing your suspicious and
irrational Natu r e, my Sassenach, I make no such
Pr otestations), but my Hand will not bear the Strain of
r ecounting such Descriptions now . For the Moment,
suffice it to say  that the Gowns wer e of very rich Stuff,
and the Charms of the Ladies  inside them made most
appar ent by the Style .
My pilfer ed Candles ar e burning low , and both my
Hand and my E yes ar e so fatigued that I have Difficulty
in d eciphering my own W or ds, let alone in forming them
—I c an only hope you will be able to r ead the last Part of
this illegible Epistle. Still, I r etir e to my inhospitable Bed
in good Spirits, encouraged by the day’ s Events .
Thus I bid you goodnight, with  Assurance of my most
tender Thoughts , in trust that you will have patience with
and abiding Affection for
Y our Ink-stain’d W r etch and Most Devoted Husband,
 James FraserPostscriptum: In k-stained W r et ch, indeed, as I see
that I have contriv’d to cover both my Paper and my
Person with unsightly Blots. I flatter myself that the
Paper is the mor e disfigur ed .
Postscriptum 2: I have been so absorbed in
Composition as to for get my ori ginal Intent in writing: to
say that I have booked Passage on the  Euterpe, sailing
fr om Br est in two W eeks’ T ime. Should anything transpir e
to pr event this, I will write again .
Postscriptum 3: I yearn to lie beside you again, and
know your Body complicit with mine .
  ARMED WITH DIAMONDS AND WITH STEEL
 
B RIANNA CUT THE brooch apart with a steady hand
and a pair of kitchen shears. It was an antique but not a
valuable one—an ugly V ictorian thing in the shape of a
sprawling silver flower surrounded by writhing vines. Its only
worth lay in the  scatter of small diamonds that decorated the
leaves like dewdrops.
“I ho pe they’re big enough,” sh e said, and was surprised at
how calm her own voice soun ded. She had been screaming
inside her own head for the la st thirty-six hours, which was
how long it had taken them to make their plans and
preparations.
“I th ink they’ll be fine,” Roger said, and she felt the tension
under the calm of his own words. He was standing behind her ,
his hand  on her shoulder , and the warmth of it was comfort
and torm ent. An other hour , and he would be gone. Perhaps
forever .
But ther e was no choice about it, and she went about the
necessary things dry-eyed and steady .
Amanda, very weirdly , had fa llen asleep quite suddenly
after Ro ger and W illiam Buccleigh had left in pursuit of Rob
Cameron. Brianna had laid her in her bed and sat there
watching her sleep and worrying until the men had returned
near dawn with their horrifying news. But Amanda had waked
as usual , sunny as the day , and apparently with no memory of
her d ream of screaming rocks. N either was she bothered about
Jem’ s absence; she had asked o nce, casually , when he would
be home and, receiving a noncommittal “Soon,” had gone
back to her play , apparently contented.
She was with An nie now; they’d gone into Inverness to do a
big shopping, with the promise of a toy . They wouldn’ t behome until mid-afternoon, and by then the men would be
gone.
“Why?” W illiam Buccleigh had asked. “Why would he take
your lad?”
That was the same question she and Roger had been asking
themselves since  the moment they discovered Jem’ s loss—not
that the answer was likely to help.
“Only two things it might be, ” Roger had answered, his
voice thick and cracked. “T ime travel—or gold.”
“Gold?” Buccleigh’ s dark green eyes had turned to Brianna,
puzzled. “What gold?”
“The missing letter ,” she’d explained, too tired to worry
whether it was safe to tell him. Nothing was safe anymore, and
nothing mattered. “The postscript my father wrote. Roger said
you’d read the letters. The pr operty of an Italian gentl eman—
you remember that?”
“I took no great notice,” Buccleigh admitted. “That’ s gold,
is it? Who’ s the Italian gentleman, then?”
“Charles Stuart.” And so they’d explained, in disjoint
fashion, about the gold that had come ashore in the last days of
the Jacobite Rising—Buccleig h himself would have been
about Mandy’ s age then, Brianna thought, startled by the
notion—to be divided for safety among three Scottish
gentlemen, tru sted tacksmen  of their clans: Dougal
MacKenzie, Hec tor Cameron, and Arch Bug, of the Grants of
Leoch. She watched carefully , but he gave no sign of
recognition at the name of Dougal MacKenzie. No, she
thought, he doesn’ t know . But that was not important now ,
either .
No one knew w hat had become of the two-thirds of the
French gold held by the MacKenzies or the Grants—but
Hector Cameron  had fled Scotland in the last days of the
Rising, t he chest  of gold under the seat of his carriage, and had
brought it with him to the New W orld, where part of it had
bought his plantation, River Run. The rest…“The Spaniard guards it?” Buccleigh said, heavy fair brows
knitted. “What the devil does that mean?”
“W e don ’ t know ,” Roger said. He was sitting at the table,
head sun k in his hands, staring down at the wood. “Only Jem
knows.” Then he had raised his head suddenly , looking at
Brianna.
“The Orkneys,” he said. “Callahan.”
“What?”
“Rob Cameron,” he’d said ur gently . “How old d’ye think he
is?”
“I don’ t know ,” she’d said, confused. “Mid, late thirties,
maybe. Why?”
“Callahan said Cameron went o n archaeological digs with
him in his early  twenties. Is that far enough back—I mean, I
only just  now thought—” He had to stop to clear his throat and
did s o an grily be fore going on. “ If he was into the ancient stuf f
fifteen, eighteen  years ago—might he have known Geilie
Duncan? Or Gillian Edgars, I suppose she still was then.”
“Oh, no,” Brianna said, but in d enial, not disbelief. “Oh, no.
Not another Jacobite nut!”
Roger had almost smiled at that one.
“I doubt it,” he’d  said dryly . “I don’ t think the man’ s insane,
let a lone a polit ical idealist. But he does belong to the SNP .
They aren’ t insane, either—but what’ s the odds that Gillian
Edgars would have been involved with them?”
There was no telling, not without digging into Cameron’ s
connections and history , and there was no time for that. But it
was possible. Gillian—who’d later taken the name of a famous
Scottish witch—had certainly been deeply interested both in
Scottish antiquity and in Scottish politics. She might have
crossed paths with Rob Cameron, easily . And if so …
“If so,” Roger said grimly , “God only knows what she
might h ave told him, might have left him with.” A few ofGeillis’ s notebooks were in his study; if Rob had known her ,
he would have recognized them.
“And we bloody well know he r ead your da’ s postscript,” he
added. H e rubbe d his forehead—there was a dark bruise along
his hairline—an d sighed. “It doesn’ t matter , does it? The only
thing that matters now is Jem.”
And so Brianna gave each of the m a chunk of silver studded
with small diamonds and two peanut butter sandwiches. “For
the road,” she s aid, with a ghastly attempt at humor . W arm
clothes and stout shoes. She gav e Roger her Swiss army knife;
Buccleigh took a stainless-steel steak knife from the kitchen,
admiring its serrated edge. There wasn’ t time for much more.
The sun was s till high when the blue Mustang bumped
along the dirt ro ad that led near the base of Craigh na Dun; she
had to be back before Mandy came home. Rob Cameron’ s blue
truck wa s still there; a shudder w ent through her at the sight of
it.
“Go ahead,” Roger said roughly to Buccleigh when she
stopped. “I’ll be along directly .”
W illiam Buccleigh had given Brianna a quick look, direct
and disconcerting, with those eyes, so like Roger ’ s, touched
her hand briefly , and got out. R oger didn’ t hesitate; he’d had
time on the way  to decide what to say—and there was only
one thing to say , in any case.
“I love you,” he  said softly , and  took her by the shoulders,
holding her together long enough to say the rest. “I’ll bring
him bac k. Believe me, Bree—I’ll see you again. In this
world.”
“I l ove you,” s he’d said, or tried to. It came out as a
soundless whisp er against his mouth, but he took it, along with
her breath, smiled, gripped he r shoulders so hard that she
would find bruises there later—and opened the door .
She’d w atched t hem—she could n’ t help watching them—as
they climbed toward the top of  the hill, toward the invisible
stones, until they disappeared, o ut of her sight. Perhaps it wasimagination; perhaps she really could hear the stones up there:
a weird buzzing  song that lived  in her bones, a memory that
would live there forever . T rem bling and tear -blinded, she
drove home. Carefully , carefully . Because now she was all that
Mandy had. FOOTSTEPS
 
L A TE THA T NIGHT , she made her way to Roger ’ s
study . Sh e felt dull and heavy , th e horror of the day blunted by
fatigue. She sat at his desk, tryin g to feel his presence, but the
room was empty .
Mandy was asleep, surprisingly unworried by the chaos of
her parents’ feelings. Of course, she was used to Roger ’ s
occasional absences, gone to London or to Oxford, lodge
nights i n Inverness. W ould she remember him if he never
came back? Brianna thought with a pang.
Unable to bear that thought, she got up and prowled
restlessly round the of fice, seeking the unfindable. She hadn’ t
been ab le to eat anything and was feeling light-headed and
friable.
She took  up the little snake, finding a minimal comfort in its
smooth sinuosity , its pleasant face. She glanced up at the box,
wondering whether she should seek solace in her parents’
company—but the thought of reading letters that Roger might
never re ad with her… She pu t the snake down and stared
blindly at the books on the lower shelves.
Beside the books on the American Revolution that Roger
had ord ered were her father ’ s books, the ones from his old
of fice. Franklin W . Randall , the neat spines said, and she took
one out and sat down, holding it to her chest.
She’d asked him once before f or help—to look after Ian’ s
lost daughter . Surely he would look after Jem.
She thumbed the pages, feelin g a little soothed by the
friction of the paper .
Daddy , she thought, finding no words beyond that, and
needing no more. The folded sh eet of paper tucked among theleaves came as no surprise at all.
The letter was a draft—she cou ld see that at once from the
crossings-out, the mar ginal additions, words circled with
question marks. And being a draft, it had neither date nor
salutation but was plainly intended for her .
Y ou’ve just left me, dear est deadeye, after our
wonderful afternoon at Sherman ’ s (the clay pigeon place
—will she r emember the name?). My ears ar e still
ringing. Whenever we shoot, I’m torn between immense
pride in your ability , envy of it, and fear . I don’ t know
quite when you will r ead this, or if you will. Maybe I’ll
have the courage to tell you befor e I die (or I’ll do
something so unfor givable that your mother will—no, she
won’ t. I’ve never met anyone so honorable as Clair e,
notwithstanding. She’ll keep her wor d).
What a queer f eeling it is, writing this. I know that
you’ll ev entually learn who—an d per haps what—you ar e.
But I have no idea how you’ll come to that knowledge.
Am I about to r eveal you to yo urself, or will this be old
news when you find it? I can only hope that I’ve
succeeded in saving your life, either way . And that you
will find it, sooner or later .
I’m sorry , sweetheart, that’ s terribly melodramatic.
And the last thing I want to do is  alarm you. I have all the
confidence in the world in you. But I am your father and
thus pr ey to the fears that afflict all par ents—that
something dr ea dful and unpr eventable will happen to
your child, and you powerless to pr otect them. And the
truth is that thr ough no fault of your own, you ar e…
 
Here he had changed his min d several times, writing a
danger ous person , amending that to always in some danger ,
then cro ssing th at out in turn, adding in a dan ger ous position ,
crossing that  out, and circling a danger ous person , though
with a question mark.“I get the point, Daddy ,” she muttered. “What are you
talking  about? I—”
A sound  froze the words in her throat. Footsteps were
coming down the hall. Slow , confident steps. A man’ s. Every
hair on her body rose.
The light was on in the hall; it darkened briefly as a shape
took form in the door to the study .
She stared at him, dumbfounded.
“What are you  doing here?” Even as she spoke, she was
rising from the chair , groping for something that might be used
as a weapon, he r mind lagging far behind her body , not yet
able to penetrate the fog of horror that gripped her .
“I ca me for you , hen,” he said, smiling. “And for the gold.”
He l aid something on the desk:  her parents’ first letter . “T ell
Jem the Spaniar d guar ds it,”  R ob Cameron q uoted, tapping it.
“I thoug ht mayb e it’ s best you tell Jem that. And tell him to
show me  where this Spaniard is. If ye’d like to keep him alive,
I mean. Up to you, though.” The smile widened. “Boss.” INDEPENDENCE DA Y , II
 Brest
 
S EEING JENNY DEAL with it all was disturbing his
own pre sence of mind considerably . He could see her heart in
her t hroat the first time she spoke French to a real Frenchman;
her puls e fluttered in the hollo w of her neck like a trapped
hummingbird. B ut the boulanger  understood her—Brest was
full of foreigners, and her peculiar accent roused no particular
interest—and the sheer delight on her face when the man took
her penny and h anded her a baguette filled with cheese and
olives made Jamie want to laugh and cry at the same time.
“He und erstood me!” she said, c lutching him by the arm as
they left. “Jamie, he understood me! I spoke Fr ench  to him,
and he kent what I said, clear as day!”
“Much m ore clearly than he wo uld have had ye spoken to
him in the Gaididhlig,”  h e assured he r . He smiled a t her
excitement, patting her hand. “W ell done, a nighean.”
She was  not listening. Her head turned to and fro, taking in
the vast array o f shops and vendors that filled the crooked
street, assessing the possibilities now open to her . Butter ,
cheese, beans, sausage, cloth, shoes, buttons … Her fingers
dug into his arm.
“Jamie! I can buy anything! By myself!”
He c ouldn’ t help sharing her jo y at thus rediscovering her
independence, e ven though it gave him a small twinge. He’d
been enjoying the novel sensation of having her rely on him.
“W ell, s o ye can,” he agreed, taking the baguette from her .
“Best no t to buy a trained squirr el or a longcase clock, though.
Be dif ficult to manage on the ship.”
“Ship,” she repeated, and swallowed. The pulse in her
throat, which had subsided momentarily , resumed its
fluttering. “When will we … go on the ship?”“Not yet, a nighean,”  he said gently . “W e’ll go and ha’ a
bite to eat first, aye?”
 
THE EUTERPE  W AS meant to sail on the evening tide,
and they went down to the d ocks in mid-afternoon to go
aboard and settle their things. But the slip at the dock where
the Euterpe  had floated the day before was empty .
“Where the devil is the ship that was here yesterday?” he
demanded, seizing a passing boy by one arm.
“What, the Euterpe? ” The boy looked casually where he
was pointing, and shrugged. “Sailed, I suppose.”
“Y ou suppose?”  His tone alarmed the boy , who pulled his
arm free and backed of f, defensive.
“How would I know , Monsieur? ” Seeing Jamie’ s face, he
hastily a dded, “Her master went into the district a few hours
ago; probably he is still there.”
Jamie sa w his sister ’ s chin dimple slightly and realized that
she was near to panic. He wasn’ t so far of f it himself, he
thought.
“Oh, is he?” he said, very calm. “A ye, well, I’ll just be
going to fetch him, then. Which house does he go to?”
The boy shrugged helplessly . “All of them, Monsieur .”
Leaving Jenny on the dock to guard their baggage, he went
back into the streets that adjoined the quay . A broad copper
halfpenny secur ed him the services of one of the urchins who
hung about the stalls, hoping for a half-rotten apple or an
unguarded purse, and he followed his guide grimly into the
filthy all eys, one hand on his purse, the other on the hilt of his
dirk.
Brest was a port city , and a bu stling port, at that. Which
meant, he calculated, that roug hly one in three of its female
citizenry was a prostitute. Several of the independent sort
hailed him as he passed.It took three ho urs and several shillings, but he found the
master of the Euterpe  at last, dead drunk. He pushed the whore
sleeping with him unceremoniously aside and roused the man
roughly , slapping him into semiconsciousness.
“The sh ip?” The man stared at him blearily , wiping a hand
across his stubbled face. “Fuck. Who cares?”
“I do,” Jamie said between cle nched teeth. “And so will
you, ye wee arse-wipe. Where is she, and why are ye not on
her?”
“The cap tain threw me of f,” the  man said sullenly . “W e had
a disagreement. Where is she? On her way to Boston, I
suppose.” He grinned unpleasantly . “If you swim fast enough,
maybe you can catch her .”
 
IT T OOK THE last of his go ld and a well-calculated
mixture of threats and persuasion, but he found another ship.
This one  was headed south, to Charleston, but at the moment
he w ould settle for being on the right continent. Once in
America, he’d think again.
His sen se of grim fury bega n finally to abate as the
Philomene  reached the open sea. Jenny stood beside him,
small and silent, hands braced on the rail.
“What, a piuthar ?” H e put his hand in the small of her back,
rubbing gently with his knuckles. “Y ou’re grieving Ian?”
She closed her eyes for a mom ent, pressing back into his
touch, t hen opened them and turned her face up to him,
frowning.
“No, I’m troubled, thinkin’ of y our wife. She’ll be peeved
wi’ me—about Laoghaire.”
He couldn’ t help a wry smile at thought of Laoghaire.
“Laoghaire? Why?”“What I did—when ye brought Claire home again to
Lallybroch, from Edinbur gh. I’ ve never said sorry to ye for
that,” she added, looking up earnestly into his face.
He laughed.
“I’ve ne ver said sorry to you , have I? For bringing Claire
home and being coward enough not to tell her about Laoghaire
before we got there.”
The frow n between her brows e ased, and a flicker of light
came back into her eyes.
“W ell, no,” she said. “Y e have n’ t told me sorry . So we’re
square, are we?”
He hadn’ t heard her say that to him since he’d left home at
fourteen to foster at Leoch.
“W e’re s quare,” he said. He put  an arm round her shoulders
and she slipped her own around his waist, and they stood close
together , watching the last of France sink into the sea. A SERIES OF SHOR T , SHARP SHOCKS
 
I  W AS IN MARSALI’S kitchen , plaiting Felicite’ s hair
while ke eping one eye on the porridge over the fire, when the
bell over the pr intshop door rang. I whipped a ribbon round
the e nd of the plait and, with a quick admonition to the girls to
watch the porridge, went out to attend to the customer .
T o my surprise, it was Lord John. But a Lord John I had
never seen before. He was not so much disheveled as
shattered, everything in order save his face.
“What?” I said, deeply alarmed. “What’ s happened? Is
Henry—”
“Not Henry ,” he said hoarsely . He put a hand flat on the
counter , as though to steady himself. “I have—bad news.”
“I can see that,” I said, a little tartly . “Sit down, for God’ s
sake, before you fall down.”
He shoo k his head like a horse shaking of f flies and looked
at me. His face was ghastly , shocked and white, and the rims
of his eyes showed red. But if it wasn’ t Henry…
“Oh, G od,” I said, a fist clenching deep in my chest.
“Dottie. What’ s happened to her?”
“Euterpe,”  he blur ted, and I stopped dead, jarred to the
backbone.
“What?” I whispered. “What?”
“Lost,” he said, in a voice that w asn’ t his own. “Lost. W ith
all hands.”
“No,” I said, trying for reason. “No, it’ s not.”
He l ooked at me  directly then, for the first time, and seized
me by the forearm.“Listen to me,” he said, and the pressure of his fingers
terrified me. I tried to jerk away but couldn’ t.
“Listen,” he said again. “I hea rd it this morning from a
naval ca ptain I know . I met him at the cof feehouse, and he was
recounting the tragedy . He saw it.” His voice trembled, and he
stopped for a moment, firming h is jaw . “A storm. He had been
chasing the ship, meaning to s top and board her , when the
storm came upon them both. His own ship survived and
limped in, badly damaged, but he saw the Euterpe  swamped
by a broaching wave, he said—I have no notion what that is
—” He waved a way his own digression, annoyed. “She went
down be fore his eyes. The Roberts— his ship—hung about in
hopes of picking up survivors.” He swallowed. “There were
none.”
“None,” I said blankly . I heard  what he said but took no
meaning from the words.
“He is dead,” Lord John said so ftly , and let go of my arm.
“He is gone.”
From the kitchen came the smell of burning porridge.
 
JOHN GREY ST OPPED walking because he had come
to the end of the street. He had been walking up and down the
length of State Street since som etime before dawn. The sun
was high now , and sweat-damp  grit irritated the back of his
neck, mud and dung splashed his stockings, and each step
seemed to drive the nails in his shoe sole into the sole of his
foot. He didn’ t care.
The Delaware River flowed across his view , muddy and
fish-smelling, and people jostle d past him, crowding toward
the end of the do ck in hopes of getting on the ferry making its
slow way toward them from the  other side. W avelets rose and
lapped a gainst the pier with an agitated sound that seemed to
provoke the people waiting, for they began to push and shove,and one of the soldiers on the dock took down his musket from
his shoulder and used it to shove a woman back.
She stum bled, sh rieking, and her husband, a bantam-rooster
of a  man, bounced forward, fis ts clenched. The soldier said
something, bared his teeth and made a shooing motion with
the g un, his fello w , attracted by the disturbance, turned to see,
and wit h no more than incitement than that, there was
suddenly a heaving knot of people at the end of the dock and
shouts and screams ran through  the rest, as people toward the
rear tried to get away from the violence, men in the crowd
tried to press to ward it, and someone was pushed into the
water .
Grey took three steps back and watched as two little boys
rushed out of th e crowd, their faces bloated with fright, and
ran of f up the street. Somewhere in the crowd, he heard a
woman’ s high call, dist raught: “Ethan! Johnny!
Joooooohnnny! ”
Some dim instinct said he sho uld step forward, raise his
own voi ce, assert his authority , s ort this. He turned and walked
away .
He wasn’ t in uni form, he told himself. They wouldn’ t listen,
would be confused, he might do more harm than good. But he
wasn’ t in  the habit of lying to himself, and dropped that line of
ar gument at once.
He’d los t people before. Some of them dearly loved, more
than life itself. But now he’d lost himself.
He walked slowly back toward his house in a numb daze.
He hadn’ t slept since the news had come, save in the snatches
of complete physical exhaustion, slumped in the chair on
Mercy W oodcock’ s porch, waking disoriented, sticky with sap
from th e sycamores in her ya rd and covered with the tiny
green caterpillars that swung down from the leaves on
invisible strands of silk.
“Lord John.” He became aware  of an insistent voice, and
with it, the realization that whoever was speaking had calledhis name  several times already . He stopped, and turned to find
himself facing Captain Richa rdson. His mind went quite
blank. Possibly his face had, too, for Richardson took him by
the arm in a most familiar manner and drew him into an
ordinary .
“Come with me,” Richardson sa id in a low voice, releasing
his a rm, but jerking his head toward the stair . Faint stirrings of
curiosity and wariness made themselves felt through the haze
that wra pped him, but he follo wed, the sound of his shoes
hollow in the wooden stairwell.
Richardson clos ed the door of the room behind him and
began speaking  before Grey c ould gather his wits to begin
questioning him regarding the very peculiar circumstances
W illiam had recounted.
“Mrs. Fraser ,” Richardson said without preamble. “How
well do you know her?”
Grey was so taken aback by this that he answered.
“She is  the wife—the widow ”—he corrected himself,
feeling a s thoug h he had stuck a pin into a raw wound—”of a
good friend.”
“A good  friend,” Richardson repeated, with no particular
emphasis. The man could sca rcely look more nondescript,
Grey thought, and had a sudd en creeping vision of Hubert
Bowles. The most dangerous s pies were men whom no one
would look at twice.
“A good friend,” Grey repea ted firmly . “His political
loyalties are no longer an issue, are they?”
“Not if he’ s trul y dead, no,” Richardson agreed. “Y ou think
he is?”
“I am  quite sure of it. What is it you wish to know , sir? I
have business.”
Richardson smiled a little at this patently false statement.
“I propose to arrest the lady as a spy , Lord John, and wished
to be certain that there was no … personal attachment on yourpart, before I did so.”
Grey sat down, rather abruptly , and braced his hands on the
table.
“I—she—what the devil for?” he demanded.
Richardson courteously sat down opposite him.
“She has been p assing seditious materials to and fro all over
Philadelphia for  the last three months—possibly longer . And
before you ask, yes, I’m sure.  One of my men intercepted
some of the material; have a look, if you like.” He reached into
his c oat and wit hdrew an untidy wad of papers, these looking
to have passed through several hands. Grey didn’ t think
Richardson was practicing upon him, but took his time in
deliberate examination. He put down the papers, feeling
bloodless.
“I heard  that the lady had been received at your house, and
that she is often at the house where your nephew abides,”
Richardson said . His eyes rested on Grey’ s face, intent. “But
she is not a … friend?”
“She is a physician,” Grey said, and had the small
satisfaction of seeing Richardson’ s brows shoot up. “She has
been of—of the greatest servic e to me and my nephew .” It
occurred to him that it was likely better that Richardson did
not k now how m uch esteem he might hold for Mrs. Fraser , as
if he thought there was  a  personal in terest, he would
immediately cease to give Grey information. “That is ended,
though,” he added, speaking as casually as possible. “I respect
the lady , of cou rse, but there is no attachment, no.” He rose
then, in a decided manner , and t ook his leave, for to ask more
questions would compromise the impression of indif ference.
He set of f toward W alnut Street, no longer numb. He felt
once more himself, strong and determined. There was, after
all, one more service he might perform for Jamie Fraser .
 
“YOU MUST MARR Y me,” he repeated.I’d h eard him th e first time, but it made no more sense upon
repetition. I stuck a finger in one ear and wiggled it, then
repeated the process with the other .
“Y ou can’ t possibly have said what I think you said.”
“Indeed I did,” he said, his normal dry edge returning.
The numbness of shock was b eginning to wear of f, and
something horrible was beginnin g to crawl out of a small hole
in my heart. I co uldn’ t look at th at and took refuge in staring at
Lord John.
“I kn ow I’m shocked,” I told him, “but I’m sure I’m neither
delusional nor hearing things. Why the bloody hell are you
saying  th at, for God’ s s ake?!” I rose ab ruptly , wanting to strike
him. He saw it and took a smart step back.
“Y ou are going to marry me,” he said, a fierce edge in his
voice. “ Are you  aware that you  are about to be arrested as a
spy?”
“I—no.” I sat down again, as  abruptly as I’d stood up.
“What… why?”
“Y ou would know that better than I would,” he said coldly .
In fact, I would.  I repressed the  sudden flutter of panic that
threatened to overwhelm me, thinking of the papers I had
conveyed secretly from one pair of hands to another in the
cover of my bas ket, feeding the secret network of the Sons of
Liberty .
“Even if  that were true,” I said,  struggling to keep my own
voice level, “why the bloody hell would I marry you? Let
alone wh y you would want to marry me , which I don’ t believe
for an instant.”
“Believe it,” he advised me briefly . “I will do it because it is
the l ast s ervice I  can render Jam ie Fraser . I can protect you; as
my wife, no one can touch you. And you  will do it because…”
He cast  a bleak glance behind me, raising his chin, and I
looked around to see all four o f Fer gus’ s children huddled in
the doorway , the girls and Henri-Christian watching me withhuge, ro und eyes. Germain was looking straight at Lord John,
fear and defiance plain on his long, handsome face.
“Them, too?” I asked, taking a deep breath and turning to
meet his gaze. “Y ou can protect them, too?”
“Y es.”
“I—yes. All right.” I rested bot h hands flat on the counter ,
as thoug h that somehow could k eep me from spinning of f into
space. “When?”
“Now ,” he said, and took my e lbow . “There is no time to
lose.”
 
I HAD NO MEMOR Y whatever of the brief ceremony ,
conducted in the parlor of L ord John’ s house. The only
memory I retained of the entire day was the sight of W illiam,
standing soberly beside his father—his stepfather—as best
man. T all, straight, long-nosed, his slanted cat-eyes resting on
me with uncertain compassion.
He can’ t be dead , I reme mbered thinking, with  unusual
lucidity . Ther e he is .
I said what I was told to say and then was escorted upstairs
to li e do wn. I fell asleep at once and didn’ t wake until the next
afternoon.
Unfortunately , it was still real when I did.
 
DOROTHEA W AS THERE, hovering near me with
concern. She stayed with me through the day , trying to coax
me t o eat somet hing, of fering me sips of whisky and brandy .
Her presence was not exactly a comfort—nothing could be
that—but she was at least an in nocuous distraction, and I let
her talk,  the words washing over me like the sound of rushing
water .T oward evening, the men came back—Lord John and
W illie. I heard th em downstairs. Dottie went down and I heard
her talking to them, a slight rise of interest in her voice, and
then her steps on the stairs, quick and light.
“Aunt,” she said, breathless. “A re you well enough to come
down, do you think?”
“I—yes, I suppose so.” Slightly taken aback at being called
“Aunt,” I rose a nd made vague tidying motions. She took the
brush from my h and, twisted up my hair , and, whipping out a
ribboned cap, tucked my hair tenderly under it. I let her , and
let h er convey m e gently downstairs, where I found Lord John
and W illiam in the parlor , both of them a little flushed.
“Mother Claire. ” W illie took m y hand and gently kissed it.
“Come and look. Papa has found  something he thinks you will
like. Come and see it,” he repeated, drawing me gently toward
the table.
“It” was a lar g e wooden chest, made of some expensive
wood, banded in gold. I blinked at it and put out a hand to
touch it. It looked rather like a cutlery safe but much bigger .
“What… ?” I looked up to find Lord John standing beside
me, looking somewhat abashed.
“A, um,  present,” he said, depr ived for once of his smooth
manners. “I thought—I mean, I perceived that you lacked
somewhat in the way of… equipment. I do not wish you to
abandon your profession,” he added gently .
“My profession.” A chill was beginning to spread up my
spine, along the edges of my jaw . Fumbling a little, I tried to
raise the lid of the chest, but my fingers were sweating; they
slipped, leaving a slick of moisture gleaming on the wood.
“No, no, this way .” Lord John bent to show me, turning the
chest to ward him self. He slipped the hidden catch, lifted the
lid, and swung the hinged door s open, then stood back with
something of the air of a conjurer .
My scal p prickled with cold swe at, and black spots began to
flicker at the corners of my eyes.T wo doz en empt y gold-topped bottles. T wo shallow drawers
below . A nd abo ve, gleaming in its velvet bed, the pieces of a
brass-bound microscope. A medical chest.
My knee s gave way and I fainted, welcoming the cool wood
of the floor against my cheek. THE P A THS OF DEA TH
 
L YING IN THE T ANGLED HELL of my bed at night, I
searched for the way to death. I longed with every fiber of my
being to  pass from this present existence. Whether what lay on
the other side o f life was undreamed glory or only merciful
oblivion, mystery was infinitely preferable to my present
inescapable misery .
I c annot  say what it was that kept me from a simple and
violent escape. The means, afte r all, were always to hand. I
had my choice o f pistol ball or blade, of poisons ranging from
swiftness to stupor .
I rumma ged through the jars and bottles of the medicine
chest like a ma dwoman, leavin g the little drawers ajar , the
doors hanging open, seeking , scrabbling in my haste,
ransacking knowledge and memory as I did the chest,
knocking jars and bottles and bits of the past to the floor in a
jumble.
At last I thought I had them all and, with a shaking hand,
laid them one by one by one on the tabletop before me.
Aconite. Arsenic …
So many kinds of death to choose from. How , then?
The ethe r . That would be the easiest, if not quite the surest.
Lie down, soak a thick pad of cloth in the stuf f, put the mask
over my nose an d mouth, and drift painlessly away . But there
was always the chance that som eone would find me. Or that,
losing consciou sness, my head might fall to one side or I’d
suf fer convulsio ns that would dislodge the rag, and I would
simply wake again to this aching void of existence.
I s at still for a m oment, and then, feeling dreamlike, reached
out to pick up the knife that lay on the table, where I hadcarelessly left it after using it to cut flax stems. The knife
Jamie had given me. It was sha rp; the edge gleamed raw and
silver .
It would be sure, and it would be fast.
 
JAMIE FRASER ST OOD on the deck of the Philomene ,
watching the water slide endlessly away , thinking about death.
He h ad at least stopped thinking  about it in a personal manner ,
since the seasickness had—at long, long last—abated. His
thoughts now were more abstract.
T o Claire, he thought, death was always the Enemy .
Something alwa ys to be fought, never yielded to. He was as
well acquainted with death as s he was but had perforce made
his peac e with it. Or thought he  had. Like for giveness, it was
not a thing once learned and the n comfortably put aside but a
matter o f consta nt practice—to accept the notion of one’ s own
mortality , and yet live fully , was  a paradox worthy of Socrates.
And that worthy Athenian had embraced exactly that paradox,
he reflected, with the ghost of a smile.
He’d come face-to-face with death often enough—and
remembered those encounters with suf ficient vividness—to
realize that there were indeed worse things. Much better to die
than be left to mourn.
He had still a dreadful feeling  of something worse than
sorrow w hen he looked at his sister , small and solitary , and
heard the word “ widow” in his m ind. It was wrong. She could
not b e th at, coul dn’ t be severed in that brutal way . It was like
watching her be cut in pieces, and he helpless to do anything.
He turne d from that thought to his memories of Claire, his
longing for her , the flame of h er his candle in the dark. Her
touch a comfort  and a warmth  beyond that of the body . He
remembered the last evening before she’d left, holding hands
on t he bench ou tside the broch, feeling her heartbeat in her
fingers, his own steadying to that warm, quick pulse.Odd how the pr esence of death seemed to bring with it so
many attendants , shades long-for gotten, glimpsed briefly in
the g athering shadow . The thou ght of Claire, and how he had
sworn to protect her from the first time he held her , brought
back to him the nameless girl.
She’d died in Fr ance, on the far side of the void in his head
that had been made by the blow of an ax. He hadn’ t thought of
her in years, but suddenly she was there again. She’d been in
his m ind when h e’d held Claire at Leoch, and he’d felt that his
marriage might  be some smal l atonement. He’d learned—
slowly—to for give himself for what had not been his fault and,
in loving Claire, gave the girl’ s shade some peace, he hoped.
He h ad felt obsc urely that he ow ed God a life and had paid
that deb t by taking Claire to wife—though God knew he
would h ave taken her in any case, he thought, and smiled
wryly . But he’d kept faith with the promise to protect her . The
pr otection of my name, my cla n—and the pr otection of my
body , he’d said.
The pr otection of my body . There was an irony in that that
made hi m squirm, as he glimpsed another face among the
shades. Narrow , mocking, long-eyed—so young.
Geneva . O ne more you ng woman dead as the result of his
lust. Not his fault, precisely—he’d fought that through, in the
long days and ni ghts following her death, alone in his cold bed
above the stables, taking what comfort he could in the solid,
voiceless presen ce of the horses  shifting and champing in their
stalls be low . Bu t had he not lain with her , she would not have
died; that was inescapable.
Did he owe God  another life? he wondered. He had thought
it wa s W illie, th e life he’d been given to protect with his own,
in exchange for Geneva’ s. But that trust had had to be handed
to another .
W ell, he had his sister now and assured Ian silently that he
would keep her safe. As long as I live , he thought. And that
should b e some time yet. He tho ught he’d used only five of the
deaths the fortune-teller in Paris had promised him.“Y ou’ll die nine times befor e you r est in your grave,”  she’d
said. Did it take so many tries to get it right? he wondered.
 
I LET MY HAND fall back, exposing my wrist, and
placed t he tip of the knife midway up my forearm. I’d seen
many unsuccess ful suicides, those who slashed their wrists
from sid e to side, the wounds sm all mouths that cried for help.
I’d seen  those who meant it. T he proper way was to slit the
veins lengthwise, deep, sure cuts that would drain me of blood
in minutes, assure unconsciousness in seconds.
The mark was still visible on the mound at the base of my
thumb. A faint white “J,” the mark he’d left on me on the eve
of C ulloden, when we first faced  the stark knowledge of death
and separation.
I traced the thin  white line with the tip of the knife and felt
the s eductive whisper of metal on my skin. I’d wanted to die
with him  then, and he had sent me on with a firm hand. I
carried his child; I could not die.
I ca rried her no  longer—but she was still there. Perhaps
reachable. I sat motionless for w hat seemed a long time, then
sighed and put the knife back on the table carefully .
Perhaps it was t he habit of yea rs, a bent of mind that held
life sacred for its own sake , or a superstitious awe of
extinguishing a spark kindled by a hand not my own. Perhaps
it was obligatio n. There were those who needed me—or at
least to  whom I could be useful. Perhaps it was the
stubbornness of the body , with its inexorable insistence on
never -ending process.
I c ould slow m y heart, slow en ough to count the beats…
slow the  flowing  of my blood ‘til my heart echoed in my ears
with the doom of distant drums.
There were pathways in the dark. I knew; I had seen people
die. Despite physical decay , there was no dying until the
pathway was found. I couldn’ t—yet—find mine. NUMBNESS
 
T HE NEW MEDICAL CHEST sat on the table in my
room, g leaming softly in the c andlelight. Beside it were the
gauze bags of dried herbs I had bought during the morning, the
fresh bottles of the tinctures I had brewed in the afternoon,
much to  Mrs. Figg’ s displeasure at having her kitchen’ s purity
so perverted. Her slitted eyes said that she knew me for a rebel
and thou ght me likely a witch; she’d retreated to the doorway
of the cookhouse while I worked but wouldn’ t leave
altogether , instead keeping sile nt suspicious watch over me
and my cauldron.
A lar ge decanter of plum brandy was keeping me company .
Over the  course of the last week, I had found that a glass of it
at night would let me find surcea se in sleep, at least for a little.
It wa sn’ t working tonight. I hear d the clock on the mantelpiece
downstairs chime softly , once.
I sto oped to pic k up a box of dried chamomile that had
spilled, sweeping the scattered leaves carefully back into their
container . A bottle of syrup of  poppies had fallen over , too,
lying on  its side, the aromatic l iquid oozing round the cork. I
set i t upright, wiped the golden droplets from its neck with my
kerchief, blotted up the tiny pu ddle from the floor . A root, a
stone, a leaf. One by one, I picked them up, set them straight,
put them away , the accoutrements of my calling, the pieces of
my destiny .
The coo l glass seemed somehow remote, the gleaming
wood an illusion. Heart beating slowly , erratically , I put a hand
flat on the box, trying to steady myself, to fix myself in space
and time. It was becoming more dif ficult by the day .
I r emembered, with sudden, pai nful vividness, a day on the
retreat from T iconderoga. W e had reached a village, found
momentary refuge in a barn. I’d worked all day then, doingwhat could be done with no supplies, no medicines, no
instruments, no bandages save what I made from the sweat-
sodden, filthy clothes of the wounded. Feeling the world
recede further and further as I worked, hearing my voice as
though it belonged to someone else. Seeing the bodies under
my hands, only bodies. Limbs. W ounds. Losing touch.
Darkness fell. Someone came, pulled me to my feet, and
sent me out of t he barn, into the  little tavern. It was crowded,
overwhelmed with people. Som eone—Ian?—said that Jamie
had food for me outside.
He was alone th ere, in the emp ty woodshed, dimly lit by a
distant lantern.
I’d stoo d in the doorway , sway ing. Or perhaps it was the
room that swayed.
I c ould see my fingers dug into the wood of the doorjamb,
nails gone white.
A move ment in the dimness. He  rose fast, seeing me, came
toward me. What was his—
“Jamie.” I’d felt a distant sense of relief at finding his name.
He’d sei zed me, drawn me into the shed, and I wondered for
an instan t whether I was walkin g or whether he was carrying
me; I heard the s crape of the dirt  floor under my feet but didn’ t
feel my weight or the shift of it.
He was talking to me, the sound of it soothing. It seemed a
dreadful ef fort to distinguish w ords. I knew what he must be
saying, though, and managed to  say , “All right. Just… tired,”
wondering even as I spoke them whether these sounds were
words at all, let alone the right ones.
“W ill ye  sleep, then, lass?” he’d  said, worried eyes fixed on
me. “Or can ye eat a bit first?”  He let go of me, to reach for
the bread, and I put out a hand to the wall to support myself,
surprised to find it solid.
The sense of cold numbness had returned.“Bed,” I said. My lips felt blue and bloodless. “W ith you.
Right now .”
He’d cupped my cheek, callous ed palm warm on my skin.
Big hand. Solid. Above all, solid.
“Are ye sure, a nighean ?” he’d said, a note of surprise in his
voice. “Y e look as though—”
I’d laid a hand on his arm, half fearing that it would go
through his flesh.
“Hard,” I’d whispered. “Bruise me.”
My glas s was empty , the decanter halfway full. I poured
another and took hold of the glass carefully , not wanting to
spill it, determined to find oblivion, no matter how temporary .
Could I separate entirely? I wondered. Could my soul
actually leave my body without my dying first? Or had it done
so already?
I drank the glass slowly , one sip at a time. Another . One sip
at a time.
There must have been some sound that made me look up,
but I wasn’ t aw are of having raised my head. John Grey was
standing in the doorway of m y room. His neckcloth was
missing and his shirt hung limp  on his shoulders, wine spilled
down the front of it. His hair was loose and tangled, and his
eyes as red as mine.
I stood up, slow , as though I were underwater .
“I w ill not mou rn him alone tonight,” he said roughly , and
closed the door .
 
I W A S S URPRISED to wake up. I hadn’ t really expected
to an d lay for a bit trying to fit reality back into place around
me. I had only  a slight heada che, which was almost more
surprising than the fact that I was still alive.Both tho se things paled in signif icance beside the fact of the
man in bed beside me.
“How lo ng has it been since you  last slept with a woman, if
you don’ t mind my asking?”
He d idn’ t appear to mind. He fr owned a little and scratched
his chest thoughtfully .
“Oh… fifteen years? At least that.” He glanced at me, his
expression altering to one of concern. “Oh. I do apologize.”
“Y ou do ? For what?” I arched o ne brow . I could think of a
number of things he might  apo logize for , b ut probably none of
those was what he had in mind.
“I a m afraid I was perhaps not…” he hesitated. “V ery
gentlemanly .”
“Oh, you weren’ t,” I said, rath er tartly . “But I assure you
that I wasn’ t being at all ladylike myself.”
He look ed at me, and his mouth worked a bit, as though
trying to frame some response to that, but after a moment or
two he shook his head and gave it up.
“Besides, it wasn’ t me you we re making love to,” I said,
“and both of us know it.”
He look ed up, startled, his eyes very blue. Then the shadow
of a smi le cross ed his face, and he looked down at the quilted
coverlet.
“No,” he said softly . “Nor were you, I think, making love to
me . W ere you?”
“No,” I said. Th e grief of the night before had softened, but
the w eight of it was still there. My voice was low and husky ,
because my throat was halfway closed, where the hand of
sorrow clutched me unawares.
John sat up and  reached to the table, where a carafe stood
along with a bottle and a glass. He poured something out of
the bottle and handed it to me.“Thank you,” I said, and lifted i t to my lips. “Good grief, is
that beer ?”
“Y es, an d very good beer , too ,” he said, tilting back the
bottle. He took several hearty gulps, eyes half closed, then
lowered it with a sigh of sat isfaction. “Clears the palate,
freshens the breath, and prepares the stomach for digestion.”
Despite myself, I was amused—and shocked.
“Do you mean to tell me tha t you are in the habit of
drinking beer for breakfast every day?”
“Of course not. I have food with it.”
“I am  am azed th at you have a single tooth in your head,” I
said severely—b ut risked a smal l sip. It was  goo d be er: heav y-
bodied and sweet, with just the right sour edge.
At this point, I noticed a certa in tenseness in his posture,
which the content of the conversation didn’ t account for .
Slow-witted as I was, it took a moment for me to realize what
was amiss.
“Oh. If you ne ed to fart,” I said, “don’ t trouble on my
account. Go ahead.”
He was suf ficiently startled by my observation that he did.
“I do beg your  pardon, madam!” he said, his fair skin
flushing up to the hairline.
I t ried not to la ugh, but suppressed amusement jiggled the
bed, and he went redder still.
“W ould you have any hesitation about it were you in bed
with a man?” I asked, out of idle curiosity .
He rubbed his knuckles against his mouth, the color fading a
bit from his cheeks.
“Ah. W ell, that would depend upon the man. By and lar ge,
though, no.”
The man . I knew  that Jamie was the man in his mind—just
as he was in mine. At the moment, I wasn’ t disposed to resentit.
He knew what I was thinking, too.
“He of fered me his body once. Y ou knew that?” His voice
was dry .
“I ta ke i t you didn’ t accept.” I k new he hadn’ t but was more
than curious to hear his side of that encounter .
“No. What I wa nted from him was not that—or not entirely
that,” he  added, with honesty . “I wanted all of it—and was
young and proud enough to think that if I could not have that,
then I would ac cept no less. And that, of course, he couldn’ t
give me.”
I wa s silent for a time, thinking. The window was open, and
the long muslin curtains moved in the breeze.
“Did yo u regret it?” I asked. “Not taking him up on his
of fer , I mean?”
“T en thousand times, at the v ery least,” he assured me,
breaking into a rueful grin. “At the same time… refusing him
was one of the few acts of true  nobility to which I would lay
claim fo r myself. It’ s true, you know ,” he added, “selflessness
does carry its own reward—for if I had  taken him, that would
have destroyed forever what did exist between us.
“T o have given him instead the gift of my understanding,
hard com e by as it was,” he added ironically , “left me with his
friendship. So I am left with momentary regret on the one
hand, bu t satisfa ction on the oth er . And in the end it was the
friendship that I valued most.”
After a moment’ s silence, he turned to me.
“May I… Y ou will think me odd.”
“W ell, you ar e  a  bit od d, aren ’ t you?” I said tolerantly . “I
don’ t really mind, though. What is it?”
He g ave me a look, strongly suggesting that if one of us was
indeed odd, he didn’ t think it was himself. Gentlemanlyinstincts suppre ssed any remark he might have made to this
ef fect, though.
“W ill you allow me to see you? Ah… naked?”
I closed one eye and looked at him.
“This certainly isn’ t the first tim e you’ve slept—I do mean
slept  with—a woman, is it?” I asked. He had  been married,
though I seemed to recall that he had spent much of his
married life living separately from his wife.
He pursed his lips thoughtfully , as though trying to recall.
“W ell, no. I do think it may be the first time I’ve done it
entirely voluntarily , though.”
“Oh, I am  flattered!”
He glanced at me, smiling slightly .
“So you should be,” he said quietly .
I wa s of  an age, after all, where … W ell, on the other hand,
he presumably didn’ t have the same instinctive reactions that
the majority of men did, in terms of feminine attractions.
Which rather left open the question …
“Why?”
A sh y smile touc hed the corner of his mouth, and he hitched
himself up against the pillow .
“I… am  not quite sure, to tell you the truth. Perhaps it is
only an ef fort to  reconcile my memories of last night with the
… er … actuality of the experience?”
I f elt a sharp jolt, as though he had punched me in the chest.
He couldn’ t have known my first thoughts on waking and
seeing him—that sharp, disorienting flash when I had thought
he was Jamie, remembering so acutely Jamie’ s flesh and
weight a nd ardo r , and so ur gentl y wanted him to be Jamie that
I had  su cceeded for an instant in  thinking that he was, only to
be c rushed like a  grape at the realization that he wasn’ t, all my
soft insides spurting out.Had he felt or thought the same things, waking to find me
there beside him?
“Or perh aps it is curiosity ,” he  said, smiling a little more
broadly . “I have not seen a nak ed woman in some time, bar
Negro slaves at the docks in Charleston.”
“How long is some time? Fifteen years, you said?”
“Oh, a good deal longer than that. Isobel—” He stopped
abruptly , the smile vanishing. He hadn’ t mentioned his dead
wife before.
“Y ou ne ver saw her naked?” I asked, with more than idle
curiosity . He turned his face away a little, eyes cast down.
“Ah … no. It wasn’ t… She did not… No.” He cleared his
throat, th en raised his eyes, look ing into mine with an honesty
raw enough to make me want to look away .
“I a m naked to  you,” he said simply , and drew back the
sheet.
Thus in vited, I could hardly not look at him. And in all
truth, I wanted to, out of simp le curiosity . He was trim and
lightly built, but muscular and solid. A little softness at the
waist, but no fa t—and softly furred with vigorous blond hair ,
darkening to brown at his crutch. It was a warrior ’ s body; I
was wel l acquainted with those. One side of his chest was
heavily marked with crisscrossing scars, and there were others
—a deep  one across the top of o ne thigh, a jagged thing like a
lightning bolt down his left forearm.
At le ast my own  scars weren’ t visible, I thought, and before
I could hesitate further , I pulled the sheet away from my own
body . He looked at it with deep curiosity , smiling a little.
“Y ou are very lovely ,” he said politely .
“For a woman of my age?”
His gaze  passed  over me dispass ionately , not with any sense
of ju dgment but rather with the air of a man of educated tastes
evaluating what he saw in the light of years of seeing.“No,” he  said finally . “Not for a  woman of your age; not for
a woman at all, I think.”
“As what, then?” I asked, fascinated. “An object? A
sculpture?” In a way , I could see that. Something like museum
sculptures, perh aps: weathered statues, fragments of vanished
culture, holding within them some remnant of the original
inspiration, this remnant in some odd way magnified by the
lens of age, sanctified by ant iquity . I had never regarded
myself in such a light, but I couldn’ t think what else he might
mean.
“As my friend,” he said simply .
“Oh,” I said, very touched. “Thank you.”
I waited, then drew the sheet up over both of us.
“Since we’re friends …” I said, somewhat emboldened.
“Y es?”
“I o nly wondered… have you… been quite alone all this
time? Since your wife died?”
He sigh ed, but smiled to let me know he didn’ t mind the
question.
“If you really must know , I hav e for many years enjoyed a
physical relationship with my cook.”
“W ith… your cook?”
“Not with Mrs. Figg, no,” he said hastily , hearing the horror
in m y voice. “ I meant with my cook at Mount Josiah, in
V ir ginia. His name is Manoke.”
“Ma—oh!” I recalled Bobby Higgins telling me that Lord
John retained an Indian named Manoke to cook for him.
“It is not merely the relief of necessary ur ges,” he added
pointedly , turnin g his head to meet my eyes. “There is true
liking between us.”
“I’m pleased to hear that,” I murmured. “He, er , he’ s…”“I h ave no idea whether his preference is solely for men. I
rather do ubt it— I was somewhat surprised when he made his
desires known in re myself—but I am in no position to
complain, whatever his tastes may be.”
I rubbed  a knuckle over my lips, not wanting to seem
vulgarly curious—but vulgarly curious, all the same.
“Y ou do n’ t mind, if he … takes other lovers? Or he you,
come to that?” I had a sudden u neasy apprehension. I did not
intend that what had happened the night before should ever
happen a gain. In  fact, I was still trying to convince myself that
it ha dn’ t happened this time. Nor did I mean to go to V ir ginia
with him. But w hat if I should and Lord John’ s household then
assumed… I had visions of a jealous Indian cook poisoning
my soup or lyin g in wait behind the necessary house with a
tomahawk.
John himself seemed to be considering the matter , lips
pursed. He had a heavy bear d, I saw; the blond stubble
softened his features and at th e same time gave me an odd
feeling of strangeness—I had s o seldom seen him less than
perfectly shaved and groomed.
“No. There is… no sense of possession in it,” he said
finally .
I gave him a look of patent disbelief.
“I assure  you,” he said, smiling a little. “It—well. Perhaps I
can describe it b est by analogy . At my plantation—it belongs
to W illia m, of course; I refer to it as mine only in the sense of
habitation—”
I m ade a small p olite sound in my throat, indicating that he
might curtail his inclinations toward complete accuracy in the
interests of getting on with it.
“At the plantatio n,” he said, ign oring me, “there is a lar ge
open space at th e rear of the house. It was a small clearing at
first, and  over the years I have enlar ged it and finally made a
lawn of it, but th e edge of the clearing runs up to the trees. In
the e venings, quite often, deer come out of the forest to feed atthe e dges of the lawn. Now and then, though, I see a particular
deer . It’ s white, I suppose, but it looks as though it’ s made of
silver . I don’ t know whether it c omes only in the moonlight or
whether it’ s only that I cannot se e it save by moonlight—but it
is a sight of rare beauty .”
His eye s had softened, and I  could see that he wasn’ t
looking at the p laster ceiling overhead but at the white deer ,
coat shining in the moonlight.
“It comes for two nights, three—rarely , four—and then it’ s
gone, and I don ’ t see it again for weeks, sometimes months.
And then it comes again, and I am enchanted once more.”
He r olled onto h is side in a rustle of bedclothes, regarding
me.
“Do you  see? I do not own this creature—would not, if I
could. It s coming is a gift, which I accept with gratitude, but
when it’ s gone, there is no sense of abandonment or
deprivation. I’m only glad to hav e had it for so long as it chose
to remain.”
“And you’re saying that your relationship with Manoke is
the same . Does he feel that wa y about you, do you think?” I
asked, fascinated. He glanced at me, clearly startled.
“I have no idea.”
“Y ou, um, don’ t… talk in bed?” I said, striving for delicacy .
His mouth twitched, and he looked away .
“No.”
W e lay in silence for a few moments, examining the ceiling.
“Have you ever?” I blurted.
“Have I what?”
“Had a lover that you talked to.”
He cut his eyes at me.
“Y es. Pe rhaps not quite so frankly as I find myself talking to
you , b ut, yes.” He opened his mou th as though to say or asksomething further , but instead breathed in, shut his mouth
firmly , and let the air out slowly through his nose.
I kn ew—I couldn’ t not know—that he wanted very much to
know what Jamie was like in bed, beyond what I had
inadvertently shown him the night before. And I was obliged
to admit  to myself that I was ve ry tempted to tell him, only in
order to bring J amie back to life for the brief moments while
we talke d. But I knew that such revelations would have a
price: not only a  later sense of betrayal of Jamie but a sense of
shame at using John—whether he wished such usage or not.
But if the memories of what had passed between Jamie and
myself in our intimacy were no longer shared—still, they
belonged only to that intimacy and were not mine to give
away .
It occur red to me—belatedly , as so many things did these
days—that John’ s intimate memories belonged to him, as well.
“I didn’ t mean to pry ,” I said apologetically .
He smiled faintly , but with real humor .
“I am  fla ttered, m adam, that you should entertain an interest
in m e. I know many more … conventional marriages in which
the partners remain by preference in complete ignorance of
each other ’ s thoughts and histories.”
W ith considerable startlement, I realized that there was now
an intim acy b etween myself and John—unexpected and
uninvited on both our parts, but… there it was.
The realization made me shy , an d with that realization came
a m ore practical one: to wit, that a person with functional
kidneys cannot lie in bed drinking beer forever .
He noticed my slight shifting and rose at once himself,
donning his banyan before fetching my own dressing gown—
which, I saw with a sense of unease, some kindly hand had
hung over a chair to warm before the fire.
“Where did that come from?” I  asked, nodding at the silk
robe he held for me.“From your bedroom, I assume .” He frowned at me for a
moment before discerning what I meant. “Oh. Mrs. Figg
brought it in when she built the fire.”
“Oh,” I said fain tly . The thought of Mrs. Figg seeing me in
Lord Joh n’ s bed —doubtless out cold, disheveled, and snoring,
if not actually d rooling—was h ideously mortifying. For that
matter , the mere fact of my being  in his bed wa s deeply
embarrassing, no matter what I had looked like.
“W e ar e  m arried ,” he pointed out, with a slight edge to his
voice.
“Er… yes. But…” A further th ought came to me: perhaps
this was not so  unusual an occurrence for Mrs. Figg as I
thought—had he entertained other women in his bed from time
to time?
“Do you sleep w ith women? Er … not sleep, I mean, but
…”
He stared at me, stopped in the act of untangling his hair .
“Not wi llingly ,” he said. He paused, then laid down his
silver co mb. “Is there anything else you would like to ask me,”
he inquired, with exquisite politeness, “before I allow the
bootboy to come in?”
Despite the fire, the room was chilly , but my cheeks
bloomed with heat. I drew the silk dressing gown tighter .
“Since y ou of fer… I know Brianna told you what—what we
are. Do you believe it?”
He considered me for a time w ithout speaking. He didn’ t
have Jamie’ s ability to mask his feelings, and I could see his
mild irritation at my previous question fade into amusement.
He gave me a small bow .
“No,” he said, “ but I give you my word that I will of course
behave in all respects as if I did.”
I stared at him until I became  aware that my mouth was
hanging unattractively open. I closed it.“Fair enough,” I said.
The odd  little bubble of intimacy in which we had spent the
last half hour ha d burst, and despite the fact that I had been the
one aski ng nosy questions, I felt  like a snail suddenly deprived
of its shell—not merely naked but fatally exposed, emotionally
as well as physically . Thoroughly rattled, I murmured a
farewell and made for the door .
“Claire?” he said, a question in his voice.
I s topped, hand on the doorkno b, feeling quite queer; he’d
never ca lled me  by my name before. It took a small ef fort to
look ove r my shoulder at him, but when I did, I found him
smiling.
“Think of the deer ,” he said gently . “My dear .”
I no dded, wordless, and made m y escape. Only later , after I
had washed—vigorously—dressed, and had a restorative cup
of tea with brandy in it, did I make sense of this last remark.
Its coming is a gift , h e’d said of the white deer , which I
accept with gratitude .
I b reathe d the fragrant steam an d watched the tiny curls of
tea l eaf drift to  the bottom of the cup. For the first time in
weeks, I wondered just what the future might hold.
“Fair enough,” I whispered, and drained the cup, the shreds
of tea leaf strong and bitter on my tongue. FIREFL Y
 
I T W AS DARK. Darker than an y place he’d ever been.
Night ou tside wasn’ t really ever dark, even when the sky was
cloudy , but this was darker than the back of Mandy’ s closet
when they played hide ‘n seek. There was a crack between the
doors, he could feel it with his fingers, but no light came
through it at all. It must still be night. Maybe there’d be light
through the crack when it got morning.
But maybe Mr . Cameron would come back when it got
morning, too. Jem moved a little  away from the door , thinking
that. He  didn’ t think Mr . Camer on wanted to hurt him, exactly
—he said  he didn ’ t, at least—but he might try to take him
back up to the rocks and Jem wasn’ t going ther e , not for
anything.
Thinking about the rocks hurt. Not as much as when Mr .
Cameron pushed him against one and it … started, but it hurt.
There w as a scrape on his elbow  where he banged it, fighting
back, and he rubbed at it now , b ecause it was lots better to feel
that than to think about the rocks. No, he told himself, Mr .
Cameron wouldn’ t  hurt him, because he’d pulled him back out
of th e rock when  it tried to … H e swallowed hard, and tried to
think about something else.
He sort of thought he knew whe re he was, only because he
remembered Mam telling Da about the joke Mr . Cameron
played o n her , locking her in the tunnel, and she said the
wheels that locked the doors sounded like bones being
chewed, and that’ s just  w hat it sounded like when Mr .
Cameron shoved him in here and shut the doors.
He was kind of shaking. It was cold in here, even with his
jacket o n. Not as cold as when he and Grandda got up before
dawn an d waite d in the snow for the deer to come down and
drink, but still pretty cold.The air felt weird. He snif fed, trying to smell what was
going on , like Grandda and Un cle Ian could. He could smell
rock—but it was just plain old rock, not … them . Metal, too,
and an oily sort of smell, kind o f like a gas station. A hot kind
of smell  he thought was electricity . There was something in
the air that wasn’ t a smell at all , but a kind of hum. That was
power , he recognized that. Not quite the same as the big
chamber Mam had showed him and Jimmy Glasscock, where
the turbi nes lived, but sort of the same. Machines, then. He felt
a little better . Machines felt friendly to him.
Thinking about machines reminded him that Mam said there
was a train in h ere, a little train, and that made him feel lots
better . If there w as a train in here, it wasn’ t all just empty dark
space. That hum maybe belonged to the train.
He put out his hands and shuf fled along until he bumped
into a wall. The n he felt around and walked along with one
hand on  the wall, found out he was going the wrong way when
he walked face first into the doors and said, “Ow!”
His own  voice made him laugh, but the laughter sounded
funny in  the big space and he quit and turned around to walk
the other way , with his other hand on the wall to steer by .
Where was Mr . Cameron now? He hadn’ t said where he was
going. Just told Jem to wait an d he’d come back with some
food.
His hand touched something round and smooth, and he
jerked it  back. It didn’ t move, t hough, and he put his hand on
it. Powe r cables, running along the wall. Big ones. He could
feel a little hum in them, same a s he could when Da turned on
the c ar ’ s motor . It made him thin k of Mandy . She had that kind
of q uiet hum w hen she was sleeping, and a louder one when
she was awake.
He w ondered suddenly whethe r Mr . Cameron might have
gone to take M andy , and the t hought made him feel scared.
Mr . Cam eron wanted to know ho w you got through the stones,
and Jem couldn’ t tell him—but Mandy for sure couldn’ t betelling h im, she was only a baby . The thought made him feel
hollow , though, and he reached out, panicked.
There she was, though. Something like a little warm light in
his h ead, and he  took a breath. Mandy was OK, then. He was
interested to find he could tell that with her far away . He’d
never th ought to try before, us ually she was just right ther e ,
being a pain in the arse, and when him and his friends went of f
without her , he wasn’ t thinking about her .
His foot struck s omething and he stopped, reaching out with
one hand. He didn’ t find anything and after a minute got up his
nerve to let go of the wall and reach out further , then to edge
out into the dark . His heart thumped and he started to sweat,
even tho ugh he was still cold. His fingers stubbed metal and
his heart leaped in his chest. The train!
He f ound the op ening, and felt his way in on his hands and
knees, and cracked his head on  the thing where the controls
were, standing up. That made him see colored stars and he said
“Ifrinn!”  out  loud. It sounded funny , not so echoey now he
was inside the train, and he giggled.
He felt around over the controls. They were like Mam said,
just a switch and  a little lever , and he pushed the switch. A red
light popped into life, and made him jump. It made him feel
lots better , though, just to see it. He could feel the electricity
coming through the train, and t hat made him feel better , too.
He push ed the lever , just a littl e, and was thrilled to feel the
train move.
Where d id it go? He pushed the  lever a little more, and air
moved p ast his face. He snif fed at it, but it didn’ t tell him
anything. He was going away from the big doors, though—
away from Mr . Cameron.
Maybe Mr . Cameron would go and try to find out about the
stones from Mam or Da? Jem hoped he would . Da would settle
Mr . Cam eron’ s hash, he kent t hat for sure, and the thought
warmed him. Then they’d come and find him and it would be
OK. He wondere d if Mandy could tell them where he was. She
kent him  the same way he kent her , and he looked at the littlered light on the train. It glowed like Mandy , steady and warm-
looking, and he felt good looking at it. He pushed the lever a
little farther , and the train went faster into the dark. NEXUS
 
R ACHEL POKED SUSPICIOUSL Y at the end of a loaf.
The bread-seller , catching sight, turned on her with a growl.
“Here, don’ t you be touching th at! Y ou want it, it’ s a penny .
Y ou don’ t, go away .”
“How old is this bread?” Rachel said, ignoring the young
woman’ s glowe r . “It smells sta le, and if it is as stale as it
looks, I would not give thee more than half a penny for a loaf.”
“It’ s no more th an a day old!” The young woman pulled
back the tray of  loaves, indignant. “There’ll be no fresh bread
‘til W ednesday; my master can’ t get flour ‘til then. Now , d’you
want bread or not?”
“Hmm,” said Rachel, feigning skepticism. Denny would
have fits if he thought she was trying to cheat the woman, but
there wa s a dif ference between paying a fair price and being
robbed, and it w as no more fair  to allow the woman to cheat
her than it was the other way about.
W ere tho se crumbs on the tray? And were those tooth marks
in the end of th at loaf? She bent close, frowning, and Rollo
whined suddenly .
“Does thee think the mice hav e been at these, dog?” she
said to him. “So do I.”
Rollo w asn’ t interested in mice, though. Ignoring both
Rachel’ s question and the bread-seller ’ s indignant reply , he
was snif fing the ground with great industry , making an odd,
high-pitched noise in his throat.
“Whatever ails thee, dog?” Rachel said, staring at this
performance in consternation. She put a hand on his ruf f and
was startled at the vibration ru nning through the great hairy
frame.Rollo ig nored her touch as w ell as her voice. He was
moving—almost running—in small circles, whining, nose to
the ground.
“That d og’ s not  gone mad, has  he?” the baker ’ s assistant
asked, watching this.
“Of course not,” Rachel said absently . “Rollo … Rollo! ”
The dog  had suddenly shot ou t of the shop, nose to the
ground, and was heading down the street, half-trotting in his
eagerness.
Muttering under her breath, Rachel seized her marketing
basket and went after him.
T o her alarm, he was already at the next street and vanished
round the corner as she watched. She ran, calling after him, the
basket bumping  against her leg as she went and threatening to
spill out the goods she’d already bought.
What was the matter with him? He’d never acted thus
before. She ran faster , trying to keep him in sight.
“W icked dog,” she panted. “Serve thee right if I let thee
go!” An d yet she ran after him , calling. It was one thing for
Rollo to  leave the inn on his own hunting expeditions—he
always returned . But she was well away from the inn and
feared his being lost.
“Though if thy sense of smel l is so acute as it seems,
doubtless you could follow me back!” she panted, and then
stopped dead, struck by a thought.
He was following a scent, so mu ch was clear . But what kind
of scent  would make the dog do that? Surely no cat, no
squirrel…
“Ian,” she whispered to herself. “Ian.”
She picked up her skirts and ran flat out in pursuit of the
dog, hea rt hammering in her ears, even as she tried to restrain
the wild hope sh e felt. The dog was still in sight, nose to the
ground and tail held low , intent on his trail. He went into a
narrow alley and she followed without hesitation, hopping andlurching in an ef fort to avoid stepping on the various squashy ,
nasty things in her path.
Any of these would normally have fascinated any dog,
including Rollo—and yet he ignored them all, following his
trail.
Seeing this, she realized suddenly what “dogged” really
meant, and smiled to herself at the thought.
Could it  be Ian? It was surely folly to think so; her hope
would b e dashed, and yet she could not conquer the conviction
that had  sprung up in her breast with the possibility . Rollo’ s
tail flicked round the corner , and she dashed after , breathless.
If it was  Ian, what could he be doing? The trail was leading
them toward the edge of the to wn—not along the main road
but q uite out of the settled, prosperous part of the city , into an
area of ramshackle houses and the informal camps of the
British camp followers. A flock of chickens squawked and
scattered at Rollo’ s approach, but he didn’ t pause. Now he was
circling back, coming round the  far side of a shed and out into
a narrow  street of packed dirt, curling like a tongue between
rows of close-packed, ill-built houses.
She had  a pain i n her side and sweat was pouring down her
face, but she, too, knew the meaning of “dogged” and kept on.
The dog was dr awing away from her , though; she would lose
sight of him at any moment—her right shoe had rubbed the
skin from her heel, and she felt as though her shoe was filling
with blood, though likely this was imagination. She’d seen
men with shoes filled with blood…
Rollo vanished at the end of the street, and she dashed
madly after him, her stockings falling down and her petticoat
drooping so she stepped on the hem and tore it. If she did find
Ian, she’d have a thing to say to him, she thought. If she could
speak by then.
There was no sign of the dog a t the end of the street. She
looked r ound wildly . She was at the back of a tavern; she
could sm ell the hops from the b rew tubs, and the stink of themidden, and voices came from the street on the other side of
the buil ding. Soldiers’ voices—there was no mistaking the
way soldiers talked, even if she couldn’ t make out the words—
and she halted, heart in her throat.
But they  hadn’ t caught someone; it was only the usual way
men talked, casual, getting ready to do something. She caught
the c link and jingle of equipme nt, the sound of boots on the
pavement—
A ha nd seized h er arm, and she swallowed the shriek before
it co uld tear out of her throat, te rrified of giving Ian away . But
it wasn’ t Ian who had grabbed her . Hard fingers dug into her
upper arm, and a tall, white-haired old man looked down at her
with burning eyes.
 
IAN W AS F AMISHED. He ha d not eaten in more than
twenty-four hou rs, unwilling to take time either to hunt or to
find a farmhouse that might give him food. He had covered the
twenty m iles from V alley For ge in a daze, hardly noticing the
distance.
Rachel w as here . By some mira cle, her e , in Philadelphia. It
had taken him some time to  overcome the suspicion of
W ashington’ s soldiers, but at last a rather stout German of ficer
with a big nose and a peering, friendly way had come along
and expressed curiosity regarding Ian’ s bow . A brief
demonstration of archery and a conversation in French—for
the German of ficer had only the most rudimentary English—
and he was at last able to inqu ire as to the whereabouts of a
sur geon named Hunter .
This at first prod uced only blank looks, but von Steuben had
taken a liking to  Ian and sent someone to ask while he found a
little bread. At l ong last, the someone had come back and said
that there was  a sur geon named Hunter , who was usually in
camp, but who went now and then to Philadelphia to tend a
private patient. Hunter ’ s sister? The someone had shrugged.But Ian knew th e Hunters: where Denzell was, Rachel was.
Granted, no one knew wher e  in Philadelphia Dr . Hunter ’ s
private patient might be—there was some reserve about it,
some hostility that Ian didn’ t u nderstand but was much too
impatient to unravel—but they were at least in Philadelphia.
And now so wa s Ian. He’d cre pt into the city just before
dawn, th reading his way silently through the camps that ringed
the city , past the sleeping, blanket-wrapped forms and
smothered, reeking campfires.
There was food in the city , f ood in abundance, and he
paused for a mo ment of anticipatory bliss on the edge of the
market square, deciding between fish fried in batter or a
Cornish pasty . He had just stepped forward, money in hand, to
the p asty-seller ’ s stall, when he saw the woman look over his
shoulder and her face change to a look of horror .
He whirled round and was knocked flat. There were
screams and shouts, but these w ere lost in the mad slobber of
Rollo’ s tongue licking every inch of his face, including the
inside of his nose.
He w hooped at that and half-sat  up, fending of f the ecstatic
dog.
“A cu!”  he said,  and hugged the huge, w riggling creature in
delight. He seized the dog’ s ruf f in both hands then, laughing
at the lolling tongue.
“A ye, I’ m glad to see ye, too,” he told Rollo. “But what
have ye done wi’ Rachel?”
 
FERGUS’S MIS SING HAND itched. It hadn’ t done that
for s ome time, a nd he wished it  didn’ t now . He was wearing a
bran-stuf fed glo ve pinned to hi s sleeve rather than his useful
hook—he was much too memorable with that—and it was
impossible to rub his stump for relief.
Seeking distract ion, he came out of the barn where he’d
been sleeping and slouched casually toward a nearby campfire.Mrs. Hempstead  nodded at him  and picked up a tin mug, into
which sh e ladled thin porridge and passed it over . A ye, well,
he th ought, there was some adv antage to the glove, after all—
he c ouldn’ t grasp the mug with it but could use it to cradle the
hot c up against h is chest without burning himself. And, he was
pleased to discover , the heat killed the itch.
“Bon jour , madame,”  he said, with a polite bow , and Mrs.
Hempstead smi led, despite her bedraggled tiredness. Her
husband had been killed at Pa oli, and she eked out a bare
living for her t hree children by doing laundry for English
of ficers. Fer gus augmented her income in return for food and
shelter . Her house had been taken by her husband’ s brother ,
but he had grac iously allowed her and her family to sleep in
the barn—one of three or four such bolt-holes Fer gus
employed in turn.
“There was a man looking out for you, sir ,” she said in a
low voice, coming to give him a cup of water .
“A ye?” He kept himself from glancing round; if the man
was still here, she would have told him. “Did you see this
man?”
She shook her head.
“No, sir . ‘T was M r . Jessop he sp oke to, and Jessop told Mrs.
W ilkins’ s youngest, who came by and said to my Mary . Jessop
said he was a Scotch man, very tall, a fine-looking man.
Thought he might have been a soldier once.”
Excitement sprang up in Fer gus’ s breast, hot as the porridge.
“Had he  red hair?” he asked, a nd Mrs. Hempstead looked
surprised.
“W ell, I  don’ t know as how the  young’un said. Let me ask
Mary , though.”
“Do not trouble yourself, mada me. I will ask myself.” He
swallowed the rest of the porridge, nearly scalding his throat,
and handed back the cup.Small Mary , carefully questioned, did not know whether the
tall Scot ch man had red hair; she  hadn’ t seen him, and T ommy
W ilkins didn’ t say . He had, however , told her where Mr .
Jessop had seen the man, and F er gus, thanking Mary with his
best Gal lic cour tesy—which made her blush—made his way
into the city , heart beating fast.
 
RACHEL JERKED HER arm, but the old man merely
tightened his grip, his thumb digging hard into the muscle
below her shoulder .
“Let me  go, Friend,” she said c almly . “Thee has mistaken
me for someone else.”
“Oh, I think not ,” he said polite ly , and she perceived him to
be a Scot. “Y on dog is yours, is he not?”
“No,” she said, puzzled and beginning to be vaguely
alarmed. “I am but minding him for a friend. Why? Has he
eaten on e of thy chickens? I w ill be pleased to pay thee for
it….” She leaned away , gropin g with her free hand for her
purse, gauging the possibilities of escape.
“Ian Murray is the name of your friend,” he said, and she
was now genuinely alarmed to see he did not phrase this as a
question.
“Let me go,” sh e said, more strongly . “Thee has no right to
detain me.”
He paid no atten tion to this but looked intently into her face.
His eyes were ancient, red-rimmed, and rheumy—but sharp as
razors.
“Where is he?”
“In Scotland,” she told him, and saw him blink with
surprise. He bent a little to peer directly into her eyes.
“Do you love him?” the old man asked softly—but there
was nothing soft about his tone.“Let go!” She kicked at his shin, but he stepped aside with
an adroi tness that surprised her . His cloak swung aside as he
moved, and she caught the gleam  of metal in his belt. It was a
small ax, and with the sudden memory of the dreadful house in
New Jersey , she jerked back and shrieked out loud.
“Hush!” the old man snapped. “Come with me, lass.” He
put a lar ge, dirty  hand over her mouth and tried to pull her of f
her feet,  but she struggled and k icked and got her mouth free
long enough to scream again, as loudly as she could.
Startled exclamations, as well as the sound of heavy boots,
came rapidly toward her .
“Rachel!” A familiar bellow reached her ears, and her heart
bounded at the sound.
“W illiam! Help me!”
W illiam was running toward her , and some distance behind
him wer e three or four British soldiers, muskets in hand. The
old man said something in G aelic, in tones of absolute
amazement, and  let go of her so suddenly that she staggered
back, tripped on the torn hem of her petticoat, and sat down
hard in the road.
The old man wa s backing away , but W illiam was roused; he
char ged the old man, ducking hi s shoulder , clearly meaning to
knock him of f h is feet. The old  man had his ax in his hand,
though, and Rachel screamed, “W illiam!” at the top of her
voice. B ut it was no good. There was a flash of light on metal
and a sickening thud, and W illia m lurched sideways, took two
ungainly steps, and fell.
“W illiam, W illiam! Oh, Lord, oh, Lord…” She couldn’ t get
to her feet but c rawled to him as fast as she could, moaning.
The soldiers were shouting, roar ing, running after the old man,
but she had no attention to spare for them. All she saw was
W illiam’ s face, ghastly pale, his eyes rolled up in his head so
the whites of them showed, and the blood running dark,
soaking his hair .
 
I TUCKED WILLIAM up in bed, despite his protests,
and bade him stay there. I was reasonably sure the protests
were for  Rachel ’ s sake, since as  soon as I had shooed her out
the d oor , he allo wed me to ease  him back onto his pillow , his
face pal e and clammy under the bandage wrapped around his
forehead.
“Sleep,” I said. “Y ou’ll feel perfectly bloody in the morning,
but you won’ t die.”
“Thank you, Mother Claire,” he murmured, with the faintest
of smile s. “Y ou’re always such a comfort. Before you go,
though …” Despite how ill he plainly felt, his hand on my arm
was solid and firm.
“What?” I asked warily .
“The man who attacked Rachel. Do you have any idea who
he might be?”
“Y es,” I  said reluctantly . “From  her description, he’ s a man
named Arch Bug. He used to live near us in North Carolina.”
“Ah.” His face w as pale and clammy , but the deep blue eyes
brightened a little with interest. “Is he mad?”
“Y es, I think s o. He … lost his wife under very tragic
circumstances, a nd I do believe it turned his wits to some
degree.” I did in fact think this was true, and the months and
months since that winter night o n the Ridge, spent alone in the
woods, walking endless roads, listening for the vanished voice
of his dead wif e … If he had not been mad to start with, I
thought he would be now . At the same time, I wasn’ t about to
tell W illiam the whole story . Not now , and possibly not ever .
“I’ll speak to someone,” he s aid, and suddenly gave a
massive yawn. “Sorry . I’m … awfully sleepy .”
“Y ou ha ve a concussion,” I told  him. “I’ll come and wake
you every hour . Speak to whom?”
“Of ficer ,” he said indistinctly ,  his eyes already closing.
“Have men look for him. Can’ t  let him… Rachel.” Her namecame ou t on a sigh as the big young body went slowly limp. I
watched him for a moment to b e sure he was soundly asleep.
Then I kissed his forehead gently , thinking—with the same
wrench of the heart with which I had kissed his sister at the
same age— God, you ar e so like him .
Rachel herself was waiting on the landing, anxious and
disheveled, though she’d made some ef fort to tidy her hair and
cap.
“W ill he be all right?”
“Y es, I think so.  He has a mild c oncussion—you know what
that is? Y es, of course you do. That, and I’ve put three stitches
into his head. He’ll have an ungodly headache tomorrow , but it
was a glancing wound, nothing serious.”
She sighed, slender shoulders drooping suddenly as the
tension went out of them.
“Thank the Lord,” she said, then  glanced at me and smiled.
“And thee, too, Friend Claire.”
“My pleasure,” I said sincerely . “Are you sure that you’re
all right ? Y ou should sit down and have something to drink.”
She wasn’ t hurt, but the shock of the experience had plainly
marked her . I knew she would n’ t drink tea, as a matter of
principle, but a little brandy , or even water…
“I’m fine. Better than fine.” R elieved of her worry about
W illiam, she looked at me now , her face aglow . “Claire—he’ s
here! Ian!”
“What? Where?”
“I do n’ t know!” She glanced at the door to W illiam’ s room
and drew me a little way away , lowering her voice. “The dog
—Rollo. He smelled something  and went of f after it like a
shot. I ran afte r him, and tha t’ s when I ran into the poor
madman. I know , thee will tell  me he might chase anything,
and he might—but, Claire, he has not come back! If he had not
found Ian, he would have come back.”I ca ught her se nse of excitement, though I was afraid to
hope as much as she did. There  were other things that could
prevent the dog coming back, and none of them was good.
One of them was Arch Bug.
Her desc ription of him just now had taken me aback—and
yet s he was right, I realized. Ever since Mrs. Bug’ s funeral at
Fraser ’ s Ridge, I had seen Arch Bug only as a threat to Ian—
and yet, with Ra chel’ s words, I also saw the maimed, arthritic
hands fu mbling to pin a bird-sha ped brooch to his loved wife’ s
shroud. Poor madman, indeed.
And a bloody dangerous one.
“Come downstairs,” I said to her , with another glance at
W illiam’ s door . “I need to tell you about Mr . Bug.”
 
“OH, IAN,” SHE whispered, when I had finished my
account. “Oh, poor man.” I d idn’ t know whether this last
referred to Mr . Bug or Ian, but she was right, either way . She
didn’ t weep, but her face had gone pale and still.
“Both o f them,” I agreed. “Al l three, if you count Mrs.
Bug.”
She shook her head, in dismay rather than disagreement.
“Then that is why—” she said, but stopped.
“Why what?”
She grim aced a little, but glanc ed at me and gave a small
shrug.
“Why he said to  me that he was afraid I might die because I
loved him.”
“Y es, I expect so.”
W e s at for a moment over our st eaming cups of lemon balm
tea, contemplating the situation. At last, she looked up and
swallowed.
“Does thee think Ian means to kill him?”“I—well, I don’ t know ,” I said. “Certainly not to begin with;
he felt terrible about what happened to Mrs. Bug—”
“About the fact that he killed he r , thee means.” She gave me
a direct look; not one for easy evasions, Rachel Hunter .
“I do . B ut if he realizes that Arc h Bug knows who you are,
knows what you mean to Ian, an d means you harm—and make
no mistake about it, Rachel, he does  mean you harm”—I took
a sw allow of hot tea and a de ep breath—”yes, I think Ian
would try to kill him.”
She went absolutely still, the st eam from her cup the only
movement.
“He must not,” she said.
“How do you mean to stop him?” I asked, out of curiosity .
She let out a long, slow breath, eyes fixed on the gently
swirling surface of her tea.
“Pray ,” she said. MISCHIANZA
 May 18, 1778
 W alnut Grove, Pennsylvania
 
I T HAD BEEN q uite a long tim e since I’d seen a gilded
roast peacock, and I hadn’ t really expected to see another .
Certainly not in Philadelphia. Not that I should have been
surprised, I thought, leaning closer to look—yes, it did  have
eyes made of diamonds. Not after the regatta on the Delaware,
the three bands of musicians  carried on bar ges, and the
seventeen-gun salute from the warships on the river . The
evening had been billed as a “mischianza.” The word means
“medley” in Italian—I was told—and in the current instance
appeared to have been interpreted so as to allow the more
creative souls in the British army and the Loyalist community
free rein in the  production of a gala celebration to honor
General Howe, who had resigne d as commander in chief, to be
replaced by Sir Henry Clinton.
“I am sorry , my dear ,” John murmured at my side.
“For what?” I asked, surprised.
He was surprised in turn; his fair brows went up.
“Why , k nowing your loyalties, I must suppose that it would
be p ainful to y ou, to see so much …” He made a discreet
motion of the w rist, indicating the lavish displays around us,
which were certainly not limited  to the peacock. ” … so much
pomp and extravagant expense devoted to—to—”
“Gloating?” I ended dryly . “I might—but I don’ t. I know
what will happen.”
He blinked at that, very much taken aback.
“What will happen? T o whom?”
The sort of prophecy I possess ed was seldom a welcome
gift; in these circumstances, t hough, I took a rather grim
pleasure in telling him.“T o you. The B ritish army , I mean, not you personally .
They’ll lose the war , in three years’ time. What price gilded
peacocks then, eh?”
His face twitched, and he hid a smile.
“Indeed.”
“Y es, indeed,” I replied amiably . “Fuirich agus chi thu.”
“What?” He stared at me.
“Gaelic,” I said, with a small, deep twinge. “It means ‘W ait
and see.’”
“Oh, I shall,” he assured me. “In the meantime, allow me to
make known Lieutenant-Colonel Banastre T arleton, of the
British Legion.” He bowed to a short, wiry young gentleman
who had  approached us, an of ficer of dragoons in a bottle-
green uniform. “Colonel T arleton, my wife.”
“Lady John.” The young man bowed low over my hand,
brushing it with very red, very sensual lips. I wanted to wipe
my han d on my skirt, but didn’ t. “Are you enjoying the
festivities?”
“I’m looking forward to the fire works.” He had foxy , clever
eyes that missed nothing, and his ripe red mouth twisted at
this, but he smiled and left it, turning to Lord John. “My
cousin Richard bids me give you his best regards, sir .”
John’ s air of pleasant cordiality warmed into genuine
pleasure at that.
“Richard T arleton was my ensign at Crefeld,” he explained
to me before switching his attention back to the green dragoon.
“How does he do these days, sir?”
They lapsed at once into a detailed conversation of
commissions, promotions, campaigns, troop movements, and
parliamentary politics, and I moved away . Not out of boredom,
but rather out of tact. I had not promised John that I would
refrain from passing on useful in formation; he hadn’ t asked it.
But delicacy and a certain sense of obligation required that I atleast not acquire such information through him, or directly
under his nose.
I drifted slowly through the crowd in the ballroom, admiring
the l adies’ dresses, many of them  imported from Europe, most
of th e rest mod eled on such imports with such materials as
could be obtained locally . The brilliant silks and sparkling
embroidery were such a contrast to the homespuns and
muslins I was accustomed to s ee that it seemed surreal—as
though I’d found myself in a su dden dream. This impression
was heightened by the presence among the crowd of a number
of knigh ts, dres sed in surcoats and tabards, some with helms
tucked under their arms—the afternoon’ s entertainment had
included a mock jousting tournament—and a number of
people in fantastic masks and extravagant costume, whom I
assumed would later be part of some theatrical presentation.
My atten tion drifted back over the table where the gaudier
viands w ere displayed: the peacock, tail feathers spread in a
huge fan , occupi ed pride of plac e in the center of the table, but
it was flanked by an entire roast boar on a bed of cabbage—
this emitting a s mell that made my stomach growl—and three
enormous game pies, decorated  with stuf fed songbirds. Those
reminded me suddenly of the Ki ng of France’ s dinner with the
stuf fed nightingales, and my appetite vanished at once in a
puf f of nausea and grief recalled.
I shi fted my gaz e hastily back to the peacock, swallowing. I
wondered idly how dif ficult it might be to abstract those
diamond eyes and whether som eone was keeping an eye on
them. A lmost ce rtainly so, and I looked to see if I could spot
him. Y es, there he was, a uniformed soldier standing in a nook
between the table and the huge mantelpiece, eyes alert.
I didn’ t need to steal diamonds, though, I thought, and my
stomach curled a little. I had them. John had given me a pair of
diamond earrings. When the time came for me to leave …
“Mother Claire!”
I had been feeli ng pleasantly invisible and, startled out of
this delusion, now glanced acro ss the room to see W illie, hisdisheveled head  sticking out from the red-crossed tabard of a
Knight T emplar , waving enthusiastically .
“I do wish you could think of something else to call me,” I
said, rea ching hi s side. “I feel as though I ought to be swishing
round in a habit with a rosary at my waist.”
He l aughed at th at, introduced the young lady making goo-
goo eyes at him  as Miss Chew , and of fered to get us both an
ice. The temperature in the ballr oom was rising eighty , at least,
and sweat darkened not a few of the bright silks.
“What a n elegant gown,” Miss Chew said politely . “Is it
from England?”
“Oh,” I said, ra ther taken aback. “I don’ t know . But thank
you,” I added, looking down a t myself for the first time. I
hadn’ t really noticed the gown, beyond the mechanical
necessities of getting into it; dre ssing was no more than a daily
nuisance, and so long as nothi ng was too tight or chafed, I
didn’ t care what I wore.
John had presented me with the gown this morning, as well
as summ oning a  hairdresser to d eal with me from the neck up.
I’d s hut my eye s, rather shocked at how enjoyable the man’ s
fingers felt in my hair—but still more shocked when he
handed m e a looking glass and I saw a towering confection of
curls and powder , with a tiny ship perched in it. Full-rigged.
I’d waited ‘til he left, then hurriedly brushed it all out and
pinned i t up as simply as I cou ld. John had given me a look,
but said nothing. Concerned with my head, though, I hadn’ t
taken any time to look at mys elf below the neck, and was
vaguely pleased now to see how  well the cocoa-colored silk fit
me. Da rk enough that it mig ht not show sweat stains, I
thought.
Miss Ch ew was watching W illia m like a cat eyeing up a fat,
handsome mouse, frowning a little as he stopped to flirt with
two other young ladies.
“W ill Lord Ellesmere be remaining long in Philadelphia?”
she aske d, eyes still on him. “I believe someone told me thathe is not to go with General Howe. I do hope that is the case!”
“That’ s right,” I said. “He surrendered with General
Bur goyne; those troops are all on parole and are meant to go
back to England, but there’ s some administrative reason why
they can ’ t embark just yet.” I knew W illiam was hoping to be
exchanged, so that he could fight again, but didn’ t mention it.
“Really ,” she said, brightening. “What splendid news!
Perhaps he will be here for my ball next month. Naturally , it
will not be quite so good as this one”—she arched her neck a
little, tilting her head toward the  musicians who had begun to
play at the far end of the room—”but Major Andre says he
will len d his skill to paint the backdrops so we may have
tableaux, so it will be—”
“I’m sor ry ,” I interrupted, “did you say Major Andre? Major
… John Andre?”
She glanced at me in surprise, half-annoyed at my
interruption. “Of course. He designed the costumes for the
joust tod ay and has written the play they will do later . Look,
there he is, speaking with Lady Clinton.”
I looked where she pointed with her fan, feeling a sudden
chill wash through me, despite the heat in the room.
Major A ndre was the center of  a group, men and women
both, laughing and gesturing, plainly the focus of everyone’ s
attention. He was a handsome y oung man in his late twenties,
his unifo rm tail ored to perfection and his face vivid, flushed
with heat and pleasure.
“He seem s … very charming,” I murmured, wanting to look
away from him, but unable to do so.
“Oh, ye s!” Miss Chew was enthusiastic. “He and I and
Peggy Shippen did almost all of the work for the mischianza
together—he’ s a  marvel, always with such good ideas, and he
plays the  flute just delightful. So  sad that Peggy’ s father would
not let her come  tonight—quite unfair!” I thought there was an
underlying tone of satisfaction to her voice, though; she was
quite pleased not to have to share the limelight with her friend.“Do let me present him to you,” she said suddenly , and
folding her fan, slipped her ar m through mine. I was taken
entirely by surprise and couldn ’ t think of a way to extricate
myself before I found myself towed into the group around
Andre, with Miss Chew chattering brightly to him, laughing
up at him, her hand familiarly on his arm. He smiled at her ,
then switched his gaze to me, his eyes warm and lively .
“I am enchante d, Lady John,” he said, in a soft, husky
voice. “Y our servant, madame.”
“I—yes,” I said abruptly , quite for getting the usual form.
“Y ou—yes. Gla d to meet you!” I pulled my hand out of his
before he could kiss it, disconc erting him, and backed away .
He b linked, but Miss Chew re claimed his attention at once,
and I turned away , going to sta nd near the door where there
was at least a little air . I was covered in cold sweat and
vibrating in every limb.
“Oh, there you are, Mother Claire!” W illie popped up
beside me, two half-melted ices in his hands, sweating freely .
“Here.”
“Thank you.” I took one, notin g absently that my fingers
were nearly as cold as the misted silver cup.
“Are you quite all right, Mother Claire?” He bent down to
look at me, conc erned. “Y ou look quite pale. As though you’d
seen a ghost.” He winced in brief apology at this clumsy
reference to death, but I made an ef fort to smile back. Not a
terribly successful ef fort, becaus e he was right. I had just seen
a ghost.
Major John Andre was the British of ficer with whom
Benedict Arnold—hero of Sa ratoga and still a legendary
patriot—would eventually conspire. And the man who would
go t o the gallow s for his part in that conspiracy , sometime in
the next three years.
“Had you better sit down for a bit?” W illie was frowning in
concern, and I made an ef fort to shake of f my cold horror . I
didn’ t w ant him  of fering to leav e the ball to see me home; hewas plainly having a good time. I smiled at him, barely feeling
my lips.
“No, tha t’ s all right,” I said. “I think … I’ll just step outside
for some air .” A BUTTERFL Y IN A BUTCHER’S Y ARD
 
R OLLO LA Y UNDER a bush, noisily devouring the
remains of a squirrel he’d caught. Ian sat on a rock,
contemplating him. The city of Philadelphia lay just out of
sight; he could smell the haze of fire, the stink of thousands of
people living cheek by jowl. Could hear the clop and rattle of
people going there, on the road  that lay only a few hundred
yards away . And somewhere, w ithin a mile of him, hidden in
that mass of buildings and people, was Rachel Hunter .
He wanted to step out on the road, stride down it into the
heart of Philadelphia, and begin taking the place apart, brick
by brick, until he found her .
“Where do we begin, a cu ?” he said to Rollo. “The
printshop, I suppose.”
He’d not been t here, but supposed it would not be hard to
find. Fer gus and Marsali would give him shelter—and food, he
thought, feeling his stomach gro wl—and perhaps Germain and
the girls could help him hunt  for Rachel. Perhaps Auntie
Claire could … W ell, he knew she wasn’ t a witch or a fairy ,
but there was no doubt at al l in his mind that she was
something, and perhaps she would be able to find Rachel for
him.
He waited for Rollo to finish his meal, then rose, an
extraordinary sense of warmth suf fusing him, though the day
was ove rcast and cool. Could he find her that way? he
wondered. W alk through the streets, playing the children’ s
game of “warmer , colder ,” growing steadily warmer as he
approached her more closely , coming to her at last just before
he burst into flame?
“Y ou co uld help , ye know ,” he said reproachfully to Rollo.
He’d tried getting Rollo to backtrack to her at once when thedog had found him, but the dog had been so berserk with joy
at Ia n’ s return th at there was no  speaking to him. That was a
thought, though—if they somehow ran across her trail, Rollo
might take it up, now that he was more sober -minded.
He s miled crookedly at that tho ught; the bulk of the British
army was encamped at Germantown, but there were thousands
of soldie rs quartered in Philadelphia itself. As well ask the dog
to follow the scent of a butterfly through a butcher ’ s yard.
“W ell, w e won’ t  find her , sitting  here,” he said to Rollo, and
stood up. “Come on, dog.” LADY IN W AITING
 
I  W AS W AITING FOR THINGS to make sense. Nothing
did. I had lived in John Grey’ s house, with its gracious stair
and crystal chandelier , its T ur key rugs and fine china, for
nearly a month, and yet I woke each day with no idea where I
was, reaching across an empty bed for Jamie.
I cou ld not believe he was dead. Could  not.  I shut my eyes
at night and he ard him breathing slow and soft in the night
beside me. Felt his eyes on me, humorous, lusting, annoyed,
alight w ith love. T urned half a dozen times a day , imagining I
heard his step be hind me. Opened my mouth to say something
to h im—and more than once  really had  spo ken to him,
realizing only when I heard the  words dwindle on the empty
air that he was not there.
Each realization crushed me anew . And yet none reconciled
me to his loss.  I had, with shrinking mind, envisioned his
death. H e would  so have hated drowning. Of all ways to die! I
could only hope that the sinking  of the ship had been violent,
and that he had gone unconscious into the water . Because
otherwise … he couldn’ t give up, he wouldn’ t have. He would
have swum and kept swimming, endless miles from any
shores, a lone in the empty deep, swum stubbornly because he
could not give up and let himself sink. Swum until that
powerful frame was exhausted,  until he could not lift a hand
again, and then …
I rol led over and pressed my face hard into my pillow , heart
squeezing with horror .
“What a bloody , bloody waste! ” I said  into the feathers,
clenching handf uls of pillow in my fists as hard as I could. If
he’d died in bat tle, at least … I rolled back over and shut my
eyes, biting my lip until the blood came.At last my breathing slowed, and I opened my eyes on
darkness again, and resumed waiting. W aiting for Jamie.
Some tim e later , the door opene d, and a slice of light from
the hallway fell into the room.  Lord John came in, setting a
candle o n the table by the door , and approached the bed. I
didn’ t look at him, but knew he was looking down at me.
I lay on my bed, staring at the ceiling. Or , rather , looking
through it to the  sky . Dark, full of stars and emptiness. I hadn’ t
bothered to light a candle, but I didn’ t curse the darkness,
either . Only looked into it. W aiting.
“Y ou a re very lonely , my dear ,” he said, with great
gentleness, “and  I know it. W ill you not let me bear you
company , for a little time at least?”
I said nothing, but did move over a little and did not resist
when he lay do wn beside me and gathered me carefully into
his arms.
I res ted my head on his shoulder , grateful for the comfort of
simple touch and human warmth, though it didn’ t reach the
depths of my desolation.
T ry not to think . Accept what there is; don’ t think about
what there is not.
I l ay still, listen ing to John breathe. He breathed dif ferently
than Jamie, shallower , faster . A very slight catch in his breath.
It d awned on me, slowly , tha t I was not alone in my
desolation or my loneliness. An d that I knew all too well what
had happened last time this state of af fairs had become
obvious to both of us. Granted, we were not drunk, but I
thought he couldn’ t help but remember it, as well.
“Do you … wish me to … comfort you?” he said quietly . “I
do know how , you know .” And, reaching down, he moved a
finger v ery slowly , in such a place and with such exquisite
delicacy that I gasped and jerked away .
“I know you do.” I did have a moment’ s curiosity as to how
exactly he had learned, but was not about to ask. “It’ s not that Idon’ t appreciate  the thought—I do,” I assured him, and felt my
cheeks flush hotter . “It’ s—it’ s only—”
“That yo u woul d feel unfaithful?” he guessed. He smiled a
little sadly . “I understand.”
There w as a long silence then . And a sense of growing
awareness.
“Y ou wouldn’ t?”  I asked. He lay quite still, as if asleep, but
wasn’ t.
“A standing cock is quite blind, my dear ,” he said at last,
eyes still shut. “Surely you know that, physician that you are.”
“Y es,” I said, “I  do know that.”  And taking him gently but
firmly in hand, I  dealt with him in tender silence, avoiding any
thought of whom he might see in his mind’ s eye.
 
COLENSO BA RAGW ANA TH ran as though his boot
heels were on fire. He burst into the Fox tavern near the foot
of S tate Street, and barreled through the taproom into the
cardroom at the back.
“They found him,” he panted. “ The ol’ man. Ax. W ith the
ax.”
Captain Lord Ellesmere was already rising to his feet. T o
Colenso, he looked some eight feet tall, and awful in aspect.
The plac e where the doctor had  stitched his head was bristly
with new hair , b ut the black stitching still showed. His eyes
might h ave been shooting flames, but Colenso was afraid to
look too  closely . His chest hea ved from running and he was
out of breath, but he couldn’ t h ave thought of a thing to say ,
even so.
“Where?” said the captain. He spoke very softly , but
Colenso heard him and backed toward the door , pointing. The
captain picked up the pair of p istols he had laid aside, and
putting them in his belt, came toward him.
“Show me,” he said. 
RACHEL SA T ON the tall stool behind the printshop’ s
counter , head on her hand. Sh e’d wakened with a sense of
pressure in her head, probably from the impending storm, and
it had ripened into a throbbing headache. She would rather
have gone back to Friend John’ s house, to see if Claire might
have a tea that would help, but she’d promised Marsali that
she would come and mind the s hop while her friend took the
children to the cobbler to have their shoes mended and Henri-
Christian fitted for a pair of boo ts, for his feet were too short
and wide to fit his sisters’ outgrown shoes.
At le ast the shop  was quiet. Onl y one or two folk had come
in, and only one of those had spoken to her—asking the way to
Slip Alle y . She rubbed her stif f neck, sighing, and let her eyes
close. M arsali would be back soon. Then she could go and lie
down with a wet rag on her head, and—
The bel l above the printshop door went ting!  and she
straightened up, a welcoming smile forming on her face. She
saw the visitor and the smile died.
“Leave,” she said, scrambling of f the stool, measuring the
distance between her and the do or into the house. “Leave this
minute.” If she could get through, and out the back—
“Stand still,” said Arch Bug, in a voice like rusty iron.
“I know what t hee means to d o,” she said, backing up a
step. “And I do not blame thee f or thy grief, thy rage. But thee
must know it is  not right what thee intend, the Lord cannot
wish thee to—”
“Be quie t, lass,”  he said, and his eyes rested on her with an
odd sort of gentleness. “Not yet. W e’ll wait for him.”
“For … him?”
“A ye, him.” W ith that, he lung ed across the counter and
seized her arm. She screamed a nd struggled but could not get
loose, an d he flipped up the flap in the counter and draggedher through, pushing her hard against the table of books so that
the stacks wobbled and fell with papery thumps.
“Thee cannot hope to—”
“I ha ve nay hope ,” he interrupted, quite calm. The ax was in
his belt; she saw it, bare and silver . “I need none.”
“Thee will surely die,” she said,  and made no ef fort to keep
her voice from trembling. “The soldiers will take thee.”
“Oh, ay e, they  will.” His fa ce softened a little then,
surprisingly . “I shall see my wife again.”
“I could  not counsel suicide,” s he said, edging as far away
as she could get. “But if thee d oes intend to die in any case,
why doe s thee insist upon—upo n staining thy death, thy soul,
with violence?”
“Y e think vengeance a stain?” The beetling white brows
lifted. “It is a glory , lass. My glory , my duty to my wife.”
“W ell, c ertainly not mine,” she said heatedly . “Why should I
be force d to serve thy beastly vengeance? I have done nothing
to thee or thine!”
He wasn’ t listening. Not to her , at least. He had turned a
little, hi s hand going to his ax , and smiled at the sound of
racing footsteps.
“Ian!” she shrieked. “Don’ t come in!!”
He came in, of course. She grasped a book and flung it at
the o ld m an’ s he ad, but he dodg ed it easily and grabbed her by
the wrist once more, his ax in hand.
“Let her go,” said Ian, hoars e with running. His chest
heaved and sweat was running d own his face; she could smell
him, even above the old man’ s musty reek. She jerked her
hand out of Arch Bug’ s clasp, speechless with horror .
“Don’ t kill him,” she said, to bo th of them. Neither of them
listened.
“I t old ye, did  I not?” Arch said to Ian. He sounded
reasonable, a teacher pointing out the proof of a theorem.Quod erat demonstrandum. Q.E.D .
“Get away from her ,” Ian said.
His hand  hovered above his knife, and Rachel, choking on
the words, said, “Ian! Don’ t. Thee must not. Please!”
Ian gave  her a look of furious confusion, but she held his
eyes, and his hand dropped away . He took a deep breath and
then a quick step to the side. Bu g whirled to keep him in range
of the ax, and I an slid fast in front of Rachel, screening her
with his body .
“Kill me, then,” he said deliberately to Bug. “Do it.”
“No!” Rachel said. “That is not what I—no!”
“Come here, lass,” Arch said, and put out his good hand,
beckoning. “Dinna be afraid. I’ll make it fast.”
Ian shoved her hard, so she s lammed into the wall and
knocked her head, and braced himself before her , crouched
and waiting. Unarmed, because she’d asked it.
“Y e’ll fucking kill me first,” he said, in a conversational
tone.
“No,” said Arch Bug. “Y e’ll wa it your turn.” The old eyes
measured him, cold and clever , and the ax moved a little,
eager .
Rachel shut her eyes and pra yed, finding no words but
praying all the same, in a frenzy of fear . She heard a sound and
opened them.
A long gray blur shot through the air , and in an instant, Arch
Bug wa s on the ground, Rollo on top of him, snarling and
snapping at the old man’ s throat. Old he might be but still hale,
and he had the strength of desperation. His good hand seized
the dog’ s throat, pushing back, holding of f the slavering jaws,
and a long, sinewy arm flung out, ax gripped in a maimed fist,
and rose.
“No!” Ian dove forward, knock ing Rollo aside, grappling
for t he hand tha t held the ax, but it was too late; the bladecame down with a chunk!  that made Rachel’ s vision go white,
and Ian screamed.
She was  moving  before she cou ld see, and screamed herself
when a hand suddenly seized her shoulder and hurled her
backward. She hit the wall and slid down it, landing winded
and openmouth ed. There was a writhing ball of limbs, fur ,
clothes, and blood on the floo r before her . A random shoe
cracked against her ankle and she scuttled away crabwise,
staring.
There seemed to be blood everywhere. Spattered against the
counter and the wall, smeared on the floor , and the back of
Ian’ s shirt was soaked with red and clinging so she saw the
muscles of his back straining beneath it. He was kneeling half
atop a struggling  Arch Bug, gra ppling one-handed for the ax,
his l eft arm han ging limp, and Arch was stabbing at his face
with stif fened fingers, trying to blind him, while Rollo darted
eellike and bristling into the ma ss of straining limbs, growling
and snapping. Fixed on this s pectacle, she was only dimly
aware of someone standing behind her but looked up,
uncomprehending, when his foot touched her bum.
“Is there something about you th at attracts men with axes?”
W illiam asked crossly . He sighted carefully along his pistol’ s
barrel, and fired. REDIVIVUS
 
I  W AS PINNING  up my hair for tea when there was a
scratch at the bedroom door .
“Come,” John called, in the act of pulling on his boots. The
door opened cautiously , revealing the odd little Cornish boy
who sometime s served as W illiam’ s orderly . He said
something to John, in what I assumed to be English, and
handed him a note. John nodded kindly and dismissed him.
“Could you understand what he said?” I asked curiously , as
he broke the seal with his thumb.
“Who? Oh, Colenso? No, not a word,” he said absently , and
pursed his lips in a soundless  whistle at whatever he was
reading.
“What is it?” I asked.
“A note from Colonel Graves,” he said, carefully refolding
it. I wonder if—”
There was another knock at the door , and John frowned at
it.
“Not now ,” he said. “Come back later .”
“W ell, I  would,” said a polite voice in a Scottish accent.
“But there’ s some ur gency , ken?”
The door opened, and Jamie st epped in, closing it behind
him. He  saw me, stood stock-still for an instant, and then I was
in hi s arms, the overwhelming warmth and size of him blotting
out in an instant everything around me.
I didn’ t know where my blood had gone. Every drop had
left my head, an d flickering lights danced before my eyes—
but none of it was supplying my legs, which had abruptly
dissolved under me.Jamie w as holding me up and kissing me, tasting of beer
and his beard stu bble rasping my face, his fingers buried in my
hair , and my breasts warmed and swelled against his chest.
“Oh, there it is,” I murmured.
“What?” he asked, breaking of f for a moment.
“My blood.” I touched my tingling lips. “Do that again.”
“Oh, I will,” he  assured me. “But there are a number of
English soldiers in the neighborhood, and I think—”
The sound of pounding came from below , and reality
snapped back into place like a ru bber band. I stared at him and
sat down very suddenly , my heart pounding like a drum.
“Why the bloody hell aren’ t you dead?”
He l ifted one shoulder in a brief shrug, the corner of his
mouth turning up. He was very thin, brown-faced, and dirty; I
could sm ell his sweat and the grime of long-worn clothes. And
the faint whif f of vomit—he’d not been long of f a boat.
“Delay for a few  seconds longer , Mr . Fraser , and you may
well go back to  being dead.” John had gone to the window ,
peering down into the street. He turned, and I saw that his face
was pale but glowing like a candle.
“A ye? They were a bit faster t han I thought, then,” Jamie
said ruefully , going to look out . He turned from the window
and smiled. “It’ s good to see ye, John—if only for the
moment.”
John’ s answerin g smile lit his eyes. He reached out a hand
and touc hed Jamie’ s arm, very briefly , as though wishing to
assure himself that he was in fact solid.
“Y es,” he said, reaching then for the door . “But come. Down
the back stair . O r there’ s a hatc hway to the attic—if you can
get onto the roof—”
Jamie looked at me, his heart in his eyes.
“I’ll come back,” he said. “Wh en I can.” He lifted a hand
toward me but stopped with a grimace, turned abruptly tofollow John, and they were gon e, the sound of their footsteps
nearly drowned  by the noises from downstairs. I heard the
door open below and a rough m ale voice demanding entrance.
Mrs. Fig g, bless  her intransigent little heart, was having none
of it.
I’d been sitting l ike Lot’ s wife, shocked into immobility , but
at the sound of M rs. Figg’ s rich expletives was galvanized into
action.
My min d was so stunned by the events of the last five
minutes that it was, paradoxically , quite clear . There was
simply n o room in it for thoughts, speculations, relief, joy , or
even worry—the only menta l faculty I still possessed,
apparently , was the ability to respond to an emer gency . I
snatched my cap, crammed it o n my head, and started for the
door , stuf fing my hair up into it as I went. Mrs. Figg and I
together could surely delay the soldiers long enough…
This sch eme would probably have worked, save that, as I
rushed o ut onto the landing, I ran into W illie—literally , as he
came bounding up the stair and collided heavily with me.
“Mother Claire! Where’ s Papa? There are—” He had seized
me b y th e arms  as I reeled backward, but his concern for me
was superseded by a sound from  the hall beyond the landing.
He glan ced toward the sound—then let go of me, his eyes
bulging.
Jamie stood at the end of the hall, some ten feet away; John
stood be side him, white as a sheet, and his eyes bulging as
much as W illie’ s were. This resemblance to W illie, striking as
it was, was c ompletely overwhelmed by Jamie’ s own
resemblance to the Ninth Earl of Ellesmere. W illiam’ s face
had hard ened and matured, losing all trace of childish softness,
and from both ends of the short hall, deep blue Fraser cat-eyes
stared out of th e bold, solid bones of the MacKenzies. And
W illie was old enough to shave on a daily basis; he knew  what
he looked like.
W illie’ s mouth worked, soundless with shock. He looked
wildly a t me, back at Jamie, bac k at me—and saw the truth inmy face.
“Who are you?” he said hoarsely , wheeling on Jamie.
I saw  Jamie draw himself slowly  upright, ignoring the noise
below .
“James Fraser ,” he said. His eyes were fixed on W illiam
with a burning i ntensity , as though to absorb every vestige of a
sight he would not see again.  “Y e kent me once as Alex
MacKenzie. At Helwater .”
W illiam blinke d, blinked again, and his gaze shifted
momentarily to John.
“And who—who the bloody  hell am I ?” he demanded , the
end of the question rising in a squeak.
John opened his mouth, but it was Jamie who answered.
“Y ou are a stinking Papist,” he  said, very precisely , “and
your baptismal name is James.” The ghost of regret crossed his
face and then w as gone. “It was  the only name I had a right to
give ye,” he said quietly , eyes on his son. “I’m sorry .”
W illie’ s left hand slapped at his  hip, reflexively looking for
a sword. Finding nothing, he slapped at his chest. His hands
were shaking so badly that he couldn’ t manage buttons; he
simply seized the fabric and rip ped open his shirt, reached in
and fum bled for something. He pulled it over his head and, in
the same motion, hurled the object at Jamie.
Jamie’ s reflexes brought his hand up automatically , and the
wooden rosary smacked into it, the beads swinging, tangled in
his fingers.
“God damn you, sir ,” W illie said, voice trembling. “God
damn you to he ll!” He half-turned blindly , then spun on his
heel to face John. “And you! Y ou knew , didn’ t you? God damn
you, too!”
“W illiam—” John reached out a hand to him, helpless, but
before h e could say anything more, there was a sound of
voices in the hall below and heavy feet on the stair .“Sassenach—keep him back!” Jamie’ s voice reached me
through the hubbub, sharp and c lear . By sheer reflex, I obeyed
and seized W illie by the arm. He glanced at me, mouth open,
completely nonplused.
“What—” His voice was drown ed by the thunder of feet on
the stairs and a triumphant whoop from the redcoat in front.
“There he is!”
Suddenly the landing was thronged with bodies pushing and
shoving, trying to get past W ill ie and me into the hallway . I
clung lik e grim death, despite the jostling and despite W illie’ s
own belated ef forts to free himself.
All at once the shouting stopped, and the press of bodies
relaxed just a bi t. My cap had been knocked over my eyes in
the strug gle, an d I let go of W illie’ s arm with one hand in
order to pull it of f. I dropped it on the floor . I had a feeling that
my status as a respectable woman wasn’ t going to be
important for much longer .
Brushing disheveled hair out of my eyes with a forearm, I
resumed my grip on W illie, though this was lar gely
unnecessary , as he seemed turne d to stone. The redcoats were
shifting on their feet, clearly re ady to char ge but inhibited by
something. I turned a little and  saw Jamie, one arm wrapped
around John Grey’ s throat, holding a pistol to John’ s temple.
“One step more,” he said, calmly but loud enough to be
easily h eard, “and I put a ball through his brain. D’ye think
I’ve anything to lose?”
Actually , given that W illie and myself were standing right in
front of him, I rather thought he did—but the soldiers didn’ t
know that, and judging from th e expression on W illie’ s face,
he w ould have torn his tongue  out by the roots rather than
blurt out the tru th. I also thought he didn’ t particularly care at
the moment if Jamie did  ki ll John and then die in a fusillade of
bullets. His arm was like iron under my grip; he’d have killed
them both himself, if he could.There w as a murmur of menac e from the men around me
and a shifting of bodies, men readying themselves—but no
one moved.
Jamie glanced once at me, face unreadable, then moved
toward the back stair , half-dragging John with him. They
vanished from view , and the co rporal next to me sprang into
action, turning and gesturing to his men on the stair .
“Round back! Hurry!”
“Hold!” W illie had come abruptly to life. Jerking his arm
away from my slackened grip , he turned on the corporal.
“Have you men posted at the back of the house?”
The corporal, noticing W illie’ s uniform for the first time,
straightened himself and saluted.
“No, sir . I didn’ t think—”
“Idiot,” W illie said shortly .
“Y es, sir . But we can catch the m if we hurry , sir .” He was
rocking up onto his toes as he spoke, in an agony to be gone.
W illie’ s fists were clenched, and so were his teeth. I could
see the thoughts crossing his face, as clearly as if they’d been
printed on his forehead in movable type.
He didn’ t think  Jamie would shoot Lord John  but wasn’ t
sure of it. If he s ent men after them, there was a decent chance
that the soldiers would catch up to them—which in turn meant
some chance that one or both w ould die. And if neither died
but Jam ie was captured—there was no telling what he might
say or to whom. T oo much risk.
W ith a faint sense of deja v u, I saw him make these
calculations, then turn to the corporal.
“Return to your commander ,” he said calmly . “Let him
know that Colonel Grey has been taken hostage by … by the
rebels, and ask him to notify all guard posts. I am to be
informed at once of any news.”There w as a displeased murmur from the soldiers on the
landing but nothing that could actually be called
insubordination, and even this  died away in the face of
W illiam’ s glare. The corporal’ s teeth set briefly in his lip, but
he saluted.
“Y es, sir .” He tu rned smartly on his heel, with a peremptory
gesture that sent the soldiers clumping heavily down the stair .
W illie watched them go. Then, as though suddenly noticing
it, he bent and p icked up my ca p from the floor . Kneading it
between his hands, he gave me  a long, speculative look. The
next little while was going to be interesting, I saw .
I did n’ t care. W hile I was quite sure that Jamie wouldn’ t
shoot John under any circumstances, I was under no
misapprehensions about the danger to either of them. I could
smell it;  the scent of sweat and gunpowder hung thick in the
air o n th e landin g, and the soles  of my feet still vibrated from
the slam of the heavy door below . None of it mattered.
He was alive .
So was I.
 
GREY W AS STILL IN his shir tsleeves; the rain had cut
through the cloth to his flesh.
Jamie w ent to the shed’ s wall and put his eye to a crack
between the boards. He raised a hand, adjuring silence, and
John stood waiting, shivering, as the sound of hooves and
voices went past. Who might it be? Not soldiers; there was no
sound o f brass, no jingling spu rs or arms. The sounds faded,
and Jamie turned back. He frow ned, noticing for the first time
that Grey was wet through, an d, taking the cloak from his
shoulders, wrapped it round him.
The cloak was damp, too, but made of wool, and Jamie’ s
body he at lingered in it. Grey closed his eyes for an instant,
embraced.“May I know w hat it is that you’ve been doing?” Grey
inquired, opening them.
“When?” Jamie gave him a half  smile. “Just now , or since I
saw ye last?”
“Just now .”
“Ah.” Jamie sat down on a barrel and leaned back—
gingerly—against the wall.
Grey noted with interest that the sound was nearly “ach,”
and ded uced that Fraser had sp ent much of his time of late
with Sco ts. He also observed th at Fraser ’ s lips were pursed in
thought. The slanted blue eyes cut in his direction.
“Y e’re sure ye want to know? It’ s likely better if ye don’ t.”
“I put considerable trust in your judgment and discretion,
Mr . Fras er ,” Gr ey said politely , “but somewhat more in my
own. I’m sure you will for give me.”
Fraser appeared to find that funny; the wide mouth
twitched, but he nodded and pro duced a small packet, sewn in
oilskin, from inside his shirt.
“I was observed  in the act of ac cepting this from my foster
son,” he said. “The person wh o saw me followed me to an
ordinary , then went to fetch the nearest company of soldiers
whilst I was ref reshing myself. Or so I assume. I saw them
coming down the street, supposed that it might be myself they
sought, and… left.”
“Y ou ar e familiar , I suppose, with the trope regarding the
guilty who flee w hen no man pu rsues? How do you know they
were aft er you to begin with and  not merely interested by your
abrupt departure?”
The half smile flickered again, this time tinged with rue.
“Call it the instinct of the hunted.”
“Indeed. I am surprised that you allowed yourself to be
cornered, as it were, your instincts being what they are.”“A ye, w ell, even foxes grow ol d, do they not?” Fraser said
dryly .
“Why the devil did you co me to my house?” Grey
demanded, sudd enly irritable. “Why did you not run for the
edge of town?”
Fraser looked surprised.
“My wif e,” he said simply , and it occurred to Grey , with a
pang, th at it had not been inadv ertence or lack of caution that
had impelled Jamie Fraser to c ome to his house, even with
soldiers on his heels. He’d come for her . For Claire.
Jesus!  He thought with sudden panic. Clair e!
But ther e was no time to say anything, even could he have
thought what to say . Jamie rose and, taking the pistol from his
belt, beckoned him to come.
They went down an alleyway , then through the backyard of
a pu b, squeezing past the open brew tub, its surface pocked by
falling r ain. Smelling faintly of hops, they emer ged into a
street and slowed down. Jamie had gripped his wrist
throughout this journey , and Lord John felt his hand beginning
to go  numb but said nothing. They passed two or three groups
of soldie rs, but he walked with Jamie, matching him stride for
stride, keeping his eyes front. T here was no conflict of heart
and duty here: t o shout for help might result in Jamie’ s death;
it almos t surely would result in the death of at least one
soldier .
Jamie kept his pistol out of sight, half hidden in his coat but
in his hand, pu tting it back into his belt only when they
reached the place where he had left his horse. It was a private
house; h e left Grey by himself o n the porch for a moment with
a muttered “Stay here,” while he disappeared inside.
A st rong sense o f self-preservat ion ur ged Lord John to run,
but he didn’ t and was rewarde d when Jamie emer ged again
and smiled a little, seeing him. So you wer en’ t sur e I’d stay?
Fair enough , Grey thought. He hadn’ t been sure, either .“Come on, then,” Jamie said, and with a jerk of his head
beckoned Grey to follow him to the stable, where he quickly
saddled and bridled a second ho rse, handing the reins to Grey
before mounting his own.
“Pr o forma,”  he said politely to Grey , and, drawing the
pistol, p ointed it at him. “Shoul d anyone ask later . Y e’ll come
with me, and I will  shoot you, should ye make any move to
give me  away before we’re out of the city . W e are understood,
I hope?”
“W e are,” Grey replied briefl y , and swung up into the
saddle.
He rode a little ahead of Jamie, conscious of the small round
spot between his shoulder bla des. Pr o forma  or not, he’d
meant it.
He won dered w hether Jamie would shoot him in the chest
or simp ly break his neck whe n he found out. Likely bare
hands, he thought. It was a visceral sort of thing, sex.
The idea  of concealing the truth hadn’ t seriously occurred to
him. He didn’ t k now Claire Fraser nearly as well as Jamie did
—but he knew b eyond the shadow of a doubt that she couldn’ t
keep sec rets. Not from anyone. And certainly not from Jamie,
restored to her from the dead.
Of course, it mi ght be some tim e before Jamie was able to
speak to  her again. But he knew Jamie Fraser infinitely better
than he knew Cl aire—and the one thing he was certain of was
that nothing whatever would sta nd long between Jamie and his
wife.
The rain  had passed, and the sun shone on the puddles as
they splashed through the streets. There was a sense of
movement all around, agitatio n in the air . The army was
quartered in Germantown, but there were always soldiers in
the city , and their knowledge of imminent departure,
anticipation of the return to cam paigning, infected the city like
a plague, a fever passing invisibly from man to man.A pa trol on the road out of the city stopped them but waved
them on when G rey gave his name and rank. His companion
he introduced as Mr . Alexander MacKenzie and thought he
felt a vibration of humor from said companion. Alex
MacKenzie was the name Jamie had used at Helwater—as
Grey’ s prisoner .
Oh, God , Grey thought suddenly , leading the way out of
sight of the patrol. W illiam . In the shock of the confrontation
and their abrupt departure, he hadn’ t had time to think. If Grey
were dead, what would W illiam do?
His thoughts buzzed like a swa rm of hiving bees, crawling
over one  another in a seething mass; impossible to focus on
one for more than an instant bef ore it was lost in the deafening
hum. Denys Randall-Isaacs. Ric hardson. W ith Grey gone, he
would almost certainly move to arrest Claire. W illiam would
try to stop him, if he knew . But W illiam didn’ t know what
Richardson was…. Grey didn’ t know , either , not for sure.
Henry a nd his Negro lover—Gre y knew they were lovers now ,
had seen it in both their faces—Dottie and her Quaker: if the
twin sho cks didn’ t kill Hal, h e’d be on a ship bound for
America in nothing flat, and that  would certainly kill him.
Percy . Oh, Jesus, Percy .
Jamie was in front of him now , leading the way . There were
little gro ups of people on the road: mostly farmers coming in
with wagonloads of supplies for the army . They looked
curiously at Jamie, much more so at Grey . But no one stopped
or c hallenged them, and an hou r later Jamie led them down a
trace of f the main road and into a small woodland dripping and
steaming from the recent rain . There was a stream; Jamie
swung d own of f his horse and left it to drink, and Grey did
likewise, feeling strangely unreal, as though the leather of
saddle and reins was foreign to his skin, as though rain-chilled
air passe d throu gh him, body a nd bones, rather than around
him.
Jamie crouched by the stream and drank, then splashed
water ov er his head and face and stood up, shaking himself
like a dog.“Thank ye, John,” he said. “I h adna time to say it earlier .
I’m verra grateful to ye.”
“Thank me? It w as hardly my choice. Y ou abducted me at
gunpoint.”
Jamie smiled; the tension of th e last hour had eased, and
with it the lines of his face.
“Not that. For taking care of Claire, I mean.”
“Claire,” he repeated. “Ah. Y es. That.”
“A ye, that,” Jamie said patiently , and bent a little to peer at
him in concern. “Are ye quite well, John? Y e look a wee bit
peaked.”
“Peaked,” Grey muttered. Hi s heart was beating very
erratically; perhaps it would conveniently stop. He waited for
a mome nt to allow it to do this if it liked, but it went on
cheerfully thumping away . No help, then. Jamie was still
looking quizzically at him. Best to get it over quickly .
He took  a deep breath, shut his eyes, and commended his
soul to God.
“I have had carnal knowledge of your wife,” he blurted.
He had expecte d to die more or less instantaneously upon
this utterance, but everything continued just as usual. Birds
continued chirping in the trees, and the rip and slobber of the
horses champing  grass was the only sound above that of the
rushing water . He opened on e eye to find Jamie Fraser
standing there regarding him, head to one side.
“Oh?” said Jamie curiously . “Why?” BRED IN THE BONE
 
I  … UH … IF you’ll excuse me for a moment…” I
backed s lowly t o the door of my room and, seizing the knob,
whipped inside and shut the d oor , leaving W illie to recover
himself in decent privacy . And not only W illie.
I pressed myself against the door as though pursued by
werewolves, my blood thundering in my ears.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I whispered. Something like a
geyser r ose up inside me and burst in my head, the spray of it
sparkling with sunlight and diam onds. I was dimly aware that
it had come on to rain outsid e, and dirty gray water was
streaking the windowpanes, but  that didn’ t matter a bit to the
ef fervescence inside me.
I stood still for several minutes, eyes closed, not thinking
anything, just murmuring, “Thank you, God,” over and over ,
soundlessly .
A te ntative rap o n the door jarre d me out of this trance, and
I turned to open it. W illiam stood on the landing.
His shirt  still hung open where he’d torn it, and I could see
the pulse beat fast in the holl ow of his throat. He bowed
awkwardly to me, trying to achi eve a smile but notably failing
in the attempt. He gave it up.
“I am  not sure what to call you,” he said. “Under the—the
circumstances.”
“Oh,” I said, mildly disconcerted. “W ell. I don’ t think—at
least I hope  that the relationship between you and me hasn’ t
changed.” I realized, with a sudden dampening of my
euphoria, that it very well might  now , and the thought gave me
a deep pang. I w as very fond of him, for his own sake, as well
as for his father ’ s—or fathers’, as the case might be.“Could you bring yourself to go on calling me ‘Mother
Claire,’ do you think? Just unt il we can think of something
more… appropr iate,” I added ha stily , seeing reluctance narrow
his eyes . “After all, I suppose  I am still your stepmother .
Regardless of the … er… the situation.”
He turned that over for a moment, then nodded briefly .
“May I come in? I wish to talk to you.”
“Y es, I suppose you do.”
If I hadn’ t know n both his father s, I would have marveled at
his abili ty to suppress the rage a nd confusion he had so clearly
exhibited a quarter of a hour ago . Jamie did it by instinct, John
by long experie nce—but both of them had an iron power of
will, and whether W illiam’ s wa s bred in the bone or acquired
by example, he most assuredly had one.
“Shall I send for something?” I asked. “A little brandy? It’ s
good for shock.”
He shook his head. He wouldn’ t sit—I didn’ t think he could
—but leaned against the wall.
“I suppose that you knew? Y ou could scarcely help but
notice the resemblance, I suppose,” he added bitterly .
“It is  ra ther striking,” I agreed, with  caution. “Y es, I knew .
My husband told me”—I groped for some delicate way of
putting it— “the, um, circumstances of your birth some years
ago.”
And just how was I  going to describe those circumstances?
It hadn’ t exactly escaped me that there were a few awkward
explanations to be made—but  caught up in the alarms of
Jamie’ s sudden reappearance and escape and the giddiness of
my own subsequent euphoria, it somehow hadn’ t occurred to
me that I would be the person making them.
I’d seen the litt le shrine he kept in his room, the double
portrait of his two mothers—both so heartbreakingly young. If
age was good fo r anything, surely it should have given me the
wisdom to deal with this?How cou ld I tell him that he was the result of an impulsive,
self-willed youn g girl’ s blackmail? Let alone tell him that he
had bee n the cause of both his legal parents’ deaths? And if
anyone was going to tell him what his birth had meant to
Jamie, it was going to have to be  Jamie.
“Y our mother…” I began, and hesitated. Jamie would have
taken the blame solely upon himself rather than blacken
Geneva’ s memory to her son, I knew . I wasn’ t having that.
“She w as reckless,” W illiam said, watching me closely .
“Everybody says she was reckless. W as it—I suppose I only
want to know , was it rape?”
“God, no!” I said, horrified, and saw his fists uncurl a little.
“That’ s good,” he said, and le t out the breath he’d been
holding. “Y ou’re sure he didn’ t lie to you?”
“I’m sur e.” He and his father might be able to hide their
feelings; I certainly couldn’ t, an d while I would never be able
to make a living playing cards, having a glass face was
occasionally a good thing. I stood still and let him see that I
told the truth.
“Do you think—did he say—” He stopped and swallowed,
hard. “Did they love each other , do you think?”
“As much as the y could, I think, ” I said softly . “They hadn’ t
much tim e, only the one night.” I ached for him and would
have lik ed so much to take him  in my arms and comfort him.
But he was a m an, and a youn g one, fierce about his pain.
He’d de al with it as he could, a nd I thought it would be some
years—if ever—before he learned to share it.
“Y es,” h e said, and pressed his lips together , as though he’d
been going to s ay something else and thought better of it.
“Y es, I— I see.”  It was quite clear from his tone that he didn’ t
but, reel ing under the impact of  realization, had no idea what
to ask next, let alone what to do with the information he had.
“I was born alm ost exactly nine months after my parents’
marriage,” he said, giving me a  hard look. “Did they deceivemy father? Or did my mother play the whore with her groom
before she wed?”
“That might be a bit harsh,” I began.
“No, it isn’ t,” he snapped. “Which was it?”
“Y our fa—Jamie. He’d never deceive another man in his
marriage.” Except Frank , I thought, a little wildly . But, of
course, he hadn’ t known at first that he was doing it…
“My father ,” he said abruptly . “ Pa—Lord John, I mean. He
knew—knows?”
“Y es.” Thin ice again. I didn’ t think he had any idea that
Lord John had married Isobel principally for his sake—and
Jamie’ s—but d idn’ t want him going anywhere near the
question of Lord John’ s motives.
“All of them,” I said firmly , “al l four of them; they wanted
what was best for you.”
“Best for me,” he repeated bleakly . “Right.” His knuckles
had gon e white again, and h e gave me a look through
narrowed eyes that I recognized all too well: a Fraser about to
go of f with a bang. I also knew perfectly well that there was no
way of stopping  one from deto nating but had a try anyway ,
putting out a hand to him.
“W illiam,” I began. “Believe me—”
“I do ,” he said. “Don’ t bloody tell me any more. God damn
it!” And , whirling on his heel, he drove his fist through the
paneling with a thud that shook  the room, wrenched his hand
out of the hole h e’d made, and stormed out. I heard crunching
and rending as he paused to kic k out several of the balusters
on t he l anding and rip a length of the stair railing of f, and I
made it to the door in time to s ee him draw back a four -foot
chunk of wood o ver his shoulder , swing, and strike the crystal
chandelier that hung over the stairwell in an explosion of
shattering glass. For a moment, he teetered on the open edge
of the landing and I thought he would fall, or hurl himself of f,
but he staggered back from the edge and threw the chunk ofwood like a javelin at the remnant of the chandelier with a
burst of breath that might have been a grunt or a sob.
Then he rushed headlong down the stairs, thumping his
wounded fist at intervals against the wall, where it left bloody
smudges. He hit the front door with his shoulder , rebounded,
jerked it open, and went out like a locomotive.
I stood frozen on the landing in the midst of chaos and
destruction, gripping the edge of the broken balustrade. T iny
rainbows dance d on walls and ceiling like multicolored
dragonflies spru ng out of the shattered crystal that littered the
floor .
Something moved; a shadow fell across the floor of the hall
below . A small, dark figure walk ed slowly in through the open
doorway . Puttin g back the hoo d of her cloak, Jenny Fraser
Murray looked round at the devastation, then up at me, her
face a pale oval glimmering with humor .
“Like fa ther , like son, I see,” she remarked. “God help us
all.” THE HOUR OF THE WOLF
 
T HE BRITISH ARMY was leaving Philadelphia. The
Delaware was choked with ships, and the ferries ran nonstop
from the  end of State Street across to Cooper ’ s Point. Three
thousand T ories  were leaving the city , too, afraid to stay
without the army’ s protection; G eneral Clinton had promised
them passage, though their baggage made a dreadful mess—
stacked on the docks, crammed into the ferries—and occupied
a go od d eal of space on board the ships. Ian and Rachel sat on
the riverbank below Philadelphia, under the shade of a
drooping sycamore, and watched an artillery emplacement
being disassembled, a hundred yards away .
The artillerymen worked in shirtsleeves, their blue coats
folded on the grass nearby , removing the guns that had
defended the city , preparing them for shipping. They were in
no h urry and to ok no particular notice of spectators; it didn’ t
matter now .
“Does thee know where they are going?” Rachel asked.
“A ye, I do. Fer gus says they’r e going north, to reinforce
New Y ork.”
“Thee h as seen him?” She turned her head, interested, and
the leaf shadows flickered over her face.
“A ye, he came home last night ; he’ll be safe now , wi’ the
T ories and the army gone.”
“Safe,” she said, with a skeptical intonation. “As safe as
anyone may be, in times like these, thee means.” She’d taken
of f her cap bec ause of the heat and brushed the damp, dark
hair back from her cheeks.
He s miled, but said nothing. S he knew as well as he did
what the illusions of safety were.“Fer gus says the British mean to cut the colonies in half,”
he remarked. “Separate north fr om south and deal with them
separately .”
“Does he? And how does he know this?” she asked,
surprised.
“A British of ficer named Randall-Isaacs; he talks to
Fer gus.”
“He is a spy , thee means? For which side?” Her lips
compressed a little. He wasn’ t s ure where spying fell, in terms
of Quaker philosophy , but didn’ t care to ask just now . It was a
tender subject, Quaker philosophy .
“I shouldna like to have to guess,” he said. “He passes
himself of f as an American agent, but that may be all
moonshine. Y e canna trust anyone in wartime, aye?”
She turn ed round to look at him at that, hands behind her
back as she leaned against the sycamore.
“Can thee not?”
“I trust you,” he said. “And your brother .”
“And thy dog,” she said, with a glance at Rollo, writhing on
the grou nd to scratch his back. “Thy aunt and uncle, too, and
Fer gus and his wife? That seem s a fair number of friends.”
She lean ed towa rd him, squinting in concern. “Does thy arm
pain thee?”
“Och, it’ s well enough.” He shrugged with his good
shoulder , smilin g. His arm did hurt, but the sling helped. The
ax blow  had nearly severed his  left arm, cutting through the
flesh an d breaki ng the bone. Hi s aunt said he had been lucky ,
in th at it  had not damaged the te ndons. The body is plastic, she
said. Muscle would heal, and so would bone.
Rollo’ s h ad; there was no trace of stif fness from the gunshot
wound, and while his muzzle  was growing white, he slid
through the bushes like an eel, snif fing industriously .
Rachel sighed and gave him a d irect look under dark, level
brows.“Ian, the e is thinking something  painful, and I would much
prefer thee tells me what it is. Has something happened?”
A great many things had happened, were happening all
around them, would continue to  happen. How could he tell her
… ? And yet he couldn’ t not.
“The wo rld is turning upside down,” he blurted. “And you
are t he only constant thing. The only thing I—that binds me to
the earth.”
Her eyes softened.
“Am I?”
“Y e ken verra w ell that you are,” he said gruf fly . He looked
away , hi s heart pounding. T oo la te, he thought, with a mixture
of disma y and elation. He’d beg un to speak; he couldn’ t stop
now , no matter what might come of it.
“I know what I am,” he said, awkward but determined. “I
would tu rn Quaker for your sake, Rachel, but I ken I’m not
one in my heart; I think I nev er could be. And I think ye
wouldna want me to say words I dinna mean or pretend to be
something I canna be.”
“No,” she said softly . “I would not want that.”
He o pened his m outh but couldn’ t find more words to say .
He swallowed, dry-mouthed, waiting. She swallowed, too; he
saw the slight m ovement of her throat, soft and brown; the sun
had beg un to touch her again, t he nut-brown maiden ripening
from winter ’ s pale bloom.
The artil lerymen loaded the last of the cannon into a wagon,
hitched their limbers to teams o f oxen, and with laughter and
raucous talk moved up the road toward the ferry point. When
they were gone at last, a silence  fell. There were still noises—
the sound of th e river , the rustle of the sycamore, and far
beyond, the bellowings and cras hings of an army on the move,
the soun d of violence impending. But between them, there was
silence.I’ve lost , he thought, but her head was still bent in thought.
Is sh e m aybe pr aying? Or only t rying to think how to send me
away?
Whichever it was, she lifted he r head and stood up, away
from the tree. S he pointed at Rollo, who was lying couchant
now , motionless but alert, yellow eyes following every
movement of a fat robin foraging in the grass.
“That dog is a wolf, is he not?”
“A ye, well, mostly .”
A small flash of hazel told him not to quibble.
“And yet he is  thy boon companion, a creature of rare
courage and af fection, and altogether a worthy being?”
“Oh, aye,” he said with more confidence. “He is.”
She gave him an even look.
“Thee is a wolf,  too, and I know it. But thee is my wolf, and
best thee know that.”
He’d sta rted to burn when she spoke, an ignition swift and
fierce as the lighting of one of his cousin’ s matches. He put out
his h and, palm f orward, to her , still cautious lest she, too, burst
into flame.
“What I said to ye, before … that I kent ye loved me—”
She step ped forward and pressed her palm to his, her small,
cool fingers linking tight.
“What I  say to t hee now is that I do love thee. And if thee
hunts at night, thee will come home.”
Under th e sycamore, the dog yaw ned and laid his muzzle on
his paws.
“And sleep at thy feet,” Ian whispered, and gathered her in
with his one good arm, both of them blazing bright as day . 
 AUTHOR’S NOTES
 