Part One
A SWARM OF BEES IN THE CARCASS
OF A LION
1
The Mackenzies Are Here
Fraser’s Ridge, Colony of North Carolina
June 17, 1779
THERE WAS A STONE under my right buttock, but I didn’t want to move.
The tiny heartbeat under my fingers was soft and stubborn, the fleeting jolts
life. The space between them was infinity, my connection to the dark sky and
the rising flame.
“Move your arse a bit, Sassenach,” said a voice in my ear. “I need to
scratch my nose and ye’re sitting on my hand.” Jamie twitched his fingers
under me, and I moved, turning toward him as I shifted and resettled, keeping
my hold on three-year-old Mandy, bonelessly asleep in my arms.
He smiled at me over Jem’s tousled head and scratched his nose. It must
have been past midnight, but the fire was still high, and the light sparked off
the stubble of his beard and glowed as softly in his eyes as in his grandson’s
red hair and the shadowed folds of the worn plaid he’d wrapped about them
both.
On the other side of the fire, Brianna laughed, in the quiet way people
laugh in the middle of the night with sleeping children near.
She laid her head on Roger’s shoulder, her eyes half closed. She looked
completely exhausted, her hair unwashed and tangled, the firelight scooping
deep hollows in her face … but happy.
“What is it ye find funny, 
a nighean
?” Jamie asked, shifting Jem into a
more comfortable position. Jem was fighting as hard as he could to stay
awake, but was losing the fight. He gaped enormously and shook his head,
blinking like a dazed owl.
“Wha’s funny?” he repeated, but the last word trailed off, leaving him with
his mouth half open and a glassy stare.His mother giggled, a lovely girlish sound, and I felt Jamie’s smile.
“I just asked Daddy if he remembered a Gathering we went to, years ago.
The clans were all called at a big bonfire and I handed Daddy a burning
branch and told him to go down to the fire and say the MacKenzies were
there.”
“Oh.” Jem blinked once, then twice, looked at the fire blazing in front of
us, and a slight frown formed between his soft red brows. “Where are we
now?”
“Home,” Roger said firmly, and his eyes met mine, then passed to Jamie.
“For good.”
Jamie let out the same breath I’d been holding since the afternoon, when
those four figures had appeared suddenly in the clearing below, and we had
flown down the hill to meet them. There had been one moment of joyous,
wordless explosion as we all flung ourselves at one another, and then the
explosion had widened as Amy Higgins came out of her cabin, summoned by
the noise, to be followed by Bobby, then Aidan—who had whooped at sight
of Jem and tackled him, knocking him flat—with Orrie and little Rob.
Jo Beardsley had been in the woods nearby, heard the racket, and come to
see … and within what seemed like moments, the clearing was alive with
people. Six households were within reach of the news before sundown; the
rest would undoubtedly hear of it tomorrow.
The instant outpouring of Highland hospitality had been wonderful;
women and girls had run back to their cabins and fetched whatever they had
baking or boiling for supper, the men had gathered wood and—at Jamie’s
behest—piled it on the crest where the outline of the New House stood, and
we had welcomed home our family in style, surrounded by friends.
Hundreds of questions had been asked of the travelers: Where had they
come from? How was the journey? What had they seen? No one had asked if
they were happy to be back; that was taken for granted by everyone.
Neither Jamie nor I had asked any questions. Time enough for that—and
now that we were alone, Roger had just answered the only one that truly
mattered.
The 
why
 of that answer, though … I felt a stirring of the hair on my nape.
“Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof,” I murmured into Mandy’s
black curls, and kissed her tiny, sleep-deaf ear. Once more, my fingers
probed inside her clothes—filthy from travel, but very well made—and foundthe hairline scar between her ribs, the whisper of the surgeon’s knife that had
saved her life two years ago, in a place so far from me.
It thumped peacefully along, that brave little heart under my fingertips, and
I blinked back tears—not for the first time today, and surely not for the last.
“I was right, aye?” Jamie said, and I realized he’d said it for the second
time.
“Right about what?”
“About needing more room,” he said patiently, and turned to gesture at the
invisible rectangle of the stone foundation, the only tangible trace so far of
the New House. The footprint of the original Big House was still visible as a
dark mark beneath the grass of the clearing below, but it had nearly faded
away. Perhaps by the time the New House was finished, it would be only a
memory.
Brianna yawned like a lion, then pushed back her tangled mane and
blinked sleepily into the dark.
“We’ll probably be sleeping in the root cellar this winter,” she said, then
laughed.
“O ye o’ little faith,” Jamie said, not at all perturbed. “The timber’s sawn,
split, and milled. We’ll have walls and floors and windows aplenty before
snowfall. Maybe no glass in them yet,” he added fairly. “But that can wait ’til
the spring.”
“Mmm.” Brianna blinked again and shook her head, then stood up to look.
“Have you got a hearthstone?”
“I have. A lovely wee piece of serpentine—the green stone, ken?”
“I remember. And do you have a piece of iron to put under it?”
Jamie looked surprised.
“Not yet, no. I’ll find that when we bless the hearth, though.”
“Well, then.” She sat up straight and fumbled among the folds of her cloak,
emerging with a large canvas bag, clearly heavy and full of assorted objects.
She delved about in this for a few moments, then pulled out something that
gleamed black in the firelight.
“Use that, Da,” she said, handing it across to Jamie.
He looked at it for a moment, smiled, and handed it to me.
“Aye, that’ll do,” he said. “Ye brought it for the hearth?”
“It” was a smooth black metal chisel, six inches long and heavy in my
hand, with the word “Craftsman” imprinted in the head.“Well … for 
a
 hearth,” Bree said, smiling at him. She put a hand on
Roger’s leg. “At first, I thought we might build a house ourselves, when we
could. But—” She turned and looked across the darkness of the Ridge into
the vault of the cold, pure sky, where the Great Bear shone overhead. “We
might not manage before winter. And since I imagine we’ll be imposing
ourselves on you …” She looked up from under her lashes at her father, who
snorted.
“Dinna be daft, lass. If it’s our house, it’s yours, and ye ken that well
enough.” He raised a brow at her. “And the more hands there are to help with
the building of it, the better. D’ye want to see the shape of it?”
Not waiting for an answer, he disentangled Jem from his plaid, eased him
down on the ground beside me, and stood up. He pulled one of the burning
branches from the fire and jerked his head in invitation toward the invisible
rectangle of the new foundation.
Bree was still drowsy, but game; she smiled at me and shook her head
good-naturedly, then hunched her cloak over her shoulders and got up.
“Coming?” she said to Roger.
He smiled up at her and waved a hand, shooing her along. “I’m too
knackered to see straight, love. I’ll wait ’til the morning.”
Bree touched his shoulder lightly and set off after the light of Jamie’s
torch, muttering something under her breath as she stumbled over a rock in
the grass, and I laid a fold of my cloak over Jem, who hadn’t stirred.
Roger and I sat quiet, listening to their voices move away into the dark—
and then sat quiet for a few moments longer, listening to the fire and the
night, and each other’s thoughts.
For them to have risked the dangers of the travel, let alone the dangers of
this time and this place … whatever had happened in their own time …
He gazed into my eyes, saw what I was thinking, and sighed.
“Aye, it was bad. Bad enough,” he said quietly. “Even so—we might have
gone back to deal with it. I wanted to. But we were afraid there wasn’t
anyone there Mandy could feel strongly enough.”
“Mandy?” I looked down at the solid little body, limp in sleep. “Feel
whom? And what do you mean, ‘gone back’?” Wait—” I lifted a hand in
apology. “No, don’t try to tell me now; you’re worn out, and there’s time
enough.” I paused to clear my throat. “And it’s enough that you’re here.”
He smiled then, a real smile, though with the weariness of miles and years
and terrible things behind it.“Aye,” he said. “It is.”
We were silent for a time, and Roger’s head nodded; I thought he was
nearly asleep, and was gathering my legs under me to rise and collect
everyone for bed when he lifted his head again.
“One thing …”
“Yes?”
“Have you met a man—ever—named William Buccleigh MacKenzie? Or
maybe Buck MacKenzie?”
“I recall the name,” I said slowly. “But—”
Roger rubbed a hand over his face and slowly down his throat, to the white
scar left by a rope.
“Well … he’s the man who got me hanged, to begin with. But he’s also my
four-times great-grandfather. Neither one of us knew that at the time he got
me hanged,” he said, almost apologetically.
“Jesus H …. Oh, I beg your pardon. Are you still a sort of minister?”
He smiled at that, though the marks of exhaustion carved runnels in his
face.
“I don’t think it wears off,” he said. “But if ye were about to say ‘Jesus H.
Roosevelt Christ,’ I wouldn’t mind it. Appropriate to the situation, ye might
say.”
And in a few words, he told me how Buck MacKenzie had ended in
Scotland in 1980, only to travel back with Roger in an effort to find Jem.
“There’s a great deal more to it than that,” he assured me. “But the end of
it—for now—is that we left him in Scotland. In 1739. With … erm … his
mother.”
“With 
Geillis
?” My voice rose involuntarily, and Mandy twitched and
made small cranky noises. I patted her hastily and shifted her to a more
comfortable position. “Did 
you
 meet her?”
“Yes. Ehm … interesting woman.” There was a mug on the ground beside
him, still half full of beer; I could smell the yeast and bitter hops. He picked it
up and seemed to be debating whether to drink it or pour it over his head, but
in the event took a gulp and set it down.
“I—we—wanted him to come with us. Of course there was the risk, but
we’d managed to find enough gemstones, I thought we could make it, all
together. And … his wife is here.” He waved vaguely toward the distant
forest. “In America, I mean. Now.”“I … dimly recall that, from your genealogy.” Though experience had
taught me the limits of belief in anything recorded on paper.
Roger nodded, drank more beer, and cleared his throat, hard. His voice was
hoarse and cracking from tiredness.
“I take it you forgave him for—” I gestured briefly at my own throat. I
could see the line of the rope and the shadow of the small scar I’d left on his
when I did the emergency tracheotomy with a penknife and the amber
mouthpiece of a pipe.
“I loved him,” he said simply. A faint smile showed through the black
stubble and the veil of tiredness. “How often do you get the chance to love
someone who gave ye their blood, their life, and them never knowing who ye
might be, or even if ye’d exist at all?”
“Well, you do take chances when you have children,” I said, and laid a
hand gently on Jem’s head. It was warm, the hair unwashed but soft under
my fingers. He and Mandy smelled like puppies, a sweet, thick animal scent,
rich with innocence.
“Yes,” Roger said softly. “You do.”
Rustling grass and voices behind us heralded the return of the engineers—
they were deep in a discussion of indoor plumbing.
“Aye, maybe,” Jamie was saying, dubious. “But I dinna ken if we can get
all the things ye’ll need for it before the cold weather comes. I’ve just started
digging a new privy, though; that’ll see us through for the time being. Then
in the spring …”
Brianna said something in reply that I didn’t catch, and then they were
there, caught in the fire’s halo, so alike to look at with the light glimmering
on their long-nosed faces and ruddy hair. Roger stirred, getting his feet under
him, and I stood up carefully, Mandy limp as her rag doll, Esmeralda.
“It’s wonderful, Mama,” Bree said, and hugged me to her, her body strong
and straight and softly powerful, encompassing me, Mandy between us. She
held me tight for a moment, then bent her head and kissed my forehead.
“I love you,” she said, her voice soft and husky.
“I love you, too, darling,” I said around the lump in my throat, and touched
her face, so tired and radiant.
She stepped back then and took Mandy from me, swinging her up against a
shoulder with practiced ease.
“Come on, pal,” she said to Jem, gently nudging him with the toe of her
boot. “It’s time for bed.” He made a sleepy, interrogative noise and half-liftedhis head, then collapsed again, soundly asleep.
“Dinna fash, I’ll get him.” Roger waved Jamie away and, stooping, rolled
Jem into his arms and stood up with a grunt. “D’ye mean to go down, too?”
he asked. “I can come back and take care of the fire, as soon as I’ve put Jem
down.”
Jamie shook his head and put an arm around me.
“Nay, dinna trouble yourself. We’ll maybe sit awhile and see the fire out.”
They moved off slowly down the hill, shambling like cattle, to the
accompaniment of clanking noises from Brianna’s bag. The Higgins cabin,
where they’d spend the night, showed as a tiny glimmer in the dark; Amy
must have lit a lamp and pulled back the hide that covered the window.
Jamie was still holding the chisel in his hand; eyes fixed on his daughter’s
disappearing back, he raised it and kissed it, as he’d once kissed the haft of
his dirk before me, and I knew this, too, was a sacred promise.
He put the chisel away in his sporran and took me in his arms, my back to
him, so we could both watch them out of sight. He rested his chin on top of
my head.
“What are ye thinking, Sassenach?” he said softly. “I saw your eyes; there
are clouds in them.”
I settled against him, feeling his warmth a bulwark at my back.
“The children,” I said, hesitant. “They—I mean, it’s 
wonderful
 that they’re
here. To think we’d never see them again, and suddenly …” I swallowed,
overcome by the dizzying joy of finding myself—finding 
us
—once again and
so unexpectedly part of that remarkable thing, a family. “To be able to see
Jem and Mandy grow up … to have Bree and Roger again …”
“Aye,” he said, a smile in his voice. “But?”
It took a moment, both to gather my thoughts and to put them into words.
“Roger said that something bad had happened, in their own time. And you
know it must have been something truly terrible.”
“Aye,” he said, his voice hardening a little. “Brianna said the same. But
ken, 
a nighean,
 they’ve lived in this time before. They do know, I mean—
what it’s like, what it 
will
 be like.”
The ongoing war, he meant, and I squeezed his hands, clasped about my
middle.
“I don’t think they do,” I said softly, looking down across the broad cove.
They had vanished into the darkness. “Nobody knows who hasn’t been
there.” To war.“Aye,” he said, and held me, silent, his hand resting on my side, over the
scar of the wound made by a musket ball at Monmouth.
“Aye,” he said again after a long moment. “I ken what ye’re saying,
Sassenach. I thought my heart would burst when I saw Brianna and kent it
was really her, and the bairns … but for all the joy of it … see, I missed them
cruelly, but I could take comfort in thinking they were safe. Now—”
He stopped and I felt his heart beating against me, slow and steady. He
took a deep breath, and the fire popped suddenly, a pocket of pitch exploding
in sparks that disappeared into the night. A small reminder of the war that
was rising, slowly, all around us.
“I look at them,” he said, “and my heart is suddenly filled with …”
“Terror,” I whispered, holding tight to him. “Sheer terror.”
“Aye,” he said. “That.”
WE STOOD FOR a bit, watching the darkness below, letting joy return. The
window of the Higgins cabin still glowed softly on the far side of the clearing
below.
“Nine people in that cabin,” I said. I took a deep breath of the cool, spruce-
scented night, envisioning the fug and humid warmth of nine sleeping bodies,
occupying every horizontal inch of the place, with a cauldron and kettle
steaming on the hearth.
The second window bloomed into brightness.
“Four of them ours,” Jamie said, and laughed softly.
“I hope the place doesn’t burn down.” Someone had put fresh wood on the
fire, and sparks were beginning to dance above the chimney.
“It willna burn down.” He turned me round to face him. “I want ye, 
a
nighean,
” he said softly. “Will ye lie wi’ me? It may be the last time we have
any privacy for some while.”
I opened my mouth to say, “Of course!” and instead yawned hugely.
I clapped a hand to my mouth, removing it to say, “Oh, dear. I 
really
 didn’t
mean that.”
He was laughing, almost soundlessly. Shaking his head, he straightened
out the rumpled quilt I’d been sitting on, knelt on it, and stretched up a hand
to me.
“Come lie wi’ me and watch the stars for a bit, Sassenach. If ye’re still
awake in five minutes, I’ll take your clothes off and have ye naked in themoonlight.”
“And if I’m asleep in five minutes?” I kicked off my shoes and took his
hand.
“Then I won’t bother takin’ your clothes off.”
The fire was burning lower but still steadily; I could feel the warm breeze
of it touch my face and lift the hair at my temples. The stars were thick and
bright as diamonds spilled in some celestial burglary. I shared this
observation with Jamie, who made a very derogatory Scottish noise in
response, but then lay back beside me, sighing in pleasure at the view.
“Aye, they’re bonnie. Ken Cassiopeia there?”
I looked at the approximate portion of the sky indicated by his nod, but
shook my head. “I’m complete rubbish at constellations. I can see the Big
Dipper, and I usually recognize Orion’s Belt, but damned if I see it at the
moment. And the Pleiades are up there somewhere, aren’t they?”
“They’re part of Taurus—just there by the hunter.” He stretched out an
arm, pointing. “And that’s Camelopardalis.”
“Oh, don’t be silly. There isn’t a giraffe constellation, I would have heard
of that.”
“Well, it’s no really in the sky just now, but there is one. And come to
think, is it any more ridiculous than what’s happened today?”
“No,” I said softly. “No, it’s not.” He put an arm around me and I rolled
over to lay my cheek on his chest, and we watched the stars in silence,
listening to the wind in the trees and the slow beat of our hearts.
It seemed a long time later when Jamie stirred and sighed.
“I dinna think I’ve ever seen such stars, not since the night we made
Faith.”
I lifted my head in surprise. We seldom mentioned Faith—stillborn, but
embedded in our hearts—to each other, though each of us knew the other’s
feelings.
“You 
know
 when she was conceived? 
I
 don’t know that.”
He ran his hand slowly down my back, fingers pausing to rub circles in the
small of it. If I’d been a cat, I would have waved my tail gently under his
nose.
“Aye, well, I suppose I could be wrong, but I’ve always thought it was the
night I went to your bed at the abbey. There was a tall window at the end o’
the hall, and I saw the stars as I came to ye. I thought it might be a sign to me
—to see my way clear.”For a moment, I groped among my memories. That time at the Abbey of
Ste. Anne, when he’d come so close to a self-chosen death, was one I seldom
revisited. It had been a terrifying time. Days full of fear and confusion
running from one into the next, nights black with despair and desperation.
And 
yet when I did look back, I found a handful of vivid images, standing out
like the illuminated letters on a page of ancient Latin.
Father Anselm’s face, pale in candlelight, his eyes warm with compassion
and then the growing glow of wonder as he heard my confession. The abbot’s
hands, touching Jamie’s forehead, eyes, lips, and palms, delicate as a
hummingbird’s touch, anointing his dying nephew with the holy chrism of
Extreme Unction. The quiet of the darkened chapel where I had prayed for
his life, and heard my prayer answered.
And among these moments was the night when I woke from sleep to find
him standing, a pale wraith by my bed, naked and freezing, so weak he could
barely walk, but filled once more with life and a stubborn determination that
would never leave him.
“You remember Faith, then?” My hand rested lightly on my stomach,
recalling. He’d never seen her, or felt her as more than random kicks and
pushes from inside me.
He kissed my forehead briefly, then looked at me.
“Ye ken I do. Don’t you?”
“Yes. I just wanted you to tell me more.”
“Oh, I mean to.” He settled himself on one elbow and gathered me in so I
could share his plaid.
“Do you remember that, too?” I asked, pulling down the fold of cloth he’d
draped over me. “Sharing your plaid with me, the night we met?”
“To keep ye from freezing? Aye.” He kissed the back of my neck. “It was
me freezing, at the abbey. I’d worn myself out tryin’ to walk, and ye wouldna
let me eat anything, so I was starving to death, and—”
“Oh, you 
know
 that’s not true! You—”
“Would I lie to ye, Sassenach?”
“Yes, you bloody would,” I said. “You do it all the time. But never mind
that now. You were freezing and starving, and suddenly decided that instead
of asking Brother Paul for a blanket or a bowl of something hot, you should
stagger naked down a dark stone corridor and get in bed with me.”
“Some things are more important than food, Sassenach.” His hand settled
firmly on my arse. “And finding out whether I could ever bed ye again wasmore important than anything else just then. I reckoned if I couldn’t, I’d just
walk on out into the snow and not come back.”
“Naturally, it didn’t occur to you to wait for a few more weeks and recover
your strength.”
“Well, I was fairly sure I could walk that far leaning on the walls, and I’d
be doin’ the rest lying down, so why wait?” The hand on my arse was idly
stroking it now. “Ye do recall the occasion.”
“It was like making love to a block of ice.” It had been. It had also wrung
my heart with tenderness, and filled me with a hope I’d thought I’d never
know again. “Though you did thaw out after a bit.”
Only a bit, at first. I’d just cradled him against me, trying as hard as
possible to generate body heat. I’d pulled off my shift, urgent to get as much
skin contact as possible. I remembered the hard, sharp curve of his hipbone,
the knobs of his spine, and the ridged fresh scars over them.
“You weren’t much more than skin and bones.”
I turned, drew him down beside me now, and pulled him close, wanting the
reassurance of his present warmth against the chill of memory. He 
was
 warm.
And alive. Very much alive.
“Ye put your leg over me to keep me from falling out the bed, I remember
that.” He rubbed my leg slowly, and I could hear the smile in his voice,
though his face was dark with the fire behind him, sparking in his hair.
“It was a small bed.” It had been—a narrow monastic cot, scarcely large
enough for one normal-sized person. And even starved as he was, he’d
occupied a lot of space.
“I wanted to roll ye onto your back, Sassenach, but I was afraid I’d pitch us
both out onto the floor, and … well, I wasna sure I could hold myself up.”
He’d been shaking with cold and weakness. But now, I realized, probably
with fear as well. I took the hand resting on my hip and raised it to my mouth,
kissing his knuckles. His fingers were cold from the evening air and tightened
on the warmth of mine.
“You managed,” I said softly, and rolled onto my back, bringing him with
me.
“Only just,” he murmured, finding his way through the layers of quilt,
plaid, shirt, and shift. He let out a long breath, and so did I. “Oh, Jesus,
Sassenach.”
He moved, just a little.“What it felt like,” he whispered. “Then. To think I’d never have ye again,
and then …”
He 
had
 managed, and it 
was
 just barely.
“I thought—I’d do it if it was the last thing I ever did …”
“It almost bloody was,” I whispered back, and took hold of his bottom,
firm and round. “I really did think you’d died, for a moment, until you started
to move.”
“Thought I was going to,” he said, with the breath of a laugh. “Oh, God,
Claire …” He stopped for a moment, lowered himself, and pressed his
forehead against mine. He’d done it that night, too, cold-skinned and fierce
with desperation, and I’d felt I was breathing my own life into him then, his
mouth so soft and open, smelling faintly of the ale mixed with egg that was
all he could keep down.
“I wanted …” he whispered. “I wanted you. Had to have ye. But once I
was inside ye, I wanted …”
He sighed then, deep, and moved deeper.
“I thought I’d die of it, then and there. And I wanted to. Wanted to go—
while I was inside ye.” His voice had changed, still soft but somehow distant,
detached—and I knew he’d moved away from the present moment, gone
back to the cold stone dark and the panic, the fear and overwhelming need.
“I wanted to spill myself into ye and let that be the last I ever knew, but
then I started, and I kent it wasna meant to be that way—that I’d live, but that
I 
would
 keep myself inside ye forever. That I was givin’ ye a child.”
He’d come back in the speaking, back into the now and into me. I held him
tight, big and solid and strong in my arms, but shaking, helpless as he gave
himself up. I felt my own warm tears well up and slide down cold into my
hair.
After a time, he stirred and rolled off onto his side. A big hand still rested
light on my belly.
“I did manage, aye?” he said, and smiled a little, firelight soft on his face.
“You did,” I said, and, pulling the plaid back over us, I lay with him,
content in the light of dying flame and eternal stars.2
A Blue Wine Day
SHEER EXHAUSTION MADE ROGER sleep like the dead, in spite of the
fact that the MacKenzies’ bed consisted of two ragged quilts that Amy
Higgins had hastily dragged out of her piecework bag, these laid over a
week’s worth of the Higginses’ dirty laundry, and the MacKenzies’ outer
clothing used as blankets. It was a warm bed, though, with the heat of the
smoored fire on one side and the body heat of two children and a snuggly
wife on the other, and he’d fallen into sleep like a man falling down a well,
with time for no more than the briefest prayer—though a profound one—of
gratitude.
We made it. Thanks.
He woke to darkness and the smell of burnt wood and a freshly used
chamber pot, feeling a sudden chill behind him. He had lain down with his
back to the fire but had rolled over during the night, and now saw the sullen
glow of the last embers a couple of feet from his face, crimson veins in a
bank of gray ash and charred wood. He put a hand behind him: Brianna was
gone. There was a vague heap that must be Jem and Mandy at the far side of
the quilt; the rest of the cabin was still somnolent, the air thick with heavy
breathing.
“Bree?” he whispered, raising himself on one elbow. She was close—a
solid shadow with her bottom braced against the wall by the hearth, standing
on one foot to pull a stocking on. She put down her foot and crouched beside
him, fingers brushing his face.
“I’m going hunting with Da,” she whispered, bending close. “Mama will
watch the kids if you have things to do today.”
“Aye. Where did ye get—” He ran a hand down the side of her hip; she
was wearing a thick hunting shirt and loose breeches, much patched; he could
feel the roughness of the stitching under his palm.“They’re Da’s,” she said, and kissed him, the tinge of firelight glisking in
her hair. “Go back to sleep. It won’t be dawn for another hour.”
He watched her step lightly through the bodies on the floor, boots in her
hand, and a cold draft snaked through the room as the door opened and closed
soundlessly behind her. Bobby Higgins said something in a sleep-slurred
voice, and one of the little boys sat up, said “What?” in a clear, startled voice,
and then flopped back into his quilt, dormant once more.
The fresh air vanished into the comfortable fug, and the cabin slept again.
Roger didn’t. He lay on his back, feeling peace, relief, excitement, and
trepidation in roughly equal proportions.
They really had made it.
All of them. He kept counting his family, compulsively. All four of them.
Here, and safe.
Fragmented memories and sensations jostled through his mind; he let them
flow through him, not trying to stay them or catch more than an image here
and there: the weight of a small gold bar in his sweaty hand, the lurch of his
stomach when he’d dropped it and seen it slide away across the tilting deck.
The warm steam of parritch with whisky on it, fortification against a freezing
Scottish morning. Brianna hopping carefully down a flight of stairs on one
foot, the bandaged one lifted and the words of “My Dame Hath a Lame,
Tame Crane” coming irresistibly to his mind.
The smell of Buck’s hair, acrid and unwashed, as they embraced each
other on the edge of a dock and a final farewell. Cold, endless,
indistinguishable days and nights in the lurching hold of the 
Constance
 on
their way to Charles Town, the four of them huddled in a corner behind the
cargo, deafened by the smash of water against the hull, too seasick to be
hungry, too tired even to be terrified, hypnotized instead by the rising water
in the hold, watching it inch higher, splashing them with each sickening roll,
trying to share their pitiful store of body heat to keep the kids alive …
He let out the breath he hadn’t realized he was holding, put his hands on
the solid wooden floor to either side, closed his eyes, and let it all drain away.
No looking back. They’d made their decision, and they’d made it here. To
sanctuary.
So now what?
He’d lived in this cabin once, for a long time. Now he supposed he’d build
a new one; Jamie had told him last night that the land Governor Tryon had
given him was still his, registered in his name.A small thrill of anticipation rose in his heart. The day lay before him; the
beginning of a new life. What should he do first?
“Daddy!” a voice with a lot of spit whispered loudly in his ear. “Daddy, I
hafta go potty!”
He sat up smiling, pushing cloaks and shirts out of the way. Mandy was
hopping from foot to foot in agitation, a small black bird, solid against the
shadows.
“Aye, sweetheart,” he whispered back, and took her hand, warm and
sticky. “I’ll take ye to the privy. Try not to step on anybody.”
MANDY HAD ENCOUNTERED quite a few privies by now, and wasn’t put
off by this one. When Roger opened the door, though, a huge spider dropped
suddenly from the lintel and hung swaying like a plumb bob, inches from his
face. He and Mandy both screamed—well, she did; his own effort was no
more than a croak, but a manly croak, at least.
There was no real light yet; the spider was a black blob with an impression
of legs, but all the more alarming for that. Alarmed in turn by their cries, the
spider hurried back up its thread into whatever invisible recess it normally
occupied.
“Not going in dere!” Mandy said, backing up against his legs.
Roger shared her feelings, but taking her off the trail into the bushes in the
dark held the threat not only of further (and possibly larger) spiders, or
snakes and bats, but also of the things that hunted in the crepuscule. Panthers,
for instance … Aidan McCallum had entertained them earlier with a story
about meeting a painter on his way to the privy … this privy.
“It’s all right, honey.” He bent and picked her up. “It’s gone. It’s afraid of
us, it won’t come back.”
“I scared!”
“I know, sweetie. Don’t worry; I don’t think it will come back, but I’ll kill
it if it does.”
“Wif a gun?” she asked hopefully.
“Yes,” he said firmly, and clutching her to his chest he ducked under the
lintel, remembering too late Claire’s own story about the enormous
rattlesnake perched on the seat of their privy …
In the event, though, nothing untoward occurred, save his nearly losing
Mandy down the hole when she let go her grip to try to wipe her bottom witha dried corncob.
Sweating slightly in spite of the chilly morning air, he made his way back
to the cabin, to find that in his absence, the Higginses—and Jem and Germain
—had risen 
en masse.
Amy Higgins blinked slightly when told that Brianna had gone a-hunting,
but when Roger added that she had gone with her father, the look of surprise
faded into a nod of acceptance that made Roger smile inwardly. He was glad
to see that Himself’s personality still dominated the Ridge, despite his long
absence; Claire had told him last night that they’d only come back from exile
the month before.
“Are there many new folk come to settle since we were last here?” he
asked Bobby, sitting down on the bench beside his host, bowl of porridge in
his hand.
“A mort of ’em,” Bobby assured him. “Twenty families, at least. A bit of
milk and honey, Preacher?” He pushed the honey pot companionably in
Roger’s direction—being an Englishman, Bobby was allowed such frivolities
with his breakfast, rather than the severe Scottish pinch of salt. “Oh, sorry—I
should have asked, are you still a preacher?”
Claire had asked him that last night, but it still came as a surprise.
“I am, aye,” he said, and reached for the milk jug. In fact, both question
and answer made his heart speed up.
He 
was
 a minister. He just wasn’t sure how official he was. Granted, he’d
christened, married, and buried the people of the Ridge for a year or more,
and preached to them, as well as doing the lesser offices of a minister, and
they’d all thought of him as such; no doubt they still did. On the other hand,
he was not formally ordained as a Presbyterian minister. Not quite.
“I’ll maybe call on the new folk,” he said casually. “Do ye ken whether
they’re any of them Catholic, or otherwise?” This was a rhetorical question;
everyone on the Ridge knew the nature of everyone else’s beliefs—and
weren’t at all shy of discussing them, if not always to their faces.
Amy plunked a tin mug of chicory coffee by his bowl and sat down to her
own salted porridge with a sigh of relief.
“Fifteen Catholic families,” she said. “Twelve Presbyterians and three Blue
Light—Methodies, aye? Ye’ll want to watch out for thon folk, Preacher.
Hmm … oh, and maybe twa Anglicans … Orrie!” She sprang up, just in time
to interrupt six-year-old Orrie, who had been stealthily, if unsteadily, lifting
the full chamber pot above his head with the clear intent of emptying it overJem, who was sitting cross-legged by the fire, blinking sleepily at the shoe in
his hand.
Startled by his mother’s cry, Orrie dropped the chamber pot—more or less
missing Jem but decanting its fetid contents into the newly stirred fire—and
ran for the door. His mother pursued him, pausing only to snatch up a broom.
Enraged Gaelic shouts and high-pitched yelps of terror receded into the
distance.
Jem, to whom morning was anathema, looked at the spluttering mess in the
hearth, wrinkled his nose, and stood up. He swayed for a moment, then
ambled to the table and sat down next to Roger, yawning.
There was silence. A charred log broke suddenly in the hearth and a spurt
of sparks flew out of the mess, like a final comment on the state of things.
Roger cleared his throat.
“Man that is born of woman is full of trouble as the sparks that fly
upward,” he observed.
Bobby slowly turned his head from contemplation of the hearth to look at
Roger. His eyes were smoke-reddened, and the old “M” brand on his cheek
showed white in the dim light of the cabin.
“Well put, Preacher,” he said. “Welcome back.”
IT WAS WHAT her mother called a blue wine day. One where air and sky
were one thing together and every breath intoxication. Chestnut and oak
leaves crackled with each step, the scent of them sharp as that of the pine
needles higher up. They were climbing the mountain, guns in hand, and
Brianna Fraser MacKenzie was one with the day.
Her father held back a hemlock branch for her, and she ducked past to join
him.
“Feur-milis,”
 he said, gesturing to the wide meadow that opened out
before them. “Recall any of the 
Gàidhlig,
 do ye, lass?”
“You said something about the grass,” she said, scrabbling hastily through
her mental closets. “But I don’t know the other word.”
“Sweet Grass. It’s what we call this wee meadow. Good pasture, but too
great a climb for most of the stock, and ye dinna want to leave them here for
days untended, because of painters and bears.”
The whole of the meadow rippled, the silver-green heads of millions of
grass stems in movement catching morning sun. Here and there, yellow andwhite butterflies cruised, and at the far side of the grass there was a sudden
crash as some large ungulate vanished into the brush, leaving branches
swaying in its wake.
“A certain amount of competition as well, I see,” she said, nodding toward
the place where the animal had disappeared. She lifted an eyebrow, wanting
to ask whether they should not pursue it, but assuming that her father had
some good reason why not, since he made no move.
“Aye, some,” he said, and turned to the right, moving along the edge of the
trees that rimmed the meadow. “But deer dinna feed the same way cattle or
sheep do, at least not if the pasture’s good. That was an old buck,” he added
offhandedly over his shoulder. “We dinna need to kill those in summer;
there’s better meat and plenty of it.”
She raised both brows but followed without comment. He turned his head
and smiled at her.
“Where there’s one, there are likely more, this time o’ year. The does and
the new fawns begin to gather into wee herds. It’s nowhere near rut yet, but
the bucks are always thinkin’ on it. He kens well enough where they are.” He
nodded in the direction of the vanished deer.
She suppressed a smile, recalling some of her mother’s uncensored
opinions on men and the functions of testosterone. He saw it, though, and
gave her a half-rueful look of amusement, knowing what she was thinking,
and the fact that he did sent a small sweet pang through her heart.
“Aye, well, your mother’s right about men,” he said with a shrug. “Keep it
in mind, 
a nighean,
” he added, more seriously. He turned then, lifting his
face into the breeze. “They’re near the meadow but downwind of us; we
won’t get near, save we climb up and come down on them from the far side
of the ridge.” He nodded toward the west, though, across the meadow. “I
thought we’d maybe stop by Young Ian’s place first, though, if ye dinna
mind?”
“Mind? No!” She felt a surge of delight at the mention of her cousin.
“Somebody by the fire last night said he’s married now—who did he marry?”
She was more than curious about Ian’s wife; some ten years before, he’d
asked 
her
 to marry him, and while that had been a counsel of desperation—
and completely ridiculous, to boot—she was aware that the thought of
bedding her hadn’t been unwelcome to him. Later, with both of them adults
and her married, him divorced from his Indian wife, a sense of physicalattraction had been silently acknowledged between them—and just as silently
dismissed.
Still, there were echoes of fondness between them, and she hoped she
would like Ian’s unknown wife.
Her father laughed. “Ye’ll like her, lass. Rachel Hunter is her name; she’s a
Quaker.”
A vision of a drab little woman with downcast eyes came to her, but her
father caught the look of doubt on her face and shook his head.
“She’s no what ye’d think. She speaks her mind. And Ian’s mad in love
wi’ her—and she with him.”
“Oh. That’s good!” She meant it, but her father cast her an amused glance,
one brow raised. He said nothing further, though, and turned to lead the way
through the rippling waves of fragrant grass.
IAN’S CABIN WAS charming. Not that it was markedly different from any
other mountain cabin Brianna had ever seen, but it was sited in the midst of
an aspen grove, and the fluttering leaves broke the sunlight into a flurry of
light and shadow, so that the cabin had an air of magic about it—as though it
might disappear into the trees altogether if you looked away.
Four goats and two kids poked their heads over the fence of their pen and
started a congenial racket of greeting, but no one came out to see who the
visitors were.
“They’ve gone somewhere,” Jamie remarked, squinting at the house. “Is
that a note on the door?”
It was: a scrap of paper pinned to the door with a long thorn, with a line of
incomprehensible writing that Bree finally recognized as Gaelic.
“Is Young Ian’s wife a Scot?” she asked, frowning at the words. The only
ones she could make out were—she thought—“MacCree” and “goat.”
“Nay, it’s from Jenny,” her father said, whipping out his spectacles and
scanning the note. “She says she and Rachel are away to a quilting at the
MacCree’s and if Ian comes home before they do, will he milk the goats and
set half the milk aside for cheese.”
As though hearing their names called, a chorus of loud 
mehh
s came from
the goat pen.
“Evidently Ian’s not home yet, either,” Brianna observed. “Do they need to
be milked now, do you think? I probably remember how.”Her father smiled at the thought but shook his head. “Nay, Jenny will ha’
stripped them no more than a few hours ago—they’ll do fine until the
evening.”
Until that moment, she’d been idly supposing “Jenny” to be the name of a
hired girl—but hearing the tone in which Jamie had said it, she blinked.
“Jenny. Your 
sister
 Jenny?” she said, incredulous. “She’s 
here
?”
He looked mildly startled. “Aye, she is. I’m sorry, lass, I never stopped to
think ye didna ken that. She—wait.” He lifted a hand, looking at her intently.
“The letters. We wrote—well, Claire mostly wrote them—but—”
“We got them.” She felt breathless, the same feeling she’d had when Roger
had brought back the wooden box with Jemmy’s full name burned into the
lid, and they’d opened it to find the letters. And the overwhelming sense of
relief, joy, and sorrow when she opened the first letter to see the words, 
“We
are alive …”
The same feeling swept through her now, and tears took her unaware, so
that everything around her flickered and blurred, as though the cabin and her
father and she herself might be about to disappear altogether, dissolved into
the shimmering light of the aspen trees. She made a small choking sound, and
her father’s arm came round her, holding her close.
“We never thought we should see ye again,” he whispered into her hair, his
own voice choked. “Never, 
a leannan.
 I was afraid—so afraid ye hadna
reached safety, that … ye’d died, all of ye, lost in—in there. And we’d never
know.”
“We couldn’t tell you.” She lifted her head from his shoulder and wiped
her nose on the back of her hand. “But you could tell 
us.
 Those letters …
knowing you were alive. I mean …” She stopped suddenly and, blinking
away the last of the tears, saw Jamie look away, blinking back his own.
“But we weren’t,” he said softly. “We were dead. When ye read those
letters.”
“No, you weren’t,” she said fiercely, gripping his hand. “I wouldn’t read
the letters all at once. I spaced them out—because as long as there were still
unopened letters … you were still alive.”
“None of it matters, lass,” he said at last, very softly. He raised her hand
and kissed her knuckles, his breath warm and light on her skin. “Ye’re here.
So are we. Nothing else matters at all.”
BRIANNA WAS CARRYING the family fowling piece, while her father had
his good rifle. She wouldn’t fire on any birds or small game, though, while
there was a chance of spooking deer nearby. It was a steep climb, and she
found herself puffing, sweat starting to purl behind her ears in spite of the
cool day. Her father climbed, as ever, like a mountain goat, without the
slightest appearance of strain, but—to her chagrin—noticed her struggling
and beckoned her aside, onto a small ledge.
“We’re in nay hurry, 
a nighean,
” he said, smiling at her. “There’s water
here.” He reached out, with an obvious tentativeness, and touched her flushed
cheek, quickly taking back his hand.
“Sorry, lass,” he said, and smiled. “I’m no used yet to the notion that ye’re
real.”
“I know what you mean,” she said softly. Swallowing, she reached out and
touched his face, warm and clean-shaven, slanted eyes deep blue as hers.
“Och,” he said under his breath, and gently brought her into his arms
again. They stood that way, not speaking, listening to the cry of ravens
circling overhead and the trickling of water on rock.
“Trobhad agus òl, a nighean,”
 he said, letting go as gently as he’d grasped
her and turning her toward a tiny freshet that ran down a crevice between two
rocks. Come and drink.
The water was icy and tasted of granite and the faint turpentine tang of
pine needles.
She’d slaked her thirst and was splashing water on her flushed cheeks
when she felt her father make a sudden movement. She froze at once, cutting
her eyes at him. He also stood frozen, but he lifted both eyes and chin a little,
signaling to the slope above them.
She saw—and heard—it then, a slow crumble of falling dirt that broke
loose and hit the ledge beside her foot with a tiny rattle of pebbles. This was
followed by silence, except for the calling of the ravens. That was louder, she
thought, as though the birds were nearer. 
They see something,
 she thought.
They 
were
 nearer. A raven swooped suddenly, flashing unnervingly near
her head, and another screamed from above.
A sudden boom from the outcrop overhead nearly made her lose her
footing, and she grabbed a handful of sapling sticking out of the rock face by
reflex. Just in time, too, for there was a thump and a slithering noise above,
and at what seemed the same instant something huge fell past in a shower ofdirt and gravel, bouncing off the ledge next to her in an explosion of breath,
blood, and impact before landing with a crash in the bushes below.
“Blessed Michael defend us,” said her father in Gaelic, crossing himself.
He peered down into the thrashing brush below—Jesus, whatever it was, it
was still alive—then up.
“Weh!”
 said an impassioned male voice from above. She didn’t recognize
the word, but she did know the voice, and joy burst over her.
“Ian!” she called. There was total silence from above, save for the ravens,
who were getting steadily more upset.
“Blessed Michael defend us,” said a startled voice in Gaelic, and an instant
later her cousin Ian had dropped onto their narrow ledge, where he balanced
with no apparent difficulty.
“It 
is
 you!” she said. “Oh, Ian!”
“A charaid!”
 He grabbed her and squeezed tight, laughing in disbelief.
“God, it’s you!” He drew back for an instant for a good look to confirm it,
laughed again in delight, kissed her solidly, and resqueezed. He smelled like
buckskin, porridge, and gunpowder, and she could feel his heart thumping
against her own chest.
She vaguely heard a scrabbling noise, and as they let go of each other, she
realized that her father had dropped off the ledge and was half sliding down
the scree below it, toward the brush where the deer—it must have been a deer
—had fallen.
He halted for a moment at the edge of the brushy growth—the bushes were
still thrashing, but the movements of the wounded deer were growing less
violent—then drew his dirk and, with a muttered remark in Gaelic, waded
gingerly into the brush.
“It’s all rose briers down there,” Ian said, peering over her shoulder. “But I
think he’ll make it in time to cut the throat. 
A Dhia,
 it was a bad shot and I
was afraid I—but what the dev—I mean, how is it ye’re 
here
?” He stood
back a little, his eyes running over her, the corner of his mouth turning up
slightly as he noted her breeches and leather hiking shoes, this fading as his
eyes returned to her face, worried now. “Is your man not with ye? And the
bairns?”
“Yes, they are,” she assured him. “Roger’s probably hammering things and
Jem’s helping him and Mandy’s getting in the way. As for what we’re doing
here …” The day and the joy of reunion had let her ignore the recent past, butthe ultimate need of explanation brought the enormity of it all suddenly
crashing in upon her.
“Dinna fash, cousin,” Ian said swiftly, seeing her face. “It’ll bide. D’ye
think ye recall how to shoot a turkey? There’s a band o’ them struttin’ to and
fro like folk dancing Strip the Willow at a ceilidh, not a quarter mile from
here.”
“Oh, I might.” She’d propped the gun against the cliff face while she
drank; the deer’s fall had knocked it over and she picked it up, checking; the
fall had knocked the flint askew, and she reseated it. The thrashing below had
stopped, and she could hear her father’s voice, in snatches above the wind,
saying the gralloch prayer.
“Hadn’t we better help Da with the deer, though?”
“Ach, it’s no but a yearling buck, he’ll have it done before ye can blink.”
Ian leaned out from the ledge, calling down. “I’m takin’ Bree to shoot
turkeys, 
a bràthair mo mhàthair
!”
Dead silence from below, and then a lot of rustling and Jamie’s disheveled
head poked suddenly up above the rose briers. His hair was loose and
tangled; his face was deeply flushed and bleeding in several places, as were
his arms and hands, and he looked displeased.
“Ian,” he said, in measured tones, but in a voice loud enough to be easily
heard above the forest sounds. “Mac Ian … mac Ian …!”
“We’ll be back to help carry the meat!” Ian called back. He waved cheerily
and, grabbing the fowling piece, caught Bree’s eye and jerked his chin
upward. She glanced down, but her father had disappeared, leaving the
bushes swaying in agitation.
She’d lost much of her eye for the wilderness, she found; the cliff looked
impassable to her, but Ian scrambled up as easily as a baboon, and after a
moment’s hesitation, she followed, much more slowly, slipping now and then
in small showers of dirt as she groped for the holds her cousin had used.
“Ian mac Ian mac Ian?” she asked, reaching the top and pausing to empty
the dirt out of her shoes. Her heart was beating unpleasantly hard. “Is that
like me calling Jem Jeremiah Alexander Ian Fraser MacKenzie when I’m
annoyed with him?”
“Something like,” Ian said, shrugging. “Ian, son of Ian, son of Ian … the
notion is to point out ye’re a disgrace to your forefathers, aye?” He was
wearing a ragged, filthy calico shirt, but the sleeves had been torn off, andshe saw a large white scar in the shape of a four-pointed star on the curve of
his bare brown shoulder.
“What did that?” she said, nodding at it. He glanced at it and made a
dismissive gesture, turning to lead her across the small ridge.
“Ach, no much,” he said. “An Abenaki bastard shot me wi’ an arrow, at
Monmouth. Denny cut it out for me a few days after—that’s Denzell
Hunter,” he added, seeing her blank look. “Rachel’s brother. He’s a doctor,
like your mam.”
“Rachel!” she exclaimed. “Your wife?”
A huge grin spread across his face.
“She is,” he said simply. 
“Taing do Dhia.”
 Then looked quickly at her to
see if she’d understood.
“I remember ‘thanks be to God,’” she assured him. “And quite a bit more.
Roger spent most of the voyage from Scotland refreshing our 
Gàidhlig.
 Da
also told me Rachel’s a Quaker?” She made it a question, stretching to step
across the stones in a tiny brook.
“Aye, she is.” Ian’s eyes were fixed on the stones, but she thought he
spoke with a bit less joy and pride than he’d had a moment before. She left it
alone, though; if there was a conflict—and she couldn’t quite see how there
wouldn’t
 be, given what she knew about her cousin and what she thought she
knew about Quakers—this wasn’t the time to ask questions.
Not that such considerations stopped Ian.
“From Scotland?” he said, turning his head to look back at her over his
shoulder. “When?” Then his face changed suddenly, as he realized the
ambiguity of “when,” and he made an apologetic gesture, dismissing the
question.
“We left Edinburgh in March,” she said, taking the simplest answer for
now. “I’ll tell you the rest later.”
He nodded, and for a time they walked, sometimes together, sometimes
with Ian leading, finding deer trails or cutting upward to go around a thick
growth of bush. She was happy to follow him, so she could look at him
without embarrassing him with her scrutiny.
He’d changed—no great wonder there—still tall and very lean, but
hardened, a man grown fully into himself, the long muscles of his arms clear-
cut under his skin. His brown hair was darker, plaited and tied with a leather
thong, and adorned with what looked like very fresh turkey feathers bound
into the braid. 
For good luck?
 she wondered. He’d picked up the bow andquiver he’d left at the top of the cliff, and the quiver swung gently now
against his back.
But the expression of a well-made man appears not only in his face,
 she
thought, entertained. 
It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the
joints of his hips and wrists / It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the
flex of his waist and knees, dress does not hide him.
 The poem had always
summoned Roger for her, but now it encompassed Ian and her father as well,
different as the three of them were.
As they rose higher and the timber opened out, the breeze rose and
freshened, and Ian halted, beckoning her with a small movement of his
fingers.
“D’ye hear them?” he breathed in her ear.
She did, and the hairs rippled pleasantly down her backbone. Small, harsh
yelps, almost like a barking dog. And farther off, a sort of intermittent purr,
something between a large cat and a small motor.
“Best take off your stockings and rub your legs wi’ dirt,” Ian whispered,
motioning toward her woolen stockings. “Your hands and face as well.”
She nodded, set the gun against a tree, and scratched dry leaves away from
a patch of soil, moist enough to rub on her skin. Ian, his own skin nearly the
color of his buckskins, needed no such camouflage. He moved silently away
while she was anointing her hands and face, and when she looked up, she
couldn’t see him for a moment.
Then there was a series of sounds like a rusty door hinge swinging to and
fro, and suddenly she saw Ian, standing stock-still behind a sweet gum some
fifty feet away.
The forest seemed to go dead for an instant, the soft scratchings and leaf-
murmurs ceasing. Then there was an angry gobble and she turned her head as
slowly as she could, to see a tom turkey poke his pale-blue head out of the
grass and look sharp from side to side, wattles bright red and swinging,
looking for the challenger.
She cut her eyes at Ian, his hands cupped at his mouth, but he didn’t move
or make a sound. She held her breath and looked back at the turkey, who
emitted another loud gobble—this one echoed by another tom at a distance.
The turkey she was watching glanced back toward that sound, lifted his head
and yelped, listened for a moment, and then ducked back into the grass. She
glanced at Ian; he caught her movement and shook his head, very slightly.They waited for the space of sixteen slow breaths—she counted—and then
Ian gobbled again. The tom popped out of the grass and strode across a patch
of open, leaf-packed ground, blood in his eye, breast feathers puffed, and tail
fanned and vibrating. He paused for a moment to allow the woods to admire
his magnificence, then commenced strutting slowly to and fro, uttering harsh,
aggressive cries.
Moving only her eyeballs, she glanced back and forth between the strutting
tom and Ian, who timed his movements to those of the turkey, sliding the
bow from his shoulder, freezing, bringing an arrow to hand, freezing, and
finally nocking the arrow as the bird made its final turn.
Or what should have been its final turn. Ian bent his bow and, in the same
movement, released his arrow and uttered a startled, all-too-human yelp as a
large, dark object dropped from the tree above him. He jerked back and the
turkey barely missed landing on his head. She could see it now, a hen,
feathers fluffed in fright, running with neck outstretched across the open
ground toward the equally startled tom, who had deflated in shock.
By reflex, she seized her shotgun, brought it to bear, and fired. She missed,
and both turkeys disappeared into a patch of ferns, making noises that
sounded like a small hammer striking a wood block.
The echoes died away and the leaves of the trees settled back into their
murmur. She looked at her cousin, who glanced at his bow, then across the
open ground to where his arrow was sticking absurdly out from between two
rocks. He looked at her, and they both burst into laughter.
“Aye, well,” he said philosophically. “That’s what we get for leavin’ Uncle
Jamie to pick roses by himself.”
BRIANNA SWABBED THE barrel and rammed a wad of tow on a fresh
round of buckshot. Hard, to stop her hand shaking.
“Sorry I missed,” she said.
“Why?” Ian looked at her, surprised. “When ye’re hunting, ye’re lucky to
get one shot in ten. Ye ken that fine. Besides, I missed, too.”
“Only because a turkey fell on your 
head,
” she said, but laughed. “Is your
arrow ruined?”
“Aye,” he said, showing her the broken shaft he’d retrieved from the rocks.
“The head’ll do, though.” He stripped the sharp iron head and put it in hissporran, tossed the shaft away, then stood up. “We’ll no get another shot at
that lot, but—what’s amiss, lass?”
She’d tried to shove her ramrod into its pipe, but missed and sent it flying.
“What do they call it when you’re too excited to hit a deer—buck fever?”
she said, making light of it as she went to fetch the rod. “Turkey fever, I
suppose.”
“Oh, aye,” he said, and smiled, but his eyes were intent on her hands.
“How long since ye’ve fired a gun, cousin?”
“Not that long,” she said tersely. She hadn’t expected it to come back.
“Maybe six, seven months.”
“What were ye hunting then?” he asked, head on one side.
She glanced at him, made the decision, and, pushing the ramrod carefully
home, turned to face him.
“A gang of men who were hiding in my house, waiting to kill me and take
my kids,” she said. The words, bald as they were, sounded ridiculous,
melodramatic.
Both his feathery brows went up.
“Did ye get them?” His tone was so interested that she laughed, in spite of
the memories. He might have been asking if she’d caught a large fish.
“No, alas. I shot out the tire on their truck, and one of the windows in my
own house. I didn’t get them. But then,” she added, with affected casualness,
“they didn’t get me or the kids, either.”
Her knees felt suddenly weak, and she sat down carefully on a fallen log.
He nodded, accepting what she’d said with a matter-of-factness that would
have astonished her—had it been any other man.
“That would be why ye’re here, aye?” He glanced around, quite
unconsciously, as though scanning the forest for possible enemies, and she
wondered suddenly what it would be like to live with Ian, never knowing
whether you were talking to the Scot or the Mohawk—and now she was
really
 curious about Rachel.
“Mostly, yes,” she answered. He picked up her tone and glanced sharply at
her but nodded again.
“Will ye go back, then, to kill them?” This was said seriously, and it was
with an effort that she tamped down the rage that seared through her when
she thought of Rob Cameron and his bloody accomplices. It wasn’t fear or
flashback that had made her hands shake now; it was the memory of theoverwhelming urge to kill that had possessed her when she touched the
trigger.
“I wish,” she said shortly. “We can’t. Physically, I mean.” She flapped a
hand, pushing it all away. “I’ll tell it to you later; we haven’t even talked to
Da and Mama about it yet. We only came last night.” As though reminded of
the long, hard push upward through the mountain passes, she yawned
suddenly, hugely.
Ian laughed, and she shook her head, blinking.
“Do I remember Da saying you have a baby?” she asked, firmly changing
the subject.
The huge grin came back.
“I have,” he said, his face shining with such joy that she smiled, too. “I’ve
got a wee son. He hasna got his real name yet, but we call him Oggy. For
Oglethorpe,” he explained, seeing her smile widen at the name. “We were in
Savannah when he started to show. I canna wait for ye to see him!”
“Neither can I,” she said, though the connection between Savannah and the
name Oglethorpe escaped her. “Should we—”
A distant noise cut her short, and Ian was on his feet instantly, looking.
“Was that Da?” she asked.
“I think so.” Ian gave her a hand and hauled her to her feet, snatching up
his bow almost in the same motion. “Come!”
She grabbed the newly loaded gun and ran, careless of brush, stones, tree
branches, creeks, or anything else. Ian slithered through the wood like a fast-
moving 
snake; she bulled her way through behind him, breaking branches
and dashing her sleeve across her face to clear her eyes.
Twice Ian came to a sudden halt, grasping her arm as she hurtled toward
him. Together they stood listening, trying to still pounding hearts and gasping
breaths long enough to hear anything above the sough of the forest.
The first time, after what seemed like agonized minutes, they caught a sort
of squalling noise above the wind, tailing off into grunts.
“Pig?” she asked, between gulps of air. Wild hogs could be big, and very
dangerous.
Ian shook his head, swallowing.
“Bear,” he said, and, drawing a huge breath, seized her hand and pulled her
into a run.
The second time they stopped for bearings, they heard nothing.“Uncle Jamie!” Ian shouted, as soon as he had enough breath to do so.
Nothing, and Brianna screamed, “Da!” as loud as she could—a pitifully
small, futile sound in the immensity of the mountain. They waited, shouted,
waited again—and after the final shout and silence, ran on again, Ian leading
the way back toward the rose briers and the dead deer.
They came to a stumbling halt on the high ground above the hollow, chests
heaving for air. Brianna seized Ian’s arm.
“There’s something down there!” The bushes were shaking. Not as they
had during the deer’s death struggles, but definitely shaking, disturbed by the
intermittent movements of something clearly bigger than Jamie Fraser. From
here, she could clearly hear grunting, and the slobber of rending tendons,
breaking bones … and chewing.
“Oh, Christ,” Ian said under his breath, but not far enough under, and terror
sent a bolt of black dizziness through her chest. In spite of that, she gulped as
much air as she could and screamed, 
“Daaaa!”
 once more.
“Och, 
now
 ye turn up,” said a deep, irascible Scottish voice from
somewhere below their feet. “I hope ye’ve a turkey for the pot, lass, for we’ll
no be having venison tonight.”
She flung herself flat on the ground, head hung over the edge of the cliff,
dizzy with relief at seeing her father ten feet below, standing on the narrow
ledge to which he’d led her earlier. His frown relaxed as he saw her above.
“All right, then, lass?” he asked.
“Yes,” she said, “but no turkeys. What on earth happened to 
you
?” He was
disheveled and scratched, spots and rivulets of dried blood marking his arms
and face, and a large rent in one sleeve. His right foot was bare, and his shin
was heavily streaked with blood. He looked down from the ledge, and the
glower returned.
“Dia gam chuideachadh,”
 he said, jerking his chin at the disturbance
below. “I’d just got Ian’s deer skinned when yon fat hairy devil came out o’
the bushes and took it from me.”
“Cachd,”
 said Ian in brief disgust. He was squatting beside Brianna,
surveying the rose briers. She took her attention off her father for a moment
and caught a glimpse of something very large and black among the bushes,
working at something in a concentrated manner; the bushes snapped and
quivered 
as it ripped at the deer, and she caught sight of one stiff, quivering
hoofed leg among the leaves.The sight of the bear, quick as it was, caused a rush of adrenaline so
visceral that it made her whole body tighten and her head feel light. She
breathed as deep as she could, feeling sweat trickle down her back, her hands
wet on the metal of the gun.
She came back to herself in time to hear Ian asking Jamie what had
happened to his leg.
“I kicked it in the face,” Jamie replied briefly, with a glance of dislike
toward the bushes. “It took offense and tried to take my foot off, but it only
got my shoe.”
Ian quivered slightly beside her, but wisely didn’t laugh.
“Aye. D’ye want a hand up, Uncle?”
“I do not,” Jamie replied tersely. “I’m waiting for the 
mac na galladh
 to
leave. It’s got my rifle.”
“Ah,” Ian said, properly appreciating the importance of this. Her father’s
rifle was a very fine one, a long rifle from Pennsylvania, he’d told her.
Plainly he was prepared to wait as long as it took—and was probably a lot
more stubborn than the bear, she thought, with a small interior gurgle.
“Ye may as well go on,” Jamie said, looking up at them. “It may be a wee
while.”
“I could probably shoot it from here,” Bree offered, judging the distance.
“I can’t kill it, but a load of bird shot might make it leave.”
Her father made a Scottish noise in response to this, and a violent gesture
of prevention.
“Dinna try it,” he said. “All ye’ll do is maybe madden it—and if I could
get down that slope, yon beast can certainly get up it. Now away wi’ ye; I’m
getting a crick in my neck talkin’ up at ye.”
Bree gave Ian a sidelong glance and he gave her back the ghost of a nod,
acknowledging her reluctance to leave her father shoeless on a ledge no more
than twenty feet from a hungry bear.
“We’ll bear ye company for a bit,” he announced—and before Jamie could
object, Ian had grasped a stout pine sapling and swung himself down onto the
cliff face, where his moccasined toes at once found a hold.
Brianna, following his example, leaned over and dropped her fowling
piece into her father’s hands before finding her own way down, more slowly.
“I’m surprised ye didna have at it wi’ your dirk, Uncle Jamie,” Ian was
saying. “Bear-Killer, is it, that the Tuscarora called ye?”Bree was pleased to see that Jamie had regained his equanimity and gave
Ian no more than a pitying look.
“Are ye maybe familiar with a saying about how a man grows wiser wi’
age?” he inquired.
“Aye,” Ian replied, looking baffled.
“Well, if ye dinna grow wiser, ye’re no likely to grow older,” Jamie said,
leaning the gun against the cliff. “And I’m old enough to ken better than to
fight a bear wi’ a dirk for a deer’s carcass. Have ye got anything to eat, lass?”
She’d quite forgotten the small bag over her shoulder, but she now took it
off and groped inside, removing a small packet of bannocks and cheese
supplied by Amy Higgins.
“Sit down,” she said, handing this to her father. “I want to look at your
leg.”
“It’s no bad,” he said, but he was either too hungry to argue or simply
conditioned to accept unwanted medical treatment by her mother, for he did
sit down and stretch out the wounded leg.
It wasn’t bad, as he’d said, though there was a deep puncture wound in his
calf, with a couple of long scrapes beside it—these presumably left as he’d
hastily pulled his foot out of the bear’s mouth, she thought, feeling a little
faint at the vision of this. She had nothing with her of use save a large
handkerchief, but she soaked this in the icy water from the rivulet that flowed
down the cliff face and cleaned the wound as well as she could.
Could you get tetanus from a bear’s bite? she wondered, swabbing and
rinsing. She’d made sure to have all the kids’ shots up to date—including
tetanus—before they’d left, but a tetanus immunization was only good for
what, ten years? Something like that.
The puncture wound was still oozing blood, but not gushing. She wrung
out the cloth and tied it firmly but not too tightly around his calf.
“Tapadh leat, a gràidh,”
 he said, and smiled at her. “Your mother couldna
have done better. Here.” He’d saved two bannocks and a bit of cheese for her,
and she leaned back against the cliff between him and Ian, surprised to
discover that she was very hungry, and even more surprised to realize that
she wasn’t worried by the fact that they were chatting away in the near
vicinity of a large carnivorous animal that could undoubtedly kill them all.
“Bears are lazy,” Ian told her, observing the direction of her glance. “If he
—is it a he-bear, Uncle?—has a fine deer down there, he’ll no bother toclimb all the way up here for a scrawny wee snack. Speakin’ of which”—he
leaned past her to address Jamie—“did it eat your sandal?”
“I didna stay to watch,” Jamie said, his temper seeming to have calmed as
a result of food. “But I’ve hopes that he didn’t. After all, wi’ a perfectly good
pile of steaming deer guts just at hand, why would ye bother wi’ a piece of
old leather? Bears aren’t fools.”
Ian nodded at this and leaned back against the cliff, rubbing his shoulders
gently on the sun-warmed stone.
“So, then, cousin,” he said to Bree. “Ye said ye’d tell me how it was ye
came home. As we’ve likely a bit of time to pass …” He nodded toward the
now-rhythmic noises of tearing flesh and mastication below.
The bottom of her stomach dropped abruptly, and her father, seeing her
face, patted her knee.
“Dinna trouble yourself, 
a leannan.
 Time enough. Perhaps ye’d rather tell
it to everyone, when Roger Mac’s with ye.”
She hesitated for a moment; she’d visualized it many times, telling her
parents the whole of it, imagined herself and Roger telling the tale together,
taking turns … but seeing the intent look in her father’s eyes, she realized
belatedly that she couldn’t have told her part of it honestly in front of Roger
—she hadn’t even told him everything when she’d found him again, seeing
how furious he was at the details she 
had
 shared.
“No,” she said slowly. “I can tell you now. At least my part of it.” And
washing down the last bannock crumbs with a handful of cold water, she
began.
Yes, her mother did know men, she thought, seeing Ian’s fist clench on his
knee, and hearing the low, involuntary growl her father made at hearing
about Rob Cameron’s cornering her in the study at Lallybroch. She 
didn’t
 tell
them what he’d said, the crude threats, the orders—nor what she’d done,
taking off her jeans at his command, then slashing him across the face with
the heavy denim before tackling him and knocking him to the floor. She did
mention smashing the wooden box of letters over his head, and the two of
them made small 
hmph
s of satisfaction.
“Where did that box come from?” she interrupted herself to ask her father.
“Roger found it in his adopted father’s garage—that’s a place where you park
a car, I mean—” she added when she saw a look of confusion touch Jamie’s
face. “Never mind, it was a sort of storage shed. But we always wondered
where you’d put it at this end?”“Och, that?” Jamie’s face relaxed a bit. “Roger Mac had told me how his
father was a priest and lived for a great many years at his manse in Inverness.
We made three boxes—it was a good bit of work to copy out all the letters,
mind—and I had them sealed and sent to three different banks in Edinburgh,
with instructions that in such and such a year, each box was to be sent on to
the Reverend Wakefield at the manse in Inverness. We hoped at least one
would turn up; I put Jemmy’s whole name on each one, thinkin’ that would
mean something to you, but no one else. Go on, though—ye smashed yon
Cameron wi’ the box and then …?”
“It didn’t knock him out all the way, but I got past him and into the hall. So
I ran down to the hall tree—it’s not the same as the one your parents have,”
she said to Ian, and then remembered what one of the last letters had said.
“Oh, God! Your father, Ian … I’m so sorry!”
“Oh. Aye,” he said, looking down. She’d grasped his forearm, and he put
his own big hand over hers and squeezed it lightly. “Dinna fash, 
a nighean.
 I
feel him wi’ me, now and then. And Uncle Jamie brought my mam back from
Scotland—oh, Jesus.” He stopped, looking at her round-eyed. “She doesna
ken ye’re here!”
“She’ll find out soon enough,” Jamie said testily. “Will ye tell me what the
devil happened to this gobshite Cameron?”
“Not enough,” she said grimly, and finished the story, including
Cameron’s conspirators and the shoot-out at the O.K. Corral.
“So I took Jem and Mandy and went to California—it’s on the other side
of America—to think what to do, and finally I decided that there wasn’t any
choice; we had to try to find Roger—he’d left a letter that told me he was in
Scotland, and when. And so we did, and …” She gestured widely to the
wilderness around them. “Here we are.”
Jamie drew in air through his nose but said nothing. Nor did Ian, though he
nodded briefly, as though to himself. Brianna felt strangely comforted by the
proximity of her kin, eased by having told them the story, confided her fears.
She felt protected in a way she hadn’t for a good long time.
“There it goes,” Ian said suddenly, and she followed the direction of his
gaze, seeing the sudden wild swaying as the rose briers gave way to the
bear’s bulk, waddling slowly away. Ian stood up and offered Brianna a hand.
She stretched to her full height and swayed, easing her limbs. She felt so
easy in mind that she barely heard what her father said, rising behind her.
“What’s that?” she said, turning to him.“I said, there’s the one thing more, isn’t there?”
“More?” she said, with a half smile. “Isn’t this enough to be going on
with?”
Jamie made a Scottish noise in his throat, half apology, half warning.
“Yon Robert Cameron,” he said. “He likely read our letters, ye said.”
A trickle of ice water began a slow crawl down the groove of Brianna’s
spine.
“Yes.” The sense of peaceful security had suddenly vanished.
“Then he kens about the Jacobite gold we keep hidden wi’ the whisky, and
he also kens where we are. If he knows, so do his friends. And he maybe
canna travel through the stones, but there are maybe those who can.” Jamie
gave her a very direct blue look. “Sooner or later, someone will come
looking.”3
Rustic, Rural, and Very Romantic
THE SUN WAS BARELY up, but Jamie was long gone. I’d awakened
briefly when he kissed my forehead, whispered that he was going hunting
with Brianna, then kissed my lips and vanished into the chilly dark. I woke
again two hours later in the warm nest of old quilts—these donated by the
Crombies and the Lindsays—that served us for a bed and sat up, cross-legged
in my shift, combing leaves and grass heads out of my hair with my fingers
and enjoying the rare feeling of waking slowly, rather than with the oft-
experienced sensation of having been shot from a cannon.
I supposed, with a pleasant little thrill, that once the house was habitable
and the MacKenzies, along with Fergus and Marsali’s son Germain, and
Fanny, an orphan left with us after the horrible death of her sister, were all
ensconced within, mornings would once more resemble the exodus of bats
from Carlsbad Cavern that I’d seen once in a Disney nature special. For now,
though, the world was bright and filled with peace.
A vividly red ladybug dropped out of my hair and down the front of my
shift, which put an abrupt end to my ruminations. I leapt up and shook the
beetle out into the long grass by the Big Log, went into the bushes for a
private moment, and came out with a bunch of fresh mountain mint. There
was just enough water left in the bucket for me to have a cup of tea, so I left
the mint on the flat surface Jamie had adzed at one end of a huge fallen
poplar log to serve as worktable and food preparation space, and went to
build up the fire and set the kettle inside the ring of blackened stones.
At the far edge of the clearing below, a thin spiral of smoke rose from the
Higginses’ chimney like a snake out of a charmer’s basket; someone had
poked up their smoored fire as well.
Who would be my first visitor this morning? Germain, perhaps; he’d slept
at the Higgins cabin last night with Jemmy—but he wasn’t an early riser bytemperament any more than I was. Fanny was a good distance away, with the
Widow Donaldson and her enormous brood; she’d be along later.
It would be Roger, I thought, and felt a lifting of my heart. Roger and the
children.
The fire was licking at the tin kettle; I lifted the lid and shredded a good
handful of mint leaves into the water—first shaking the stems to dislodge any
hitchhikers. The rest I bound with a twist of thread and hung among the other
herbs suspended from the rafters of my makeshift surgery—this consisting of
four poles with a lattice laid across the top, covered with hemlock branches
for shade and shelter. I had two stools—one for me and one for the patient of
the moment—and a small, crudely built table to hold whatever implements I
needed to have easily to hand.
Jamie had put up a canvas lean-to beside the shelter, to provide privacy for
such cases as required it, and also as storage for food or medicines kept in
raccoon-proof casks, jars, or boxes.
It was rural, rustic, and very romantic. In a bug-ridden, grimy-ankled,
exposed-to-the-elements, occasional-creeping-sensation-on-the-back-of-the-
neck-indicating-that-you-were-being-eyed-up-by-something-considering-
eating-you sort of way, but still.
I cast a longing look at the new foundation.
The house would have two handsome fieldstone chimneys; one had been
halfway built and stood sturdy as a monolith amid the framing timbers of
what would shortly—I hoped—be our kitchen and eating space. Jamie had
assured me that he would frame the large room and tack on a temporary
canvas roof within the next few weeks, so we could resume sleeping and
cooking indoors. The rest of the house …
That might depend on whatever grandiose notions he and Brianna had
conceived during their conversation the night before. I seemed to recall wild
remarks about concrete and indoor plumbing, which I rather hoped wouldn’t
take root, at least not until we had a roof over our heads and a floor under our
feet. On the other hand …
The sound of voices on the path below indicated that my expected
company had arrived, and I smiled. On the other hand, we’d have two more
pairs of experienced and competent hands to help with the building.
Jem’s disheveled red head popped into view, and he broke into a huge grin
at sight of me.“Grannie!” he shouted, and brandished a slightly mangled corn dodger.
“We brought you breakfast!”
THEY 
HAD
 BROUGHT me breakfast, lavish by my present standards: two
fresh corn dodgers, griddled sausage patties wrapped in layers between
burdock leaves, a boiled egg, still hot, and a quarter inch of Amy’s last year’s
huckleberry jam, in the bottom of its jar.
“Mrs. Higgins says to send back the empty jar,” Jemmy informed me,
handing it over. Only one eye was on the jar; the other was on the Big Log,
which had been hidden by darkness the night before. “Wow! What kind of
tree is that?”
“Poplar,” I said, closing my eyes in ecstasy at the first bite of sausage. The
Big Log was roughly sixty feet long. It had been a good bit longer before
Jamie had scavenged wood from the top for building and fires. “Your
grandfather says it was likely more than a hundred feet tall before it fell.”
Mandy was trying to get up onto the log; Jem gave her a casual boost then
leaned over to look down the length of the trunk, mostly smooth and pale but
scabbed here and there with remnants of bark and odd little forests of
toadstools and moss.
“Did it blow down in a storm?”
“Yes,” I said. “The top had been struck by lightning, but I don’t know
whether that was the same storm that knocked it down. It might have died
because of the lightning and then the next big storm blew it over. We found it
like this when we came back to the Ridge. Mandy, be careful there!”
She’d scrambled to her feet and was walking along the trunk, arms
stretched out like a gymnast, one foot in front of the other. The trunk was a
good five feet in diameter at that point; there was plenty of room atop it, but
it would be a hard bump if she fell off.
“Here, sweetheart.” Roger, who had been looking at the house site with
interest, came over and plucked her off the log. “Why don’t you and Jem go
gather wood for Grannie? D’ye remember what good firewood looks like?”
“Aye, of course.” Jem looked lofty. “I’ll show her how.”
“I knows how!” Mandy said, glowering at him.
“You have to look out for snakes,” he informed her.
She perked up at once, pique forgotten. “Wanna see a snake!”
“Jem—” Roger began, but Jemmy rolled his eyes.“
I
 know, Dad,” he said. “If I find a little one, I’ll let her touch it, but not if
it’s got rattles or a cotton mouth.”
“Oh, Jesus,” Roger muttered, watching them go off hand in hand.
I swallowed the last of the corn dodgers, licked sugary jam from the corner
of my mouth, and gave him a sympathetic look.
“Nobody died the last time you lived here,” I reminded him. He opened his
mouth to reply, but closed it again, and I remembered. Mandy nearly 
had
died last time. Which meant that whatever had made them come back now …
“It’s all right,” he said firmly, in answer to what must have been a very
apprehensive look on my face. He smiled a little and took me by the elbow,
drawing me into the shade of my surgery.
“It’s okay,” he said, and cleared his throat. “We’re okay,” he said, more
loudly. “We’re all here and sound. Nothing else matters right now.”
“All right,” I said, only slightly reassured. “I won’t ask.”
He laughed at that, and the dappled light made his worn face young again.
“We’ll tell you,” he assured me. “But most of it’s really Bree’s story; you
should hear it from her. I wonder what they’re hunting, she and Jamie?”
“Probably each other,” I said, smiling. “Sit down.” I touched his arm,
turning him toward the high stool.
“Each other?” He adjusted himself comfortably on the stool, feet tucked
back under him.
“Sometimes it’s hard to know what to say, how to talk to each other, when
you haven’t seen a person in a long time—especially when it’s a person
who’s important to you. It takes a bit of time to feel comfortable again; easier
if there’s a job at hand. Let me look at your throat, will you?”
“You don’t feel comfortable talking to me yet?” he asked lightly.
“Oh, yes,” I assured him. “Doctors never have trouble in talking to people.
You start by telling them to take off their clothes, and that breaks the ice. By
the time you’ve done poking them and peering into their orifices, the
conversation is usually fairly animated, if not necessarily relaxed.”
He laughed, but his hand had unconsciously grasped the neckband of his
shirt, pulling the fabric together.
“To tell you the truth,” he said, trying to look serious, “we only came for
the free babysitting. We haven’t been more than six feet away from the kids
in the last four months.” He laughed, then choked a little, and it ended in a
small coughing fit.I laid my hand on his and smiled. He smiled back—though with less
certainty than before, and, pulling his hand back, he quickly unbuttoned his
shirt and spread the cloth away from his neck. He cleared his throat, hard.
“Don’t worry,” I said. “You sound much better than you did last time I saw
you.”
Actually, he did, and that rather surprised me. His voice was still broken,
rasping, and hoarse—but he spoke with much less effort, and no longer
looked as though that effort caused him constant pain.
Roger raised his chin and I reached up carefully, fitting my fingers about
his neck, just under his jaw. He’d recently shaved; his skin was cool and
slightly damp and I caught a whiff of the shaving soap I made for Jamie,
scented with juniper berries; Jamie must have brought it for him early this
morning. I was moved by the sense of ceremony in that small gesture—and
moved much more by the hope in Roger’s eyes. Hope he tried to hide.
“I met a doctor,” he said gruffly. “In Scotland. Hector McEwan was his
name. He was … one of us.”
My fingers stilled and so did my heart.
“A traveler, you mean?”
He nodded. “I need to tell you about him. About what he did. But that can
wait a bit.”
“What he did,” I repeated. “To you, you mean?”
“Aye. Though it was what he did to Buck, first …”
I was about to ask what had happened to Buck when he looked suddenly
into my eyes, intent.
“Have you ever seen blue light?” he asked. “When you touch somebody in
a medical way, I mean? To heal them.”
Gooseflesh rippled up my arms and neck, and I had to take my fingers off
his neck, because they were trembling.
“I haven’t done it myself,” I said carefully. “But I saw it. Once.”
I was seeing it again, as vivid in my mind’s eye as it had been in the
shadows of my bed at L’Hôpital des Anges, when I had miscarried Faith and
been dying of puerperal fever. When Master Raymond had laid his hands on
me and I had seen the bones in my arm glow blue through my flesh.
I dropped that vision like a hot plate and realized that Roger was gripping
my hand.
“I didn’t mean to scare you,” he said.“I’m not scared,” I said, half truthfully. “Just shocked. I hadn’t thought
about it in years.”
“It scared the shit out of me,” he said frankly, and let go of my hand.
“After he did what he did to Buck’s heart, I was afraid to talk to him, but I
knew I had to. And when I touched him—to stop him, you know; I was
following him up a path—he froze. And then he turned round and put his
hand on my chest”—his own hand rose, unconsciously, and rested on his
chest—“and he said the same thing to me that I’d heard him say to Buck:
‘Cognosco te.’
 It means, ‘I know you,’” he clarified, seeing the blank look on
my face. “In Latin.”
“He knew—what you were—just by touching you?” The oddest feeling
was rippling over my shoulders and down my arms. Not exactly fear … but
something like awe.
“Yes. I couldn’t tell about 
him,
” he added hastily. “I didn’t feel anything
strange, just then, but I was watching closely, earlier, when he put his hand
on Buck’s chest—Buck had some sort of heart attack when we came through
the stones—”
“He came with you and Bree and—”
Now Roger made the same helpless gesture.
“No, this was … earlier. Anyway, Buck was in a bad way, and the people
who’d taken him in had sent for a doctor, this Hector McEwan. And he laid
his hand on Buck’s chest and—and did wee things—and I saw—I really did,
Claire, I 
saw
 it—a faint blue light come up through his fingers and spread
over his hand.”
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.”
He laughed.
“Aye. Exactly. Nobody else could see it, though,” he added, laughter
fading out of his face. “Only me.”
I rubbed the palms of my hands slowly together, imagining it.
“Buck,” I said. “I assume he survived? Since you asked if we’d seen him.”
Roger’s face changed at that, a shadow passing behind his eyes.
“He did. Then. But we—separated, after I found Bree and the kids … It’s
…”
“A long story,” I finished for him. “Maybe it should wait until Jamie and
Bree come back from their hunting. But about this Dr. McEwan—did he tell
you anything about—the blue light?” The words felt strange to say, and yet Icould envision it; my palms tingled slightly at the thought, and I looked down
at them involuntarily. No, still pink.
Roger was shaking his head. “Not much, no. Not in words. But—he put his
hand on my throat.” His own hand rose, touching the ragged scar left by the
hangman’s rope. “And … something happened,” he said softly.4
The Women Will Ha’ a Fit
“WOULD YE COME ASIDE to the cabin, cousin?” Ian said, looking
uncharacteristically shy. “In case Rachel might be back. I’d … like ye to
meet her.”
“I’d love to meet her,” Bree said, smiling at him, and meant it. She lifted
an eyebrow at her father, but he nodded.
“It will be good to put this lot down for a bit,” he said, wiping a sleeve
across his perspiring face. “And if ye milked the goats as your mother asked
ye to this morning, Ian, I wouldna say no to a cup of it, either.” He and Ian
were carrying the usable remains of the deer, bound into an unwieldy
package inside the mostly intact skin and hanging from a stout pole that they
bore across their shoulders. It was a hot day.
Someone was home at the cabin in the aspen grove. The door stood open,
and there was a small spinning wheel standing on the front stoop amid the
darting leaf shadows and a chair beside it with a flat basket piled with brown
and gray puffs of what Brianna assumed must be combed clean wool. There
was no sign of the spinner, but women were singing inside the house, in
Gaelic—breaking off every few bars in laughter, with one clear voice then
singing the line over again, and the second after it, stumbling over an
occasional word, then laughing again.
Jamie smiled, hearing it.
“Jenny’s teachin’ wee Rachel the 
Gàidhlig,
” he said, unnecessarily. “Set it
down here, Ian.” He nodded at the pool of shade under a fallen log. “The
women will ha’ a fit if we bring flies into the house.”
Someone in the house had heard them, for the singing stopped and a head
poked out of the open door.
“Ian!” A tallish, very pretty dark-haired girl popped out and hopped off the
porch, grabbing Ian round the middle in exuberant embrace, this instantlyreturned. “Thy cousins have come! Does thee know?”
“Aye, I do,” he said, kissing her mouth. “Come say hello to my cousin
Brianna, 
mo ghràidh.
 Oh—and Uncle Jamie, too,” he added, turning round.
Bree was already smiling, moved by the obvious love between the young
Murrays, and glancing at her father she saw the same smile on his face. Saw
it broaden as he looked beyond them to the open door, where a small woman
had come out, a baby wearing nothing but a clout in her arms.
“Who—” she began, and then her eyes fell on Brianna, and her mouth
dropped open.
“Blessed Bride protect us,” she said mildly, but her eyes were warm, blue,
and slanted like Jamie’s, smiling up at Brianna. “The giants have come. And
your husband, too, they say, and him even taller than yourself, lass. And
ye’ve bairns, too, they say—all of them springin’ up like weeds, I reckon?”
“Toadstools,” Bree said, laughing, and bent down to hug her diminutive
aunt. Jenny smelled of goats, fresh wool, porridge, and toasted yeast bread,
and a faint scent in her hair and clothes that Bree had long forgotten but
recognized instantly as the soap Jenny had made at Lallybroch, with honey
and lavender and a Highland herb that had no name in English.
“It’s so good to see you,” she said, and felt tears well in her eyes, for the
soap brought back Lallybroch as she’d first seen it—and with that ghost,
another, stronger one behind it: the ghost of her own Lallybroch.
She blinked back the tears and straightened up, a tremulous smile pasted
on her face. This vanished at once, though, as she remembered.
“Oh, Auntie! I’m so sorry. About Uncle Ian, I mean.” A new wave of loss
washed through her. Even though Ian Murray the elder had been dead all of
her life, save for a few brief years, and she had met him only once, the loss
seemed fresh and shocking now.
Jenny looked down, patting the baby’s tender back. He had a downy head
of brown-blond fuzz, like a guinea hen’s chick.
“Ach,” she said softly. “My Ian’s wi’ me still. I can see him in this
wee’un’s face, clear as day.”
She turned the baby deftly so he rested on her hip, looking up at Brianna
with big round eyes—eyes the same warm light brown of her cousin Ian—
and his father.
“Oh,” Brianna said, charmed and comforted at once. She reached out a
tentative hand and offered the baby a finger. “And your name is … Oggy?”Jenny and Rachel both laughed, one with honest amusement and the other
ruefully.
“I’m afraid we haven’t managed to find the proper name for him as yet,”
Rachel said, touching him gently on the shoulder. Oggy turned toward his
mother’s voice and kept on turning, leaning slowly out of Jenny’s arms like a
sloth drawn ineluctably toward sweet fruit.
Rachel gathered him up, gently touching his cheek. He turned his head—
again slowly—and started sucking on her knuckle.
“Ian says that Mohawk children find their proper names when they’re
older, and have just cradle-names until then.”
Jenny’s shapely black eyebrows rose at this.
“Ye mean to tell me that the bairn’s going to be Oggy until … when?”
“Oh, no,” Rachel assured her. “I’m sure I’ll think of something before
‘when.’” She smiled at her mother-in-law, who rolled her eyes and turned her
attention back to Brianna.
“I’m glad ye didna have such trouble wi’ your own bairns, 
a nighean.
Jamie said in his letters that they’re called Jeremiah and Amanda, is that
right?”
Brianna coughed, avoiding Rachel’s eye.
“Um … Jeremiah Alexander Ian Fraser MacKenzie,” she said. “And
Amanda Claire Hope MacKenzie.”
Jenny nodded approvingly, whether at the quality or the quantity of the
names.
“Jenny!” Bree’s father appeared on the porch, sweaty and disheveled,
bloodstained shirt much in evidence. “Ian canna find the beer.”
“We drank it,” Jenny called back, not turning a hair.
“Oh.” He disappeared back into the house, presumably in search of
something else potable, leaving damp, slightly bloody footprints on the
porch.
“What’s happened to him?” Jenny demanded, shooting a sharp glance from
the footprints to Brianna, who shrugged.
“A bear.”
“Oh.” She seemed to digest this for a moment, then shook her head. “I
suppose I’ll have to let him have beer, then.” She disappeared after the
menfolk, leaving Brianna and Rachel outside.
“I don’t think I’ve ever met a Quaker before,” Brianna said after a slightly
awkward pause. “Is ‘Quaker’ the right word, by the way? I don’t mean to—”“We say Friend,” Rachel said, smiling again. “Quaker is not offensive,
though. But I think thee must have met at least one. Thee might not know, if
the Friend chose not to use Plain Speech in talking with thee. Most of us
don’t have stripes, spots, or any other physical mark by which thee might
discern us.”
“
Most
 of you?”
“Well, naturally I cannot see my own back, but I’m sure Ian would have
told me, was there anything remarkable …”
Brianna laughed, feeling slightly giddy from hunger, relief, and the simple,
recurrent joy at being with her family again. A charmingly expanded family,
too, it seemed.
“I’m really glad to meet you,” she said to Rachel. “I couldn’t imagine what
sort of girl would marry Ian—I’m sorry, that sounds wrong …”
“No, thee is quite right,” Rachel assured her. “I couldn’t have imagined
marrying a man like him, either, but there he is in my bed each morning,
nonetheless. They do say the Lord moves in mysterious ways. Come into the
house,” she added, shifting Oggy into a new position. “I know where the
wine is.”5
Meditations on a Hyoid
“IT ALL BEGINS 
IN
 
medias res,
 and if you’re lucky, it ends that way as
well.” Roger swallowed, and I felt his larynx bob under my fingers. The skin
of his throat was cool, and smooth where I held it, though I could feel a tiny
prickle of beard stubble brush my knuckle just under his jaw.
“That’s what Dr. McEwan said?” I asked curiously. “What did he mean by
it, I wonder?”
Roger’s eyes were closed—people normally closed their eyes when I
examined them, as though needing to preserve what privacy they could—but
at this, he opened them, an arresting deep green lit by the morning sun.
“I asked him. He said that nothing ever truly starts or stops, so far as he
could see. That people think a child’s life begins at birth, but plainly that’s
not so—ye can see them move in the womb, and a child that comes too soon
will often live for a short time, and ye see that it’s alive in all its senses, even
though it can’t sustain life.”
Now I’d closed my own eyes, not because I found Roger’s gaze unsettling,
but in order to concentrate on the vibrations of his words. I moved my grip on
his throat a little lower.
“Well, he’s quite right about that,” I said, envisioning the inner anatomy of
the throat as I talked. “Babies are born already running, as it were. All their
processes—except breathing—are working long before birth. But that’s still a
rather cryptic remark.”
“Yes, it was.” He swallowed again and I felt his breath, warm on my bare
forearm. “I prodded him a bit, because he’d obviously meant it by way of
explanation—or at least the best he could do by way of explanation. I don’t
suppose you could describe what it is you actually do when you heal
someone, could you?”I smiled at that without opening my eyes. “Oh, I might have a go at it. But
there’s an implied error there; 
I
 don’t actually heal people. They heal by
themselves. I just … support them.”
A sound that wasn’t quite a laugh made his larynx execute a complicated
double bob. I 
thought
 I could feel a slight concavity under my thumb, where
the cartilage had been partially crushed by the rope … I put my other hand
round my own throat, for comparison.
“That’s actually what he said, too—Hector McEwan, I mean. But he 
did
heal people; I saw him do it.”
My hands released both our throats, and I opened my eyes.
He gave me a quick précis of his relations with William Buccleigh, from
Buck’s role in his hanging at Alamance, through the reappearance of his
ancestor 
in Inverness in 1980, and Buck’s joining him in the search for Jem,
after Brianna’s erstwhile co-worker, Rob Cameron, had kidnapped the boy.
“That was when he became … a bit more than a friend,” Roger said. He
looked down and cleared his throat. “He came with me to search for Jem.
Jem wasn’t there, of course, but we did find another Jeremiah. My father,” he
said abruptly, his voice cracking on the word. I reached by reflex for his
hand, but he waved me off, clearing his throat again.
“It’s okay. I’ll—I’ll tell you about that … later.” He swallowed and
straightened a little, meeting my eyes again. “But Buck—that’s what we
called him, Buck—when we came through the stones in search of Jem, we
were both … damaged by the passage. You said, I think, that it got worse, if
you did it more than once?”
“I wouldn’t say once 
isn’t
 damaging,” I said, with a small internal shudder
at the memory of that void, a chaos where nothing seems to exist but noise.
That, and the faint flicker of thought, all that holds you together between one
breath and the next. “But yes, it does get worse. What happened to you?”
“To me, not that much. Unconscious for a bit, woke up strangling, fighting
for air. Muck sweat, disorientation; couldn’t keep my balance for a bit,
staggered all over. But Buck—” He frowned, and I saw his eyes change as he
looked inward again, seeing the green hilltop of Craigh na Dun as he woke
with the rain on his face. As I had waked three times. The hair on my neck
rose slowly.
“It seemed to be his heart. He had a pain in his chest, his left arm, and he
couldn’t breathe well, said it was like a weight on his chest, and he couldn’tget up. I got him water, though, and after a bit he seemed okay. At least he
could walk, and he brushed off any suggestion that we stop and rest.”
They had separated then, Buck to search the road toward Inverness, Roger
to go to Lallybroch, and—
“Lallybroch!” This time I did grab him by the arm. “You went there?”
“I did,” he said, and smiled. He clasped my hand, where it lay on his arm.
“I met Brian Fraser.”
“You—but—
Brian
?” I shook my head in order to clear it. That made no
sense.
“No, it didn’t make sense,” he said, plainly reading my thoughts from my
face and smiling at the results. “We … didn’t go where—I mean 
when
—we
thought we were going. We ended in 1739.”
I stared at him for a moment, and he shrugged helplessly.
“Later,” I said firmly, and reached for his throat again, thinking, 
“In
medias res.” What the devil did McEwan mean by that?
I could hear distant childish shouts from the direction of the creek, and the
high, cracked screech of a hawk in the tall snag at the far side of our clearing;
I could just see him—or her—from the corner of my eye: a large dark shape
like a torpedo on a dead branch. And I was beginning to hear—or to think I
heard—the thrum of blood in Roger’s neck, a faint sound, separate from the
thump of his pulse. And the fact that I was evidently hearing it through my
fingertips seemed shockingly ordinary.
“Talk to me a bit more,” I suggested, as much to avoid hearing what I
thought I heard as in order to loosen up his larynx. “About anything.”
He hummed for a moment, but that made him cough, and I dropped my
hand so he could turn his head.
“Sorry,” he said. “Bobby Higgins was just telling me the Ridge is growing
—a lot of new families, I hear?”
“Like weeds,” I said, replacing my hand. “We came back to find that at
least twenty new families had settled down, and there’ve been three more just
since we came back from Savannah, where the winds of war had briefly
blown us.”
He nodded, a slight frown on his face, and gave me a sidelong green
glance. “I don’t suppose any of the new settlers is a minister?”
“No,” I said promptly. “Is that what you—I mean, you still think you—”
“I do.” He looked up at me, a little shyly. “I’m not fully ordained yet; I’ll
need to take care of that, somehow. But when we decided to come back, wetalked—Bree and I. About what we might do. Here. And …” He lifted both
shoulders, palms on his knees. “That’s what I might do.”
“You were a minister here before,” I said, watching his face. “Do you
really 
have
 to be formally ordained to do it again?”
He didn’t have to think; he’d done his thinking long since.
“I do,” he said. “I don’t feel … wrong … about having buried or married
folk before, or christened them. Someone had to do it, and I was all there
was. But I want it to be right.” He smiled a little. “It’s maybe like the
difference between being handfast and being properly married. Between a
promise and a vow. Even if ye ken ye’d never break the promise, ye want—”
He struggled for the words. “Ye want the weight of the vow. Something to
stand at your back.”
A vow. I’d made a few of those. And he was right; all of them—even those
I’d broken—had meant something, had weight. And a few of them had stood
at my back, and were still standing.
“That does make a difference,” I said.
“Ye know, ye were right,” he said, sounding surprised, and smiled at me.
“It 
is
 easy to talk to a doctor—especially one who’s got ye by the throat.
D’ye want to give McEwan’s method a try, then?”
I straightened my back and flexed my hands, rather self-consciously.
“It can’t hurt,” I said, hoping I was right. “You know—” I added
hesitantly, and felt Roger’s Adam’s apple bob below my hand.
“I know,” he said gruffly. “No expectations. If something happens … well,
it does. If not, I’m no worse off.”
I nodded, and felt gently about, fingertips probing. The tracheotomy I’d
performed to save his life had left a smaller scar in the hollow of his throat, a
slight depression about an inch long. I passed my thumb over that, feeling the
healthy rings of cartilage above and below. The lightness of the touch made
him shiver suddenly, tiny goosebumps stippling his neck, and he gave the
breath of a laugh.
“Goose walking on my grave,” he said.
“Stamping about on your throat, more like,” I said, smiling. “Tell me again
what Dr. McEwan said. Everything you can remember.”
I hadn’t taken my hand away, and I felt the lurch of his Adam’s apple as he
cleared his throat hard.
“He prodded my throat—much as you’re doing,” he added, smiling back.
“And he asked me if I knew what a hyoid bone was. He said”—Roger’s handrose involuntarily toward his throat but stopped a few inches from touching it
—“that mine was an inch or so higher than usual, and that if it had been in
the normal place, I’d be dead.”
“Really,” I said, interested. I put a thumb just under his jaw and said,
“Swallow, please.”
He did, and I touched my own neck and swallowed, still touching his.
“I’ll be damned,” I said. “It’s a small sample size, and granted, there may
be differences attributable to gender—but he may well be right. Perhaps
you’re a Neanderthal.”
“A what?” He stared at me.
“Just a joke,” I assured him. “But it’s true that one of the differences
between the Neanderthals and modern humans is the hyoid. Most scientists
think they hadn’t one at all, and therefore couldn’t speak, but my Uncle Lamb
said— You rather need one for coherent speech,” I added, seeing his blank
look. “It anchors the tongue. My uncle didn’t think they could have been
mute, so the hyoid must have been located differently.”
“How extremely fascinating,” Roger said politely.
I cleared my own throat and circled his neck once again.
“Right. And after saying about your hyoid—what did McEwan do? How,
exactly, did he touch you?”
Roger tilted his head back slightly and, reaching up, adjusted my grip,
moving my hand down an inch and gently spreading my fingers.
“About like that,” he said, and I found that my hand was now covering—or
at least touching—all the major structures of his throat, from larynx to hyoid.
“And then …?” I was listening intently—not to his voice, but to the sense
of his flesh. I’d had my hands on his throat dozens of times, particularly
during his recovery from the hanging, but what with one thing and another I
hadn’t touched it in several years—until today. I could feel the solid muscles
of his neck, firm under the skin, and I felt his pulse, strong and regular—a
little fast, and I realized just how important this might be to him. I felt a
qualm at that; I had no idea what Hector McEwan might have done—or what
Roger might have imagined he’d done—and still less notion how to do
anything myself.
“It’s just that I know what a sound larynx should feel like, and I can tell
what yours feels like, and … I put my fingers there and envision the way it
should feel.”
 That’s what McEwan had said in response to Roger’s questions.
I wondered if I knew what a normal larynx felt like.“There was a sensation of warmth.” Roger’s eyes had closed again; he was
concentrating on my touch. The smooth bulge of his larynx lay under the heel
of my hand, bobbing slightly when he swallowed. “Nothing startling. Just the
feeling you get when you step into a room where a fire is burning.”
“Does my touch feel warm to you now?” It should, I thought; his skin was
cool.
“Yes,” he said, not opening his eyes. “But it’s on the outside. It was on the
inside when McEwan … did what he did.” His dark brows drew together in
concentration. “It … I felt it … here—” Reaching up, he moved my thumb 
to
rest just to the right of center, directly beneath the hyoid. “And … 
here.
” His
eyes opened in surprise, and he pressed two fingers to the flesh above his
collarbone, an inch or two to the left of the suprasternal notch. “How odd; I
hadn’t remembered that.”
“And he touched you there, as well?” I moved my lower fingers down and
felt the quickening of my senses that often happened when I was fully
engaged with a patient’s body. Roger felt it, too—his eyes flashed to mine,
startled.
“What—?” he began, but before either of us could speak further, there was
a high-pitched yowl from the clearing below. This was instantly followed by
a confusion of young voices, more yowling, then a voice immediately
identifiable as Mandy in a passion, bellowing, “You’re bad, you’re bad,
you’re 
bad
 and I hate you! You’re bad and youse going to 
HELL
!”
Roger leapt to his feet. “Amanda!” he bellowed. “Come here right now!”
Over his shoulder, I saw Amanda, face contorted with rage, trying to grab her
doll, Esmeralda, which Germain was dangling by one arm, just above her
head, dancing to keep away from Amanda’s concerted attempts to kick him.
Startled, Germain looked up, and Amanda connected full-force with his
shin. She was wearing stout half boots and the crack of impact was clearly
audible, though instantly superseded by Germain’s cry of pain. Jemmy,
looking appalled, grabbed Esmeralda, thrust her into Amanda’s arms, and
with a guilty glance over his shoulder ran for the woods, followed by a
hobbling Germain.
“Jeremiah!” Roger roared. “Stop right there!” Jem froze as though hit by a
death ray; Germain didn’t, and vanished with a wild rustling into the
shrubbery.
I’d been watching the boys, but a faint choking noise made me glance
sharply at Roger. He’d gone pale and was clutching his throat with bothhands. I seized his arm.
“Are you all right?”
“I … don’t know.” He spoke in a rasping whisper, but gave me the shadow
of a pained smile. “Think I—might have sprained something.”
“Daddy?” said a small voice beside me. Amanda sniffled dramatically,
wiping tears and snot all over her face. “Is you mad at me, Daddy?”
Roger took an immense breath, coughed, and went over, squatting down to
take her in his arms.
“No, sweetheart,” he said softly—but in a fairly normal voice, and
something clenched inside me began to relax. “I’m not mad. You mustn’t tell
people they’re going to hell, though. Come here, let’s wash your face.” He
stood up, holding her, and turned toward my mixing table, where there was a
basin and ewer.
“I’ll do it,” I said, reaching out for Mandy. “Maybe you want to go and …
er … talk to Jem?”
“Mmphm,” he said, and handed her across. A natural snuggler, Mandy at
once clung affectionately to my neck and wrapped her legs around my
middle.
“Can we wash my dolly’s face, too?” she asked. “Dose bad boys got her
dirty!”
I listened with half an ear to Mandy’s mingled endearments to Esmeralda
and denunciations of her brother and Germain, but most of my attention was
focused on what was going on in the clearing below.
I could hear Jem’s voice, high and argumentative, and Roger’s, firm and
much lower, but couldn’t pick out any words. Roger 
was
 talking, though, and
I didn’t hear any choking or coughing …. That was good.
The memory of him bellowing at the children was even better. He’d done
that before—it was a necessity, children and the great outdoors being what
they respectively were—but I’d never heard him do it without his voice
breaking, with a follow-up of coughing and throat clearing. McEwan had said
that it was a small improvement, and that it took time for healing.
Had I actually done anything to help?
I looked critically at the palm of my hand, but it looked much as usual: a
half-healed paper cut on the middle finger, stains from picking blackberries,
and a burst blister on my thumb, from snatching a spider full of bacon that
had caught fire out of the hearth, without a pot holder to shield my hand. Not
a sign of any blue light, certainly.“Wassat, Grannie?” Amanda leaned off the table to look at my upturned
hand.
“What’s what? That black splotch? I think it’s ink; I was writing up my
casebook yesterday. Kirsty Wilson’s rash.” I’d thought at first the rash was
just poison sumac, but it was hanging on in a rather worrying fashion …. No
fever, though … perhaps it was hives? Or some kind of atypical psoriasis?
“No, 
dat.
” Mandy poked a wet, chubby finger at the heel of my hand. “Issa
letter!” She twisted her head halfway round to look closer, black curls
tickling across my arm. “Letter ‘J’!” she announced triumphantly. “‘J’ is for
Jemmy! I hate Jemmy,” she added, frowning.
“Er …” I said, completely nonplussed. It 
was
 the letter “J.” The scar had
faded to a thin white line but was still clear if the light struck right. The scar
Jamie had given me, when I’d left him at Culloden. Left him to die, hurling
myself through the stones to save his unborn, unknown child. Our child. And
if I hadn’t?
I looked at Mandy, sherry-eyed and black-curled and perfect as a tiny
spring apple. Heard Jem outside, now giggling with his father. It had cost us
twenty years apart—years of heartbreak, pain, and danger. It had been worth
it.
“It’s for Grandda’s name. ‘J’ for Jamie,” I said to Amanda, who nodded as
though that made perfect sense, clutching a soggy Esmeralda to her chest. I
touched her glowing cheek and imagined for an instant that my fingers might
be tinged with blue, though they weren’t.
“Mandy,” I said, on impulse. “What color is my hair?”
“When your hair is white, you’ll come into your full power.”
 An old
Tuscarora wisewoman named Nayawenne had said that to me, years ago—
along with a lot of other disturbing things.
Mandy stared intently at me for a moment, then said definitely, “Brindle.”
“What? Where did you learn that word, for heaven’s sake?”
“Uncle Joe. He says ’at’s what color Badger is.”
“Who’s Badger?”
“Auntie Gail’s doggy.”
“Hmm,” I said. “Not yet, then. All right, sweetheart, let’s go and hang
Esmeralda out to dry.”6
Home Is the Hunter, Home from the Hill
JAMIE AND BRIANNA CAME back in late afternoon, with two brace of
squirrels, fourteen doves, and a large piece of stained and tattered canvas that,
unwrapped, revealed something that looked like the remnants of a
particularly grisly murder.
“Supper?” I asked, gingerly poking at a shattered bone sticking out of the
mass of hair and slick flesh. The smell was iron-raw and butcherous, with a
rank note that seemed familiar, but decay hadn’t yet set in to any noticeable
degree.
“Aye, if ye can manage, Sassenach.” Jamie came and peered down at the
bloody shambles, frowning a little. “I’ll tidy it up for ye. I need a bit o’
whisky first, though.”
Given the bloodstains on his shirt and breeks, I hadn’t noticed the equally
stained rag tied round his leg, but now saw that he was limping. Raising a
brow, I went to the large basket of food, small tools, and minor medical
supplies that I lugged up to the house site every morning.
“From what’s left of it, I presume that is—or was—a deer. Did you
actually tear it apart with your bare hands?”
“No, but the bear did,” Bree said, straight-faced. She exchanged complicit
glances with her father, who hummed in his throat.
“Bear,” I said, and took a deep breath. I gestured at his shirt. “Right. How
much of that blood is yours?”
“No much,” he said tranquilly, sitting down on the Big Log. “Whisky?”
I looked sharply at Brianna, but she seemed to be intact. Filthy, and with
green-gray bird droppings streaked down her shirt, but intact. Her face
glowed with sun and happiness, and I smiled.
“There’s whisky in the tin canteen hanging over there,” I said, nodding
toward the big spruce at the far side of the clearing. “Do you want to fetch itfor your father while I see what’s left of his leg?”
“Sure. Where are Mandy and Jem?”
“When last seen, they were playing by the creek with Aidan and his
brothers. Don’t worry,” I added, seeing her lower lip suck suddenly in. “It’s
very shallow there, and Fanny said she’d go and keep an eye on Mandy while
she’s collecting leeches. Fanny’s 
very
 dependable.”
“Mm-hmm.” Bree still looked dubious, but I could see her fighting down
her maternal impulse to go scoop Mandy out of the creek immediately. “I
know I met her last night, but I’m not sure I remember Fanny. Where does
she live?”
“With us,” Jamie said matter-of-factly. “Ow!”
“Hold still,” I said, spreading the puncture wound in his leg open with two
fingers while I poured saline solution into it. “You don’t want to die of
tetanus, do you?”
“And what would ye do if I said yes, Sassenach?”
“The same thing I’m doing right now. I don’t care if you want to or not;
I’m not having it.”
“Well, why did ye ask me, then?” He leaned back on his palms, both legs
stretched out, and looked up at Bree. “Fanny’s a wee orphan lass. Your
brother took her under his protection.”
Bree’s face went almost comically blank. “My brother. Willie?” she asked,
tentative.
“Unless your mother kens otherwise, he’s the only brother ye’ve got,”
Jamie assured her. “Aye, William. Jesus, Sassenach, ye’re worse than the
bear!”
He closed his eyes, whether to avoid looking at what I was doing to his leg
—enlarging and debriding the wound with a lancet; the injury wasn’t serious
in itself, but the puncture wound in his calf was deep, and I was in fact 
not
being rhetorical about the risk of tetanus—or to give Bree a moment to
recover her countenance.
She looked at him, head cocked to one side.
“So,” she said slowly. “That means … he knows that you’re his father?”
Jamie grimaced, not opening his eyes.
“He does.”
“Not that happy about it?” One side of her mouth curled up, but both her
eyes and her voice were sympathetic.
“Probably not.”“Yet,” I murmured, rinsing blood down his long shinbone. He snorted.
Bree made a more feminine version of the same noise and went to fetch the
whisky. Jamie heard her go and opened his eyes.
“Are ye not done yet, Sassenach?” I saw the slight vibration of his wrists
and realized that he was bracing himself on his palms in order to hide the fact
that he was trembling with exhaustion.
“I’m through hurting you,” I assured him. I put my hand next to his on the
log as I rose, touching his fingers lightly. “I’ll put a bandage on it, and then
you should lie down for a bit with your foot propped up.”
“Don’t fall asleep, Da.” Brianna’s shadow fell over him, and she leaned
down to hand him the canteen. “Ian says he’s bringing Rachel and his mother
down to have supper with us.” She leaned in farther and kissed him on the
forehead.
“Don’t worry about Willie,” she said. “He’ll figure things out.”
“Aye. I hope he doesna wait ’til I’m dead.” He gave her a lopsided smile to
indicate that this was meant to be a joke, and lifted the canteen in salute.
I CHIVVIED JAMIE, protesting, into the shade under my surgical shelter
and made him lie down with my apron folded under his head.
“Have you had anything at all to eat since breakfast?” I asked, propping his
injured leg up with a chunk of wood from the scrap heap.
“I have,” he said patiently. “Amy Higgins sent bannocks and cheese wi’
Brianna, and we ate it whilst waiting on the bear to leave. Do ye think I’d not
have said by now if I was starving?”
“Oh,” I said, feeling rather foolish. “Well, yes, I do. It’s just—” I smoothed
hair back from his brow. “It’s just that I want to make you feel better, and
feeding you was the only thing that came to mind.”
That made him laugh, and he stretched, arching his back, and readjusted
himself into a more comfortable position on the trampled grass.
“Well, that’s a kind thought, Sassenach. I could think of a few other things,
maybe—after I’ve had a wee rest. And Brianna says that Ian’s lot are coming
to supper.” He turned his head, casting a look toward the distant mountain,
where the sun was coming slowly down through a scatter of fat little clouds,
painting their bellies with soft gold.
We both sighed a little at the sight, and he turned back and took my hand.“What I want ye to do, Sassenach, is sit wi’ me here for a moment—and
tell me I’m no dreaming. She’s really here? She and the bairns and Roger
Mac?”
I squeezed his hand and felt the same bubbling joy I could see in his face.
“It’s real. They’re here. Right 
there,
 in fact.” I laughed a little, because I
could still see Brianna below, just heading for the trees that fringed the creek,
her long hair loose now, fading to brown in the shadows and lifting in the
evening breeze as she called for the children.
“I know what you mean, though. I had a visit with Roger this morning and
asked him to let me examine his throat. I felt just like doubting Thomas. It
was so strange to have him right there in front of me, touch him—and at the
same time, it didn’t seem strange at all.”
I rubbed the back of his hand lightly with my thumb, feeling the knobs of
his knuckles and the faint roughness of the scar that ran down from where his
fourth finger had been.
“I feel like that all the time, Sassenach,” he said, his voice a little husky.
His fingers curled over mine. “When I wake sometimes in the early morning,
and I see ye there beside me. I doubt you’re real. Until I touch ye—or until ye
fart.”
I yanked my hand loose and he rolled away and came up sitting, elbows
hunched comfortably over his knees.
“So how is it wi’ Roger Mac?” he asked, ignoring my glare. “D’ye think
he’ll ever have his voice back?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “I truly don’t. But let me tell you what he told me
about a man named Hector McEwan …”
He listened with great attention, stirring only to brush away wandering
clouds of gnats.
“Have ye ever seen that yourself, 
a nighean
?” he asked when I’d finished.
“Blue light, as he said?”
A small, deep shiver went through me that had nothing to do with the
cooling air. I looked away, to a buried past. Or one I’d tried to bury.
“I … well, yes,” I said, and swallowed. “But I thought I was hallucinating
at the time, and it’s quite possible I 
was.
 I’m reasonably sure that I was
actually dying, and imminent death might alter one’s perceptions.”
“Aye, it does,” he said, rather dryly. “But that’s not to say what ye see in
such a state isna true.” He looked closely at my face, considering.“Ye dinna need to tell me,” he continued quietly, and touched my shoulder.
“There’s no need to live such things again, if they dinna come back of their
own accord.”
“No,” I said, maybe a little too quickly. I cleared my throat and took a firm
grip on mind and memory. “I won’t. It’s just that I had a bad infection, and—
and Master Raymond—” I wasn’t looking directly at him, but I felt his head
lift suddenly at the name. “He came and healed me. I don’t have any idea
how he did it, and I wasn’t thinking 
anything
 consciously. But I saw—” I
rubbed a hand slowly over my forearm, seeing it again. “It was blue, the bone
inside my arm. Not a vivid blue, not like that—” I gestured toward the
mountain, where the evening sky above the clouds had gone the color of
larkspur. “A very soft, faint blue. But it did—‘glow’ isn’t the right word,
really. It was … alive.”
It had been. And I’d felt the blue spread outward from my bones, wash
through me. And felt the bursting of the microbes in my system, dying like
stars. The remembered sense of it lifted the hairs on my arms and neck, and
filled me with a strange sensation of well-being, like warm honey being
stirred.
A wild cry from the woods above broke the mood, and Jamie turned,
smiling.
“Och, there’s wee Oggy. He sounds like a hunting catamount.”
I got to my feet, brushing grass off my skirt. “I think he’s the loudest child
I’ve ever heard.”
As though the shriek had been a signal, I heard hooting from the hollow
below, and a gang of children burst out of the trees by the creek, followed by
Bree and Roger, walking slowly, heads leaning toward each other, deep in
what looked like contented conversation.
“I’m going to need a bigger house,” Jamie said, meditatively.
Before he could expand on this interesting notion, though, the Murrays
appeared on the path that led down from the eastern side of the Ridge, Rachel
carrying Oggy—bellowing over her shoulder—and Ian behind her with a
large, covered basket.
“The children?” Rachel said to Jamie. Jamie stood up, smiling, then
nodded toward the clearing below.
“See for yourself, 
a nighean.
”
Jem, Mandy, and Germain had been sorted out from their companions and
were now tagging along behind Bree and Roger, amicably pushing oneanother.
“Oh,” Rachel said very softly, and I saw her hazel eyes go soft as well.
“Oh, Jamie. Thy daughter looks so like thee—and her son as well!”
“I told ye,” Ian said, smiling down at her, and she put a hand on his arm,
squeezing tight.
“Thy mother …” Rachel shook her head, unable to think of anything
sufficiently descriptive of Jenny’s emotional state.
“Well, I doubt she’ll faint away,” Jamie said, getting gingerly to his feet.
“She’s met the lass once before, though no the bairns. Where is she, though?”
He glanced up the path that led into the woods, as though expecting his sister
to materialize there as he spoke.
“She’s staying at the MacNeills’ tonight,” Rachel said, and set Oggy on the
grass, where he lay squirming in a leisurely manner. “She and Cairistina
MacNeill became very friendly while we were quilting, and Cairistina told us
that her husband has gone to Salisbury and she was frightened at the thought
of being alone at night, their home being such a distance from the nearest
neighbor.”
I nodded at that. Cairistina was very young, newly married—she was
Richard MacNeill’s third wife—and had come from Campbelton, near Cross
Creek. Night on a mountain was very dark, and full of things unseen.
“That was very kind of Jenny,” I said.
Ian gave a brief snort of amusement. “I’ll no say my mother isna kind,” he
said. “But I’ll give ye good odds that she’s staying on her own account as
much as Mistress MacNeill’s.” He nodded at Oggy, who was whining, a long
trail of drool hanging from his lower lip. “The laddie’s had the colic three
nights runnin’ and it’s a small cabin, aye? I’d wager ye three to one she’s
stretched out like a corpse on Mrs. MacNeill’s bed right now, sound asleep.”
“She walked the floor with him half the night,” Rachel said apologetically
to me. “I told her I would take him, but she said, ‘Pish, and what’s a grannie
for, then?’” She squatted and picked up Oggy before he could escalate to his
imitation of an air-raid siren. “What does thee think of Marmaduke, Claire?”
“Of … oh, as a name for Oggy, you mean?” I hastily rearranged my face,
but it was too late. Rachel laughed.
“That’s what Jenny said. Still,” she added, removing the end of her dark
plait from her son’s grasping fingers, “Marmaduke Stephenson was one of
the Boston Martyrs: a very weighty Friend. It would be a fine name.”“Well, I grant ye, he wouldna easily be mistaken for someone else, if ye
call him Marmaduke,” Jamie said, trying to be tactful. “And he’d learn to
fight early on. But if ye mean him to be a Quaker …”
“Aye,” said Ian to Rachel. “And we’re no calling him Fear the Lord, either,
lass. Maybe Fortitude, though; that’s a decent manly name.”
“Hmm,” she said, looking down her nose at her offspring. “What does thee
think of Wisdom? Wisdom Murray? Wisdom Ian Murray?”
Ian laughed. “Aye, and what if the laddie should turn out to be a fool?
Borrowing trouble, are ye no?”
Jamie tilted his head and squinted at Oggy, considering, then glanced at
Ian, then at Rachel, and shook his head.
“Given his parents, I dinna think that’s likely. Still … have ye thought
perhaps to honor your own da, Rachel? What was your father’s name?”
“Mordecai,” she said. “Possibly not as a 
first
 name …”
I glanced at the fire, a wavering reddish transparency in the daylight. “Ian,
would you build up the fire a bit? I’m going to cook the doves in the ashes,
and then … hmmm …” I glanced back down the hill, counting heads as they
came up. The Higgins children had peeled off and gone to their own 
cabin for
supper, so that left us with—I counted quickly on my fingers—seven adults,
four children—and I had a big pot of lentils with herbs and a hambone that
had been bubbling since midday. Bree had skinned and cleaned the squirrels
she’d brought back—perhaps I’d best cut them up and add them to the pot.
And then—
“We brought thee a small addition to thy supper, Claire.” Rachel nodded
toward the basket over her arm. “No, Oggy, thee mustn’t pull thy mother’s
hair. I might be startled and drop thee into the fire, and that would be a
dreadful shame, wouldn’t it?”
I laughed at this very Quaker threat, but Oggy let go—mostly—the end of
his mother’s braid and stuffed his fist into his mouth instead, regarding me
with a thoughtful stare.
“Come on,” I said, reaching for him. “You’ve got cousins to meet, young
Oglethorpe.”
JAMIE’S LEG DIDN’T hurt a great deal, but it was bruised and tender, and
he was happy to sit on the big stump near Claire’s makeshift surgery and let
his bones rest as he watched his family, busy with making dinner.Brianna was dealing with the shattered deer, still wearing the hunting
clothes he’d lent her. He watched her sure hand with the knife and the power
of her shoulders working, proud of her. Did she take that skill from himself,
he wondered—or from her mother? It wasn’t only the hands, nor yet the
simple knowledge of how to go about it … it was a toughness of mind, he
thought approvingly. The recognition of a job to do and no need to question
it.
He glanced at Roger, who was splitting wood, stripped to the waist and
sweating. That lad 
did
 have questions, and likely always would. Jamie
thought he maybe sensed a new determination in him, though; he’d need it.
Claire said he meant to go on with being a minister. That was good; folk
needed someone to do for their souls, and Roger plainly needed something
worth doing. Claire said he’d told her he’d thought about it and made up his
mind.
Brianna, though … what might the shape of her life be here, now? She’d
taught a bit in their wee school, when she was here on the Ridge before. He
hadn’t thought she really liked the teaching, though; he thought she wouldn’t
miss it. She rose to her feet as he watched, and stretched, arms reaching for
the sky. 
Christ, she’s a braw lass …
Maybe she’ll have more children.
 He was almost afraid to think that. He
didn’t want to risk her. And Jem and Mandy needed her. 
Still and all …
 The
thought was a small green hope in his chest and he smiled, watching the knot
of children bringing up firewood, dropping it on the ground, and running off
to join the game of whatever they were playing. Hide-and-seek, perhaps …
there was wee Frances, coming along with a bundle of sticks and a handful of
flowers.
She’d lost her cap and her dark curls had come down on one side,
straggling over one shoulder. Her face was pink with the exercise and she
was smiling; he was happy to see it.
Something tickled his leg, breaking into his thoughts. There was a green
thing that looked like a tiny spade sitting on his upraised knee.
He moved a hand cautiously toward it, but it wasn’t afraid of him and
didn’t fly off or retaliate by trying to crawl into his ears or nose as flies did. It
let him touch its backside, merely twitching its antennae in mild annoyance,
but when he attempted to stroke its back, it sprang off his knee, sudden as a
grasshopper, and landed on the edge of Claire’s medicine box, where it
seemed to pause to take stock of its circumstances.“Don’t do it,” he advised the insect, in Gaelic. “You’ll end up as a tonic, or
ground to powder.” He couldn’t tell whether it was looking at him, but it
seemed to consider, then gave another startling hop and vanished.
Fanny had brought Claire a plant of some kind, and Claire was turning
over the leaves, her face bright with interest, explaining what it was good for.
Fanny glowed, a tiny smile of pleasure at being useful on her face.
The sight of her warmed his heart. She’d been so frightened when Willie
brought her to them—and nay wonder, poor wee lass. There was a colder
place in his heart where her sister, Jane, lived.
He said a small prayer for the repose of Jane’s soul—and, after an instant’s
hesitation, another for Willie. Whenever he thought of Jane, he saw her in his
mind, alone and abandoned in black night, her face stark white, dead by the
light of her only candle. Dead by her own hand, and the church said thus
damned, but he stubbornly prayed for her soul anyway. They couldn’t stop
him.
Dinna fash, a leannan,
 he thought toward her, tenderly. 
I’ll see Frances
safe for ye, and maybe I’ll see ye in Heaven one day. Dinna be afraid.
He hoped someone would see William safe for him. Dreadful as the
memory of that night was, he kept it, recalled it deliberately. William had
come to him for help, and he treasured that. The sense of the two of them,
pursuing a lost cause through a rainy, dangerous night, standing together in
desolation by the light of that candle, too late. It was a dreadful memory, but
one he didn’t want to forget.
Mammaidh,
 he thought, his mother coming suddenly to mind. 
Look after
my bonnie lad, will ye?7
Dead or Alive
WILLIAM, NINTH EARL OF Ellesmere, Viscount Ashness, Baron
Derwent, leaned against an oak tree, taking stock of his resources. At the
moment, these consisted of a fairly good horse—a nice dark bay with a white
nose who (William had been informed by the horse’s prior owner) went by
the name of Bartholomew—along with a 
canvas sack containing a
discouragingly small amount of food and half a bottle of stale beer, a decent
knife, and a musket that might, in a pinch, be used to club someone, because
attempting to fire it would undoubtedly blow off William’s hand, face, or
both.
He did have three pounds, seven shillings, twopence, and a handful of
small coins and fragments of metal that might once have 
been
 coins—a
beneficent side effect of a scraping acquaintance with an American militia
unit he’d encountered at a roadside tavern. They had, they said, served with
the Continental troops at Monmouth and had been with General Washington
six months earlier, at Middlebrook Encampment—the last known place that
William’s cousin Benjamin had been seen alive.
Whether Benjamin was 
still
 alive was a matter of considerable speculation,
but William was determined to proceed on that assumption until and unless
he found proof to the contrary.
His encounter with the New Jersey militiamen had yielded no information
whatever in that regard, but it had produced a number of men eager to play at
cards, who grew wilder in their wagers as the night wore on and the drink ran
low.
William hoped he’d find someplace tonight where the money he’d won
might buy him supper and a bed; at the moment, it seemed much more likely
to get him killed. He’d discovered that dawn was often a time for regrets, and
apparently the Americans shared that sentiment today. They’d wokenbellicose rather than nauseated, though, and had shortly thereafter accused
William of cheating at cards, thus causing him to take his leave abruptly.
He peered cautiously out through the drooping canopy of a white oak. The
road ran by a furlong or so from his hiding place, and while it was blessedly
vacant at the moment, the muddy track was clearly well traveled, pocked and
churned by the recent passage of horses.
He’d heard them coming, thank God, in time to get Bart off the road and
hidden in a tangle of saplings and vines. He’d crept close to the road just in
time to see some of the men from whom he’d won money the night before,
now halfway recovered from their sodden sleep and of a mind to get it back,
judging from their incoherent shouts as they passed.
He glanced up at the flickering green light that came down through the
leaves; it was no more than midmorning. Too bad. He didn’t think it wise to
go back to the tavern, where the other militiamen were doubtless stirring, and
he had no idea how far it might be to the next hamlet. He shifted his weight
and sighed; he didn’t fancy hanging about under a tree—which, it struck him,
was the perfect size and shape from which 
to
 hang a man—until the lot
pursuing him got tired and went back the other way. Or nightfall, whichever
came first.
What came next was the sound of horses, but fewer of them. Three men,
riding slowly.
Cloaca obscaena.
 He didn’t say it aloud, but the words rang clear in his
head. One of the men was the gentleman from whom he’d purchased Bart,
two days before, and the others were from the militia unit.
The other thing that was clear to him was the vision of Bart’s right fore, on
which the shoe was missing a large triangular chunk.
He didn’t wait to see whether the ex-owner could pick Bart’s track out of
the morass in the road. He dodged round the oak and made his way as fast as
he could through the brush, devil take the noise.
Bart, whom he’d left nosing about for edibles, was standing with his head
up, ears pricked, and nostrils flared with interest.
“No!” William said in a frantic whisper. “Don’t—”
The horse neighed loudly.
William snatched loose the reins and swung up into the saddle, gathering
both reins into one hand and reaching for the musket with the other.
“Go!” he shouted, kicking Bart smartly, and they broke through the screen
of brush and slewed onto the road in a shower of leaves and mud.The three riders had gathered at the edge of the road, one man squatting in
the mud, looking at the mass of overlapping tracks. All of them turned to
gape at William, who bellowed something incoherent at them and brandished
his musket as he turned sharply to the left and charged back in the direction
of the tavern, bent low over his horse’s neck.
He could hear shouted curses behind him, but he had a good lead. He
might make it.
As to what might happen if he did … it didn’t matter. There wasn’t
anything else he could do. Being trapped between two groups of hostile
horsemen didn’t appeal to him.
Bart stumbled. Slipped in the mud and went down, William shooting off
over his head and landing flat on his back with a splat that knocked the breath
out of him and the musket out of his hand.
They were on him before he could remember how to breathe. His head
swam and everything was a blur of moving shapes. Two of the men dragged
him up and he hung between them, blood roaring in his ears, helplessly
vibrating with fury and fear, mouth opening and closing like a goldfish.
They didn’t waste time in threats. Bart’s ex-owner punched him in the face
and the others let go, dropping him back into the mud. Hands rifled his
pockets, snatched the knife from his belt. He heard Bart whuffling nearby,
stamping a bit as one of the men pulled at the saddle.
“Oy, you let that alone!” shouted Bart’s owner, standing up. “That’s my
horse and my saddle, damn your eyes!”
“No, ’tisn’t,” said a determined voice. “You’d not’ve caught this rascal
without us! I’m having the saddle.”
“Leave it, Lowell! Let him have his horse, we’ll share out the money.” The
third man evidently belted Lowell to emphasize his opinion, for there was a
meaty smack and a yelp of outrage. William suddenly remembered how to
breathe, and the dark mist cleared from his vision. Panting shallowly, he
rolled over and started trying to get his feet under him.
One of the men cast him a brief glance but clearly thought him no threat.
I’m probably not,
 he thought muzzily, but he wasn’t used to losing fights and
the thought of simply slinking off like a whipped dog wasn’t on, either.
His musket had fallen into the thick flowering grass along the road. He
wiped blood out of one eye, stood up, picked up the gun, and clubbed Bart’s
ex-owner in the back of the head with it. The man had been in the act of
mounting, and his foot stuck in the stirrup as he fell. The horse shied andbacked with a shrill whinny of protest, and the men who’d been engaged in
dividing William’s substance jerked round in alarm.
One leapt back and the other lunged forward, grabbing the musket’s barrel,
and there were a few seconds of panting confusion, interrupted by the sound
of shouts and galloping horses.
Distracted, William glanced round to see the larger group of gamblers
from last night bearing down on them, hell-for-leather. He let go of the
musket and dived for the grassy verge.
He would have made it had Bart, frightened by the onrush and the
insensible weight still dangling from his stirrup, not chosen the same moment
and the same goal. Nine hundred pounds of panicked horseflesh sent William
flying down the road, where he landed on his face. The ground shook round
him, and he could do nothing more than cover his head and pray.
There was a great deal of splashing, shouting, and impact. William
suffered a passing kick in the ribs and a jarring thump to the left buttock as
the fight—
Why are they fighting?
 he thought dizzily—raged over and past
him.
Then the shooting started.
His position couldn’t easily be improved. He went on lying in the road,
arms covering his head, as men shouted and cursed in alarm, more horses
came galloping toward him, and the rolling fire of muskets crashed over said
head.
Rolling fire?
 he thought suddenly. Because that’s what it bloody was, and
he rolled over and sat up in amazement to see a company of British infantry,
some efficiently rounding up persons attempting to flee the scene, others
efficiently reloading their muskets, and two officers on horseback, surveying
the scene with an attitude of fierce interest.
He palmed mud away from his eyes and stared hard at the officers.
Reasonably sure he didn’t know either of them, he relaxed slightly. He
wasn’t injured, but the impact of Bart’s collision had left him shaken and
bruised. He went on sitting in the middle of the road, breathing and letting his
brain begin to restore its relations with his body.
The altercation, such as it was, had died down. The soldiers had rounded
up most of the men he’d been gambling with and prodded them with
bayonets into a small group, where a young cornet was efficiently tying their
hands behind them.“You,” said a voice behind him, and a boot nudged him roughly in the ribs.
“Get up.”
He turned his head to see that he was being addressed by a private, an
older man with a good deal of assurance about him. Quite suddenly, it
occurred to him that the infantrymen might suppose him to be a participant in
the recent fracas, rather than its victim. He scrambled to his feet and stared
down at the much shorter private, who took a step back and flushed red.
“Put your hands behind you!”
“No,” William said briefly, and, turning his back on the man, took a step
toward the mounted officers. The private, affronted, lunged at him and seized
him by the arm.
“Take your hands off me,” William said, and—the private ignoring this
civil request—shoved the man away and sent him staggering.
“Stand still, damn your eyes! Stand, or I’ll shoot!” William turned again, to
find another private, hot-faced and sweating, pointing a musket at him. The
musket was primed and loaded—and it was William’s musket. His mouth
dried.
“Don’t … don’t shoot,” he managed. “That gun—it’s not—”
The first private stepped up behind him and punched him solidly in the
kidney. His insides clenched as though he’d been stabbed in the stomach, and
his vision went white. He gave at the knees but didn’t quite fall down, instead
curling up on himself like a dead leaf.
“That one,” said an educated English voice, penetrating the buzzing white
fog. “That one, that one, and—this one, the tall fellow. Stand him up.”
Hands seized William’s shoulders and yanked them back. He could
scarcely breathe, but he made a strangled noise. Through a haze of tears and
mud, he saw one of the officers, still on horseback, looking down at him
critically.
“Yes,” the officer said. “Hang that one, too.”
WILLIAM EXAMINED HIS handkerchief critically. There wasn’t much left
of it; they’d tried to bind his wrists with it and he’d ripped it to shreds, getting
it off. Still … He blew his nose on it, very gently. Still bloody, and he dabbed
the seepage gingerly. Footsteps were coming up the tavern’s stairs toward the
room where he sat, guarded by two wary privates.“He says he’s 
who
?” said an annoyed voice outside the room. Someone
said something in reply, but it was lost in the scraping of the door across the
uneven floor as it opened. He rose slowly to his feet and drew himself up to
his full height, facing the officer—a major of dragoons—who had just come
in. The major stopped abruptly, forcing the two men behind him to stop as
well.
“He says he’s the fucking ninth Earl of Ellesmere,” William said in a
hoarse, menacing tone, fixing the major with the eye that he could still open.
“Actually, he is,” said a lighter voice, sounding both amused—and
familiar. William blinked at the man who now stepped into the room, a
slender, dark-haired figure in the uniform of a captain of infantry. “
Captain
Lord Ellesmere, in fact. Hallo, William.”
“I’ve resigned my commission,” William said flatly. “Hallo, Denys.”
“But not your title.” Denys Randall looked him up and down but forbore to
comment on his appearance.
“Resigned your commission, have you?” The major, a youngish, thickset
fellow who looked as though his breeches were too tight, gave William an
unpleasant look. “In order to turn your coat and join the rebels, I take it?”
William breathed, twice, in order to avoid saying anything rash.
“No,” he said in an unfriendly voice.
“Naturally not,” Denys said, gently rebuking the major. He turned back to
William. “And naturally, you would have been traveling with a company of
American militia because …?”
“I was not traveling with them,” William said, successfully not adding
“you nit” to this statement. “I encountered the gentlemen in question last
night at a tavern, and won a substantial amount from them at cards. I left the
tavern early this morning and resumed my journey, but they followed me,
with the obvious intent of taking back the money by force.”
“‘Obvious intent’?” echoed the major skeptically. “How did you discern
such intent? Sir,” he added reluctantly.
“I’d imagine that being pursued and beaten to a pulp might have been a
fairly unambiguous indication,” Denys said. “Sit down, Ellesmere; you’re
dripping on the floor. Did they in fact take back the money?” He pulled a
large snowy-white handkerchief from his sleeve and handed it to William.
“Yes. Along with everything else in my pockets. I don’t know what’s
become of my horse.” He dabbed the handkerchief against his split lip. He
could smell Randall’s cologne on it, despite his swollen nose—the real Eaude Cologne, smelling of Italy and sandalwood. Lord John used it now and
then, and the scent comforted him a little.
“So you claim to know nothing of the men with whom we found you?”
said the other officer, this one a lieutenant, a man of about William’s own
age, eager as a terrier. The major gave him a look of dislike, indicating that
he didn’t think he needed any assistance in questioning William, but the
lieutenant wasn’t attending. “Surely if you were playing cards with them, you
must have gleaned 
some
 information?”
“I know a few of their names,” William said, feeling suddenly very tired.
“That’s all.”
That was actually not all, by a long chalk, but he didn’t want to talk about
the things he’d learned—that Abbot was a blacksmith and had a clever dog
who helped him at his forge, fetching small tools or faggots for the fire when
asked. Justin Martineau had a new wife, to whose bed he longed to return.
Geoffrey Gardener’s wife made the best beer in the village, and his
daughter’s was nearly as good, though she was but twelve years old.
Gardener was one of the men the major had chosen to hang. He swallowed,
his throat thick with dust and unspoken words.
He’d escaped the noose largely because of his skill at cursing in Latin,
which had disconcerted the major long enough for William to identify
himself, his ex-regiment, and a list of prominent army officers who would
vouch for him, beginning with General Clinton (God, where 
was
 Clinton
now?).
Denys Randall was murmuring to the major, who still looked displeased
but had dropped from a full boil to a disgruntled simmer. The lieutenant was
watching William intently, through narrowed eyes, obviously expecting him
to leap from the bench and make a run for it. The man kept unconsciously
touching his cartridge box and then his holstered pistol, clearly imagining the
wonderful possibility that he could shoot William dead as he ran for the door.
William yawned, hugely and unexpectedly, and sat blinking, exhaustion
washing through him like the tide.
Right this moment, he really didn’t care what happened next. His bloody
fingers had made smears on the worn wood of the table and he stared at these
in absorption, paying no attention to what was being said—until one battered
ear picked up the word “intelligencer.”
He closed his eyes. 
No. Just … no.
 But he was listening again, despite
himself.The voices rose, overlay each other, interrupted. But he was paying
attention now, and realized that Denys was attempting to convince the major
that he, William, was working as a spy, gaining information from American
militia groups as part of a scheme to … kidnap George Washington?
The major appeared as startled as William was to hear this. The voices
dropped as the major turned his back toward William, leaning forward into
Denys and hissing questions. Denys, damn him, didn’t turn a hair, but he had
lowered his voice respectfully. Where the bloody hell 
was
 George
Washington? He couldn’t possibly be within two hundred miles … could he?
Bar the battle at Monmouth Courthouse, the last William had heard of
Washington’s movements he was arsing about in the mountains of New
Jersey. The last place his cousin Benjamin had been seen.
There were noises outside the tavern—well, there had been all the time, but
they were the inchoate noises of men being herded, orders, trampling,
protests. Now the sounds took on a more organized character, and he
recognized the noises of departure. A raised voice of authority, dismissing
troops? Men moving away in a body, but not soldiers; nothing orderly about
the shuffling and muttering he heard beneath the nearer sound of Denys’s
discussion with Major What-not. No telling what was happening—but it
didn’t sound at all like an official hanging. He’d attended one such function
three years before, when an American captain named Hale had been executed
as a … spy. He hadn’t eaten any breakfast, and tasted bile as the word
dropped like cold lead into his stomach.
Thank you, Denys Randall …
 he thought, and swallowed. He’d once
thought of Denys as a friend, and while he’d been disabused of 
that
 notion
three years ago by Denys’s abrupt disappearance from Quebec, leaving
William snowbound and without purpose, he hadn’t quite thought the man
would use him openly as a tool. But a tool for what purpose?
Denys seemed to have won his point. The major turned and gave William a
narrow-eyed, assessing look then shook his head, turned, and left, followed
by his reluctantly obedient lieutenant.
Denys stood quite still, listening to their footsteps recede down the stairs.
Then he took a deep, visible breath, straightened his coat, and came and sat
down opposite William.
“Isn’t this a tavern?” William said before Denys could speak.
“It is.” One dark brow went up.“Then get me something to drink before you start telling me what the devil
you just did to me.”
THE BEER WAS good, and William felt a qualm on behalf of Geoffrey
Gardener, but there was nothing he could do for the man. He drank thirstily,
ignoring the sting of alcohol on his split lip, and began to feel a little more
settled in himself. Denys had been applying himself to his own beer with an
equal intensity, and for the first time William had enough attention to spare to
notice the deep coating of dust that streaked Denys’s wide cuffs, and the
grubbiness of his linen. He’d been riding for days. It occurred to him to
wonder whether perhaps Denys’s opportune appearance hadn’t been entirely
an accident. But if not—why? And how?
Denys drained his mug and set it down, eyes closed and mouth half open
with momentary content. Then he sighed, sat up straight, opened his eyes,
and shook himself into order.
“Ezekiel Richardson,” he said. “When did you last see him?”
That wasn’t what he’d been expecting. William wiped his mouth gingerly
on his sleeve and lifted one brow and his empty mug at the waiting barmaid,
who took both mugs and disappeared down the stairs.
“To speak to?” he said. “A week or two before Monmouth … maybe a
year ago. I wouldn’t talk to him, though. Why?” Mention of Richardson
annoyed him. The man had—according to Denys, he reminded himself—
deliberately sent him into the Great Dismal Swamp with an eye to having him
abducted or killed by rebels in Dismal Town. He’d nearly died in the swamp,
and mention of the man made him more than edgy.
“He’s turned his coat,” Denys said bluntly. “I suspected him of being an
American agent for some time, but it wasn’t until he sent you into the swamp
that I began to feel sure of it. But I had no proof, and it’s a dangerous
business to accuse an officer of spying without it.”
“And now you have proof?”
Denys gave him a sharp look.
“He’s left the army—without the nicety of resigning, I might add—and
showed up in Savannah in the winter, claiming to be a Continental army
major. I think that might be considered sufficient proof?”
“If it is, then what? Is there anything to eat in this place? I hadn’t any
breakfast.” Denys looked closely at him but then rose to his feet withoutcomment and went downstairs, presumably in search of food. William was in
fact very light-headed but wanted also a few moments to come to terms with
this revelation.
His father knew Richardson slightly—that was how William had first
come to take on small intelligencing missions for him. Uncle Hal had—like
most soldiers—thought intelligencing not a suitable activity for a gentleman,
but Papa hadn’t shown any reservations about it. It was also Papa who’d
introduced him to Denys Randall, who’d been calling himself Randall-Isaacs
at the time. He’d spent some months with Randall-Isaacs in Quebec, poking
about to little apparent end, before Denys had abruptly gone off on some
undisclosed mission, leaving William with an Indian guide. Denys was most
certainly … For the first time, the absolute conviction that Denys was a spy,
and the notion that Papa himself 
might
 have been one, floated into his head.
By reflex, he thumped the heel of his hand against his temple in an effort to
dislodge the idea, but it wouldn’t go.
Savannah. In the winter. The British army had taken the city in late
December. He’d been there himself soon after, and had good cause to
remember it. His throat thickened. 
Jane.
Voices below, and Denys’s footsteps coming back up. William touched his
nose; it was tender and felt about twice its normal size, but it had quit
bleeding. Denys came in, smiling in reassurance.
“Food is on the way! 
And
 more beer—unless you need something
stronger?” He peered closely at William, made a decision, and turned on his
heel. “I’ll get some brandy.”
“That can wait. What—if anything—has Ezekiel Richardson got to do with
my father?” William demanded abruptly.
That froze Denys, but only momentarily. He moved to the table and sat
down slowly, his eyes fixed on William with a distinct look of calculation.
Calculations. William could actually 
see
 thoughts flitting through the man’s
mind—he just couldn’t tell what any of them 
were.
Denys took a deep breath and placed both hands on the table, palms down
as though bracing himself.
“What makes you think that he has anything to do with Lord John?”
“He—Lord John, I mean—knows the fellow; Richardson approached him
with the notion that I should … keep an eye out for interesting bits of
information.”“I see,” Denys said, very dryly. “Well, if they were friends, I should say
that such a relationship no longer exists between them. Richardson was heard
to utter certain threats regarding your father, though he has apparently not
chosen to act on them. Yet,” he added delicately.
“What sort of threats?” A spurt of angry alarm had shot up William’s spine
at this, and blood surged painfully into his battered face.
“I’m sure they are unfounded,” Denys began.
William half-rose to his feet. “Bloody tell me, or I’ll pull your fucking
nose off.” He reached out, swollen knuckles poised to do just that, and Denys
shoved his bench back with a screech and stood up, fast.
“I’ll make allowances for your condition, Ellesmere,” he said, giving
William a firm look of the sort people tried on a dog that threatened to bite.
“But—”
William made a noise low in his throat.
Denys took an involuntary step back. “All right!” he snapped. “Richardson
threatened to make it known that Lord John is a sodomite.”
William blinked, frozen for a moment. The word didn’t even make sense
immediately.
Then it did, but he was prevented from saying anything by the entrance of
the barmaid, a plump, harassed-looking girl with a squint in one eye, bearing
a massive tray of food and drink. The scent of roast meat, buttered
vegetables, and fresh bread hurt the membranes of his nose but made his
stomach convulse in sudden urgency. Not urgent enough to take his attention
off what Randall had just said, though, and William rose, bowed the girl out,
and shut the door of the chamber firmly upon her before turning back to
Denys.
“A 
what
? That’s …” William made a wide gesture indicating the complete
unbelievability of this. “He was married, for God’s sake!”
“So I understand. To the, um, merry widow of a Scotch rebel general. That
was quite recent, though, wasn’t it?” The edge of Denys Randall’s mouth
tucked in a little in amusement, which incensed William.
“I don’t mean that!” he snapped. “And he wasn’t—I mean, the bloody
Scotchman’s not dead, it was some sort of mistake. My father was married
for years to my mother—I mean, my stepmother—to a lady from the Lake
District.” He huffed air, angry, and sat down. “Richardson can’t do us any
damage with that sort of lying gossip.”Denys pursed his lips and exhaled, slowly. “William,” he said patiently,
“gossip has probably killed more men than musket fire.”
“Rubbish.”
Denys smiled a little and acknowledged the exaggeration with a slight
shrug. “That might be stating it a bit high, but think about it. You know the
value of a man’s word, of his character. If Major Allbright hadn’t taken my
word at face value just now, you’d be dead.” He pointed a long, manicured
finger at William. “What if someone had earlier told him that I made my
living cheating at cards, or was the principal investor in a popular bawdy
house? Would he have been so inclined to accept my testimony as to the
soundness of 
your
 character?”
William eyed him skeptically, but there was something in it.
“Who steals my purse steals trash, sort of thing?”
The smile widened.
“
… But he that filches from me my good name / Robs me of that which not
enriches him, and makes me poor indeed.
 Yes, that sort of thing. Consider
what gossip of the sort Zeke Richardson has in mind could do to your family,
will you? And meanwhile, stop glowering at me and eat something.”
William reluctantly considered it. His nose had quit bleeding, but there was
an iron taste in the back of his throat. He cleared it and spat, as politely as
possible, into the rags of his handkerchief, keeping Denys’s more substantial
contribution for mopping up.
“All right. I see what you’re saying,” he said gruffly.
“A friend of your father’s—a Major Bates—was convicted of sodomy and
hanged, some years ago,” Denys said. “Your father chose to be present at the
hanging; he clung to the major’s legs to hasten his death. I don’t suppose he
would have mentioned that incident to you, though.”
William made a small, negative motion of the head. He was momentarily
too shocked to say anything.
“There is a death of the soul, as well as death of the body, you know. Even
if he were not arrested, nor tried and convicted … a man so accused might
well lose his life as it presently exists.” This was said quietly, almost
offhandedly, and Denys followed this remark by sitting up straight, picking
up a spoon, and placing before William a pewter plate piled with slices of
roast pork, fried squash with corn, and several thick slices of corn bread, then
pouring a generous cup of brandy to go with it.“Eat,” Denys repeated firmly. “And then”—with an eye toward William’s
general bedragglement—“tell me what in the name of God you’ve been
doing. What made you resign your commission to begin with?”
“None of your business,” William said brusquely. “As to what I’m doing
…” He was tempted to say that 
that
 was none of Denys’s business, either—
but he couldn’t overlook Denys’s possibilities as a source of information. It
was, after all, an intelligencer’s job to find things out.
“If you must know, I’m looking for some trace of my cousin, Benjamin
Grey. Captain Benjamin Grey,” he added. “Of the Thirty-fourth Foot. Do you
know him, by chance?”
Denys blinked, blank-faced, and William felt a small, surprising jolt in the
pit of his stomach—the same feeling he got when a fish nibbled his bait.
“I’ve met him,” Randall said cautiously. “‘Trace,’ you said? Has he been
… lost?”
“You could say that. He was captured at the Brandywine and held prisoner
at a place called Middlebrook Encampment, in the Watchung Mountains. My
uncle had an official letter from Sir Henry Clinton’s clerk, passing on a terse
note from the Americans, regretting the death of Captain Benjamin Grey
from fever.”
“Oh.” Denys relaxed a fraction of an inch, though his eyes were still
watchful. “My condolences. You mean that you want to find where your
cousin is buried? To, um, move the body to the family … er … resting
place?”
“I had that in mind,” William said. “Only I 
did
 find his grave. And he
wasn’t in it.”
A brief recollection of that night in the Watchung Mountains washed over
him suddenly, raising the hairs on his forearms. Cold, wet clay clinging to his
feet and rain soaking through his clothes, spongy blisters on his palms, and
the smell of death coming up from the ground as his shovel grated suddenly
on bone … He turned his head away, both from Denys and the memory.
“Someone else 
was,
 though.”
“Dear Lord.” Denys reached automatically for his cup and, finding it
empty, shook himself briefly as though to dislodge the vision, then reached
for the brandy bottle. “You’re quite sure? I mean, how long …?”
“He’d been buried for some time.” William took a long, burning gulp of
the brandy, to purge the memory of the smell. And the touch. “But not long
enough to hide the fact that the man in that grave had no ears.”Denys’s evident shock gave him a sour satisfaction.
“Exactly,” he said. “A thief. And no, it wasn’t a mistaken identification of
the body. The grave was marked with the name ‘Grey,’ and Benjamin’s full
name was listed in the camp’s records of prisoner burials.”
Denys was twelve years older than William, but he looked suddenly older
than thirty-three, his fine features sharpened by attention.
“You think it was deliberate, then. Well, of course,” he interrupted himself
impatiently, “naturally it was. But by whom, and to what purpose?” He didn’t
wait for an answer. “If someone had murdered your cousin and sought to hide
his death, why not simply bury 
him
 as a fever victim? No need for the
substitute body, I mean. So, your first supposition is that he’s alive? I think
that’s reasonable.”
William drew a breath tinged with relief.
“I do, too,” he said. “So then it’s one of two possibilities: Ben faked his
death and managed to substitute the other body in order to escape without
pursuit. Or someone did it for him, without his consent, and took him away. I
can see the first possibility, but damned if I can think of a reason for the
second. But it doesn’t matter that much; if he’s alive, I 
can
 find him. And I
bloody will. The family needs to know, one way or another.” This was quite
true. He was honest enough to admit to himself, though, that Ben’s
disappearance had offered him a purpose, a way out of the morass of guilt
and sorrow left by Jane’s death.
Denys rubbed a hand over his face. It was late in the day and his whiskers
were starting to rasp, a dark shadow over his jaw.
“The words ‘needle’ and ‘haystack’ come to mind,” he said. “But
theoretically, yes, you could find him, if he’s alive.”
“Definitely yes,” William said firmly. “I have a list”—he touched his
breast pocket to make sure that he still did have it, but felt the reassuring
wodge of folded paper—“of men belonging to two militia companies who
were put on gravedigging detail in Middlebrook Encampment during a fever
outbreak.”
“Oh, so that’s what you were doing with—”
“Yes. Unfortunately, American militia companies enlist only for short
periods, and then scatter off to tend their farms. One of the companies was
from North Carolina and one from Virginia, but the men last night weren’t
—” He stopped abruptly, reminded. “The men last night … does Major
Allbright actually intend to hang some of them?”Denys shrugged. “I don’t know him well enough to say. It might have been
meant only for effect, to frighten and scatter the rest. But he’s taken those
three along with him, back to his camp. If his temper cools by the time he
gets there, he’ll likely have them flogged and let them go. He’s got enough
men under his command that hanging civilians out of hand would become a
matter of record—not really what an officer with an eye to advancement
wants, if he’s any sense. Not that Allbright gives one the impression that he
has,” he added thoughtfully.
“I see. Speaking of having no sense—what the devil was that taradiddle
about me planning to kidnap George Washington?”
Randall actually laughed at that, and William felt his ears grow warm.
“Well, not you, personally,” he assured William. “Just a 
ruse de guerre.
 It
worked, though, didn’t it? And I had to think of some explanation for your
outré
 appearance; being an intelligencer was the only halfway believable
thing I could think of.”
William grunted and gingerly tried a mouthful of succotash, a fried and
buttered mixture of diced squash and corn sliced from the cob. It went down
well, and he attacked the rest of his meal with increasing enthusiasm,
ignoring the minor discomfort of eating. Denys watched him, smiling a little
as he ate his own meal but leaving him alone.
When the plates were empty, there was a contemplative silence between
them. Not friendly, but not hostile, either.
Denys picked up the brandy bottle and shook it; a small sloshing noise
reassured him and he poured out what was left into their cups, then picked
one up and raised it to William.
“A bargain,” he said. “If you come across any news of Ezekiel Richardson,
send word to me. If I hear of anything pertaining to your cousin Benjamin,
I’ll send word to you.”
William hesitated for a moment, but then touched his cup firmly to
Randall’s.
“Done.”
Denys drank, then set down his cup.
“You can send me word in care of Captain Blakeney; he’s with Clinton’s
troops in New York. And if I hear of anything …?”
William grimaced, but there wasn’t a lot of choice.
“Care of my father. He and my uncle are with the garrison at Savannah
with Prévost.”Denys nodded, pushed back his bench, and stood up.
“All right. Your horse is outside. With your knife and musket. May I ask
where you’re bound?”
“Virginia.” He hadn’t actually known that for sure until he said it, but the
speaking gave him certainty. Virginia. Mount Josiah.
Denys groped in a pocket and laid two guineas and a handful of smaller
coins on the table. He smiled at William.
“It’s a long way to Virginia. Consider it a loan.”8
Visitations
Fraser’s Ridge
BY MIDAFTERNOON, I’D MADE great progress with my medicaments,
treated three cases of poison ivy rash, a broken toe (caused by its owner
kicking a mule in a fit of temper), and a raccoon bite (non-rabid; the hunter
had knocked the coon out of a tree, thought it was dead, and went to pick it
up, only to discover that it wasn’t. The raccoon 
was
 mad, but not in any
infectious sense).
Jamie, though, had done much better. People had come up to the house site
all day, in a steady trickle of neighborliness and curiosity. The women had
stayed to chat with me about the MacKenzies, and the men had wandered off
through the site with Jamie, returning with promises to come and lend a day’s
labor here and there.
“If Roger Mac and Ian can help me move lumber tomorrow, the Sinclairs
will come next day and give me a hand wi’ the floor joists. We’ll lay the
hearthstone and bless it on Wednesday, Sean McHugh and a couple of his
lads will lay the floor with me on Friday, and we’ll get the framing started
next day; Tom MacLeod says he can spare me a half day, and Hiram
Crombie’s son Joe says he and his half brother can help wi’ that as well.” He
smiled at me. “If the whisky holds out, ye’ll have a roof over your head in
two weeks, Sassenach.”
I looked dubiously from the stone foundation to the cloud-flecked sky
overhead.
“A roof?”
“Aye, well, a sheet of canvas, most likely,” he admitted. “Still.” He stood
and stretched, grimacing slightly.“Why don’t you sit down for a bit?” I suggested, eyeing his leg. He was
limping noticeably and the leg was a vivid patchwork of red and purple,
demarcated by the black stitches of my repair job. “Amy’s left us a jug of
beer.”
“Perhaps a wee bit later,” he said. “What’s that ye’re making, Sassenach?”
“I’m going to make up some gallberry ointment for Lizzie Beardsley, and
then some gripe water for her little new one—do you know if he has a name
yet?”
“Hubertus.”
“What?”
“Hubertus,” he repeated, smiling. “Or so Kezzie told me the day before
yesterday. It’s in compliment to Monika’s late brother, he says.”
“Oh.” Lizzie’s father, Joseph Wemyss, had taken a kind German lady of a
certain age as his second wife, and Monika, having no children of her own,
had become a stalwart grandmother to the Beardsleys’ growing brood.
“Perhaps they can call him Bertie, for short.”
“Are ye out of the Jesuit bark, Sassenach?” He lifted his chin in the
direction of the open medicine chest I’d set on the ground near him. “Do ye
not use that for Lizzie’s tonic?”
“I do,” I said, rather surprised that he’d noticed. “I used the last of it three
weeks ago, though, and haven’t heard of anyone going to Wilmington or
New Bern who might get me more.”
“Did ye mention it to Roger Mac?”
“No. Why him?” I asked, puzzled.
Jamie leaned back against the cornerstone, wearing one of those overtly
patient expressions that’s meant to indicate that the person addressed is not
being particularly bright. I snorted and flicked a gallberry at him. He caught it
and examined it critically.
“Is it edible?”
“Amy says bees like the flowers,” I said dubiously, pouring a large handful
of the dark-purple berries into my mortar. “But there’s very likely a reason
why they’re called gallberries.”
“Ah.” He tossed it back at me, and I dodged. “Ye told me yourself,
Sassenach, that Roger Mac said to ye yesterday that he meant to come back
to the ministering. So,” he went on patiently, seeing no hint of enlightenment
on my face, “what would ye do first, if that was your aim?”I scooped a large glob of pale-yellow bear grease from its pot into the
mortar, part of my mind debating whether to add a decoction of willow bark,
while the rest considered Jamie’s question.
“Ah,” I said in turn, and pointed my pestle at him. “I’d go round to all the
people who’d been part of my congregation, so to speak, and let them know
that Mack the Knife is back in town.”
He gave me a concerned look, but then shook his head, dislodging
whatever image I’d just given him.
“Ye would,” he said. “And maybe introduce yourself to the folk who’ve
come to the Ridge since ye left.”
“And within a couple of days, everyone on the Ridge—and probably half
the brethren’s choir in Salem—would know about it.”
He nodded amiably. “Aye. And they’d all ken that ye need Jesuit bark, and
ye’d likely get it within the month.”
“Are ye in need of Jesuit bark, 
Grand-mère
?” Germain had emerged from
the woods behind me, a pail of water in one hand, a bundle of faggots
clutched to his chest with the other, and what appeared to be a dead snake
hanging round his neck.
“Yes,” I said. “Is that a—” But he’d forgotten me, his attention riveted on
his grandfather’s macerated leg.
“Formidable!”
 he said, dropping the wood. “Can I see, 
Grand-père
?”
Jamie made a gracious “feel free” gesture toward his leg, and Germain
bent to look, eyes round.
“Mandy said that a bear bit your leg off,” he said, advancing a tentative
forefinger toward the line of stitches. “But I didn’t believe her. Does it hurt?”
he asked, glancing at Jamie’s face.
“Och, nay bother,” Jamie said, with a dismissive wave of the hand. “I’ve a
privy to dig later. What kind is your wee snake, then?”
Germain obligingly removed the limp serpent and handed it to Jamie, who
plainly hadn’t expected the gesture, but gingerly accepted it. I smiled and
looked down into my mortar. Jamie was afraid of snakes but manfully
disguised the fact, holding it up by the tail. It was a big corn snake, nearly
three feet of orange and yellow scales, vivid as a streak of lightning.
“Did you kill it, Germain?” I frowned at the snake, pausing in my mashing.
I’d explained repeatedly to all the children that they ought not to kill any non-
venomous snake, as they helpfully ate mice and rats, but most adults on theRidge considered that the only good snake was a dead one, and it was an
uphill battle.
“Oh, no, Grannie,” he assured me. “It was in your garden and Fanny went
for it with a hoe, but I stopped her. But then your wee cheetie sleeked through
the fence and jumped on it and broke its …” He frowned at the snake. “I
dinna ken whether it was its back or its neck because how could ye tell, but
it’s dead all right. I thought I’d skin it for Fanny,” he explained, glancing
back over his shoulder toward the garden. “To make her a belt, maybe.”
“What a lovely idea,” I said, wondering whether Fanny would think so.
“Do ye think I might be able to buy a buckle for it from the tinker?”
Germain asked Jamie, taking back his snake and redraping it round his neck.
“The belt, I mean. I’ve got twopence and some wee purple stones to trade.”
“What tinker?” I stopped mashing and stared at him.
“Jo Beardsley told me he’d met a tinker in Salem two days ago, and he
reckoned the man would be here sometime this week,” Germain explained.
“He said the tinker’s got a sackload o’ simples, so I thought if ye needed
anything, Grannie …”
I cast a quick, greedy glance at my medicine chest, depleted by a planting
season rife with ax and hoe injuries, animal and insect bites, an outbreak of
food poisoning, and a strange plague of respiratory illness among the
MacNeills, accompanied by low fever, coughing, and bluish spots on the
trunk.
“Hmmm …” I patted my pockets, wondering what 
I
 had to trade, come to
think of it …
“There are two bottles left of the elderberry wine,” Jamie said, standing up
straight. “Ye can use those, Sassenach. And I’ve got a good deerskin, and
half of a wee barrel of turpentine.”
“No, I want to keep the turpentine,” I said, adding absently, “Hookworms,
you know.”
Jamie and Germain exchanged a cynical glance.
“Hookworms,” Jamie said, and Germain shook his head.
Before I could enlighten them about hookworms, though, a shout came
from the direction of the creek, and Duncan Leslie and his two sons appeared,
one of the sons with a large ham tucked under one arm.
Jamie stood up to greet them, and they all nodded politely to me but didn’t
seem to expect me to stop what I was doing in order to chat.“I shot a good-sized pig last week,” Duncan said, motioning the son with
the ham forward. “There was a bit to spare, and we thought ye might use it,
what with your family come, and all.”
“I’m much obliged, Duncan,” Jamie said. “If ye dinna mind eating under
the sky, come and share it with us … tomorrow?” he asked, turning to me. I
shook my head.
“Day after tomorrow,” I said. “I have to go up to Beardsleys’ tomorrow
and I won’t be back in time to make much more than sandwiches.” If Amy
had made bread and had some to spare, I added silently to myself.
“Aye, aye,” Duncan said, nodding. “My wife will be happy to see ye,
Missus. So, Jamie,” he added, tilting his head toward the foundation, “I see
ye’ve got a fine big house laid out—twa chimneys, eh? Where’s the kitchen
to be, then?”
Jamie rose smoothly to his feet, gave me a brief “See?” look over his
shoulder, and led the Leslies off to tour the foundation, limping only slightly.
Germain laid the snake on my table and, saying, “Look after it for me, will
ye, Grannie?” hurried to join the men.
BRIANNA PAUSED AT the top of the trail and blotted sweat from her face
and neck. The cabin before them was tidy and neat—very neat. There were
whitewashed stones lining the path that led to the door, and the paned-glass
windows—
glass
—were so polished that she could see herself and Roger in
them, tiny cut-up blobs of color amid the green flicker of the reflected forest.
“Who whitewashes 
rocks
?” she said, instinctively lowering her voice, as
though the cabin might hear her.
“Well, it can’t be someone with a lot of time on their hands,” he said, half
under his breath. “So it’s either a frustrated landscape designer or someone
with a neurotic need to control their environment.”
“I suppose there’s no reason why you wouldn’t find control freaks in any
time,” she said, shaking dust and leaf fragments off her skirt. “Look at the
people who designed Elizabethan mazes, I mean. What was it Amy said
about these people? Cunningham, is that the name?”
“Yes. ‘They’re Methodists. Blue Light,’” Roger quoted, “‘be careful of
thon people, Preacher.’” And with that, he straightened his shoulders and set
foot on the path that led between the whitewashed stones.“Blue 
Light
?” she said, and followed, poking hastily at her broad-brimmed
straw hat, worn sedately over a cap. God forbid the preacher’s wife should
give scandal to the faithful …
The door swung open before Roger could set foot on the step, and a small,
bristly man with shaggy gray eyebrows stood eyeing them with no particular
look of welcome. He was neatly dressed in butternut homespun breeches and
waistcoat, and his linen shirt, while slightly yellowed with age, had been
recently ironed.
“Good day to ye, sir.” Roger bowed, and Brianna made a brief bob of
respect. “My name is Roger MacKenzie, and this is my wife, Brianna. We’ve
come just lately to the Ridge, and—”
“I’d heard.” The man gave them a narrow look, but apparently they passed
muster, for the man stepped back, gesturing them in. “I am Captain Charles
Cunningham, late of His Majesty’s navy. Come in.”
Brianna felt Roger draw a deep breath. She smiled at Captain Cunningham,
who blinked and looked sharply at Roger to see if he approved of this.
“Thank you, Captain,” she said, as charmingly as possible, and stepped
past Roger and over the threshold. “You have a most remarkable house—so
beautiful!”
“I—why—” the captain began, flustered. Before he could rearrange his
thoughts, though, a dark Presence manifested itself before the hearth. Now it
was Brianna’s turn to blink.
“The preacher, are ye?” said the woman, looking past Bree. Yes, it was
certainly a woman, though one nearly as tall as Brianna herself and dressed
entirely in black, save for a starched white cap, one of the severe kind, with
ear lappets. She was old, but no telling 
how
 old; her face was bony and sharp-
eyed, and Brianna thought at once of the she-wolf who had suckled Romulus
and Remus.
“I am a minister,” Roger said, making her a deep bow. “Your servant,
madam.”
“Mmphm. And what sect might ye be, sir?” the woman demanded.
“I am a Presbyterian, ma’am,” Roger said, “but—”
“And you?” the woman demanded, fixing Bree with a sharp blue eye.
“D’ye share your husband’s beliefs?”
“I’m Roman Catholic,” Brianna said, as mildly as possible. It wasn’t the
first time, and wouldn’t be the last, but they’d decided early on how to handle
such questions. “Like my father—Jamie Fraser.”That reply normally took the questioner aback and provided enough space
for Roger to take control. The non-Catholic tenants’ respect for her father—
whether based on personal esteem or merely the fact that he was their
landlord—usually made them at least amenable to polite conversation,
regardless of their general opinion of Catholics.
The woman—Mrs. Cunningham?—snorted and looked Bree up and down
in a way indicating that she’d seen any number of disreputable women in her
day and was comparing Brianna unfavorably to the lot of them.
“Phut,” she said. “Popery! We’ve nay truck wi’ such things in 
this
 house!”
“Mother,” said the captain, moving toward her. “I think that—”
“Ma’am,” said Roger, stepping in front of Bree in order to intercept the 
eye
of the basilisk being aimed in her direction. “I assure ye, we’ve come neither
to proselytize nor to convert ye. I—”
“Presbyterian, ye say?” The eye fixed on him, coldly accusing. “
And
 a
minister? How is it, then, that you cannot keep your own wife in order? What
sort of minister can ye be, if you let your woman be a disciple of the Pope
and roam about sowing and watering the seeds of wickedness and disorder
amongst your neighbors?”
“Mother!” Captain Cunningham said sharply. She didn’t flinch, but turned
her stern face toward her son.
“You know it’s true,” she informed him. “This lass”—she nodded at
Brianna—“says that Jamie Fraser is her sire. That will mean”—she looked
directly at Bree—“that your mother is Claire Fraser, aye?”
Bree took a deep breath of her own; the cabin was neat as a pin but quite
small, and the supply of air in it seemed to be shrinking by the second.
“She is,” she said evenly. “And she asked me to convey her regards to you,
and to say that should any member of your family be ill or have an injury, she
would be happy to come and attend them. She’s a healer, and—”
“Phut!” repeated Mrs. Cunningham. “Aye, I daresay she would, but she’ll
not get the chance, I assure ye, girl. The instant I heard about the woman, I
planted chamomile and holly round the door. Nay witch will set foot in our
house, I can tell you!”
Bree felt Roger’s hand on her arm and gave him a cold side-eye. She
wasn’t about to lose her temper with this woman. His mouth twitched briefly
and he let go, turning not to Mrs. Cunningham but to the captain.
“As I said,” he said, pleasantly, “I’ve not come to proselytize. I’m a
respecter of sincere belief. I am curious, though—one of my neighborsmentioned the term ‘Blue Light,’ in reference to you and your family,
Captain. I wonder if ye’d be willing to tell me the meaning?”
“Ah,” said the captain, sounding cautiously pleased to be asked something
that his mother couldn’t take issue with. “Well, sir, as you ask—it’s the term
by which such naval captains as promote the theology of evangelization upon
their ships are known. ‘Blue Lights,’ they call us.” He spoke modestly, but
his head was proudly raised, as was his chin. His eyes—a paler version of his
mother’s—were wary, wondering how Roger might take this.
Roger smiled. “Are ye a theologian of sorts yourself, then, sir?”
“Oh,” said the captain, preening slightly. “I wouldn’t put it so high, but I
have
 written the occasional piece—just my own thoughts on the matter, d’ye
see …”
“Are any of them published, sir? I should be most interested to read your
views.”
“Oh, well … two or three … just small things … of no great merit, I
daresay … were published by Bell and Coxham, in Edinburgh. I’m afraid
I’ve no copies with me here”—he glanced at a small, rough table in the
corner that bore a small stack of paper along with an inkwell, sander, and jar
of quills—“but I 
am
 at work upon an endeavor of somewhat larger scale …”
“A book, then?”
Roger sounded honestly interested—probably he actually was, Bree
thought—but Mrs. Cunningham was plainly growing impatient with this
amiability and meant to nip the conversation in the bud before Roger could
seduce the captain into blasphemy or worse.
“The fact remains, Captain, that this gentleman’s good-mother is widely
kent to be a witch, and likely his wife is one as well. Send them on their way.
We’ve nay interest in their pretensions.”
Roger swung round to face her and drew himself up to his full height,
which meant his head nearly brushed the rooftree.
“Mrs. Cunningham,” he said, still polite but letting a bit of steel show
through. “I beg ye’ll consider that I 
am
 a minister of God. My wife’s beliefs
—and her parents’—are as virtuous and moral as those of any good Christian,
and I’ll swear to as much with my hand on your own Bible, if ye like.” He
nodded at the tiny shelf over the desk, where a Bible took pride of place in a
row of smaller books.
“Mmphm,” said the captain with a narrow-eyed glance at his mother. “I’m
just away to call my two lads down from the field, sir—lieutenants from mylast ship, who chose to come with me when I came ashore. I’ll walk you and
your lady to the head of the path, if you’ll bear me company that far?”
“Thank you, Captain.” Bree seized the chance of getting a word in
sideways and curtsied deeply to the captain and again—with as much face as
she could manage—to Mrs. Cunningham. “Do please remember that my
mother will come at once, ma’am, if you have any sort of … emergency.”
Mrs. Cunningham seemed to expand in several directions at once.
“Do ye dare threaten me, girl?”
“What? No!”
“D’ye see what ye’ve let in the house, Captain?” Mrs. Cunningham
ignored Brianna and glowered at her son. “The lass means to ill-wish us!”
“We have a few more calls to make,” Roger interjected hastily. “Will ye
allow me to bless your house with a wee prayer before we leave, sir?”
“Why—” The captain glanced at his mother, then drew himself up, chin
set. “Yes, sir. We should be most obliged to you.”
Brianna saw Mrs. Cunningham’s lips shaped to say “Phut!” again, but
Roger hastily forestalled her, raising his hands slightly and bowing his head
in benediction.
“May God bless the dwelling,
Each stone, and beam, and stave,
All food, and drink, and clothing.
May health of men be always here.”
“Good day to ye, sir, madam,” he added quickly, and, bowing, grabbed
Brianna’s hand. She hadn’t time to say anything—
just as well,
 she thought—
but smiled and nodded to the basilisk as they backed out of the door.
“So now we know what Blue Light means,” she said, casting a ginger
glance behind them as they reached the end of the path. “As Mama says …
Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!”
“Apt,” Roger said, laughing.
“Was that a Hogmanay prayer?” she asked. “It sounded kind of familiar,
but I wasn’t sure …”
“It is—and a house-blessing. Ye’ve heard your da say it a few times, but
he does it in the Gaelic. The Cunninghams are educated Lowlanders, from
their accent; if I’d tried the Gaelic version, Mrs. C. might well have thought I
was trying to put a spell on them.”“Weren’t you?” She said it lightly, but he turned his head to her, surprised.
“Well … in a way, I suppose so,” he said slowly, but then smiled.
“Highland charms and prayers often aren’t distinguishable from each other.
But I think if you address God directly, then it’s probably a prayer, rather
than witchcraft.”
She glanced over her shoulder once more, with the feeling that Mrs.
Cunningham’s eyes were burning a hole through the door of the cabin,
watching their retreat.
“Do Presbyterians believe in exorcism?” she asked.
“No, we don’t,” he said, though he also looked back. “My father—the
Reverend, I mean—did tell me, though, that when you go visiting, you
should never leave a house without offering a blessing of some kind.” He
held back a springy oak branch so she could duck beneath it. “He did add that
it might keep things from following you home—but I 
think
 he was joking.”
I WAS WORKING my way down the creek bank, collecting leeches,
watercress, and anything else that looked either edible or useful, when I heard
a distant sound of wagon wheels.
Thinking that this might be the tinker Jo Beardsley had mentioned to
Germain, I hastily shook down my skirts, shoved my feet back into my
sandals, and hurried toward the wagon trace, where the rumbling of wheels
had been suddenly replaced by a good deal of bad language.
This proved to be coming from a very large man, who was excoriating his
mules, the wagon, and the wheel that had just hit a rock and sprung its iron
tyre. He lacked Jamie’s creativity in cursing but was making up for it in
volume.
“May I help you, sir?” I asked, seizing a moment when he’d paused for
breath.
He swung round, astonished.
“Where the devil did 
you
 come from?” he asked.
I gestured toward the trees behind me, and repeated, “Do you need help?”
Closer to the wagon, it was apparent that he wasn’t the tinker. The wagon—
drawn by two very large mules—held a variety of things, but not iron pans
and hair ribbons. There were half a dozen muskets lying in the wagon bed,
together with a small collection of swords, scythes, and staves. A few small
barrels that 
might
 be salt fish or pork—and one that was most certainlygunpowder, both from its markings and from the faint scent of charcoal
tinged with sulfur and urine.
My insides contracted.
“Is this Fraser’s Ridge?” the man demanded, looking at the woods around
us. We were some way below the clearing where the Higginses’ cabin stood,
and there was no sign of habitation other than the wagon trace, which was
quite overgrown.
“It is,” I said, there being no point in lying. “Do you have business here?”
He looked sharply at me, and focused on me for the first time.
“My business is my own,” he said, though not impolitely. “I’m looking for
Jamie Fraser.”
“I’m Mrs. Fraser,” I said, folding my arms. “His business is mine.”
His face flushed and he glowered at me, as though thinking I was
practicing upon him, but I gave him stare for stare and after a moment, he
gave a sort of barking laugh and relaxed.
“Will you fetch your husband, then, or will I come and find him?”
“Whom shall I say is calling?” I asked, not moving.
“Benjamin Cleveland,” he said, swelling a bit with a sense of his own
importance. “He’ll know the name.”
JAMIE LAID THE last brick in the course and trimmed the mortar with a
small feeling of satisfaction—mingled with a mild dismay at the realization
that tomorrow’s work on the chimney would need to be done with a ladder;
this was as high as he could reach, without. His shoulders were complaining;
the thought of his knees joining in made him stretch his back and sigh.
Aye, well, maybe my bonnie lass can help wi’ that.
 Brianna had said
something to him the first night they’d come. She’d followed him through the
building site, the two of them stumbling over rocks and strings and laughing
as though they were drunk, bumping shoulders and grasping elbows to keep
their balance in the dark. Each fleeting touch a spark that warmed him.
“I can make a movable frame with a pulley.”
 That’s what she’d said,
putting a hand on the half-built chimney. 
“We can hoist up a bucket of bricks
you can reach from the ladder.”
“We,” he said softly, smiling to himself. Then looked over his shoulder,
self-conscious, lest the men carrying logs should have heard him. But they’d
laid down the last one and paused for refreshment—Amy Higgins and Fannyhad brought beer, and he dropped the trowel in a bucket of water and went to
join them. Just before he reached the edge of the foundation, though, his eye
caught a flicker of movement at the head of the wagon road, and the next
instant Claire came into sight, dwarfed by the man who walked beside her.
“A Naoimh Micheal Àirdaingeal, dìon sinn anns an àm a’ chatha,”
 he said
under his breath. He didn’t know the man, but there was something about him
beyond his size that made the hairs rise on Jamie’s neck.
He glanced at his helpers for the day—seven men: Bobby Higgins, three of
his Ardsmuir men, the others tenants he didn’t yet know well. And Fanny,
who had brought them lunch.
None of the men had noticed the man making his way across the clearing
—but Fanny had; she frowned and then looked quickly toward Jamie. He
nodded to her, reassuring, and her face relaxed, though she kept glancing
back down the hill, even as she answered something one of the men said to
her.
Jamie stepped over the foundation. He had a feeling that he’d have liked to
meet the fellow whilst standing in his own house with men at his back, but he
had a stronger feeling that he wanted to get between the man and Claire.
She was smiling politely at the man as he talked, but he could see the
wariness 
plain in her face. She looked up, though, and saw him coming.
Relief bloomed in her, and he felt an answering thrum in his chest. He
walked toward them, not smiling, but looking pleasant, at least.
“General Fraser?” said the man, looking him up and down with interest.
Aye, well, that explained Claire’s wariness.
“Not anymore,” he said, still pleasant, and put out a hand. “Jamie Fraser,
your servant, sir.”
“Yours, sir. Benjamin Cleveland.” A sweaty hand substantially bigger than
his own grasped him and squeezed in a manner indicating that the owner
thought he could have hurt him, had he wanted to.
Jamie let go without response and smiled. 
Aye, try it, ye wee bastard.
“I ken your name, sir. I’ve heard ye spoken of, now and then.”
From the corner of his eye, he saw Claire’s brows rise.
“Mr. Cleveland is a famous Indian fighter, 
a nighean,
” he said, not taking
his eyes off the man. “He’s killed a good many Cree and Cherokee, by his
own report.”
“Caughnawaga, too. I don’t keep a count,” Cleveland said, chuckling in a
way that said he remembered every man he’d killed, and enjoyed hismemories. “I suppose your relations with the Indians are a mite more
amiable?”
“I have friends in the Cherokee villages.” Not all of his friends in the
villages were Indians, but Scotchee Cameron was no business of Cleveland’s.
“Splendid!” Cleveland’s ruddy face grew redder. “I hoped that might be
the case.”
Jamie tilted his head with a noncommittal noise in his throat.
Claire evidently caught some note of what he was actually thinking, for she
cleared her own throat and stepped up beside him, touching his arm.
“Mr. Cleveland’s wagon broke down, a mile or so down the trace—a
sprung tyre. Perhaps you should go look at it?”
He smiled at her; she was transparent as a bottle of gin.
“Surely,” he said, and, turning to Cleveland, added, “I hope your cargo
didna gang agley when the wheel broke. If ye’ve anything fragile, perhaps
…”
“Oh, no,” Cleveland said casually. “It’s just a handful of guns and a bit of
powder; everything’s sound enough.” He grinned at Jamie, exposing a row of
stout, good teeth, though there was a shred of wet dark-brown tobacco caught
between two of them.
“Speaking of guns, though,” he went on. “That’s one thing I had in mind to
talk to you about. But yes, let’s do as your good lady suggests.” He made
Claire a creditable bow then turned and took hold of Jamie’s arm, compelling
him toward the trace.
Jamie disengaged himself without comment and, turning back to Claire,
said, “Send Bobby and Aaron along wi’ some tools, will ye, Sassenach? And
maybe a bit of beer, if there’s any left.”
Cleveland was waiting, and turned at once toward the wagon trace, leaving
Jamie to come as he would. He followed, eyes on the broad back and tree-
trunk legs. A very worn leather belt, showing the marks of cartridge box and
powder horn, and presently supporting a large knife in an equally worn
sheath—one decorated with dyed porcupine quills in an Indian pattern.
The man had maybe twenty years’ advantage on him—and at least a
hundred 
pounds, though Cleveland was an inch or two shorter. 
He’s likely
always been the biggest in any company he finds himself in. So he’s likely
never had to care whether folk like him or not.
THE WAGON STOOD in a hollow of dark-green shade, where the wagon
trace ran deep between two hillocks, both covered with a dense growth of
balsam fir, hemlock, and pine. Jamie felt the coolness touch his face like a
hand and drew a deep, clean breath of turpentine and cypress berries.
He was glad to see that the wagon wheel itself wasn’t damaged; the iron
tyre that surrounded it had sprung loose, but none of the wood was broken.
He could maybe get this man—and his guns; he spared a glance at the
contents of the wagon—back on his way before hospitality required the
Frasers to provide dinner and a bed.
“Ye came looking for me,” he said bluntly, looking up from the wheel.
They hadn’t spoken on the walk save for brief courtesies. With the guns in
plain sight, though, it was clearly time for business.
Cleveland nodded and took off his hat, openly appraising. His stomach
strained the fabric of his hunting shirt, but it looked like hard fat, of the sort
that would armor a man’s vitals.
“I did. Heard a good bit about you these two years past, one way and
another.”
“Folk who listen to gossip will hear nae good of themselves,” Jamie said,
in the 
Gàidhlig
.
“What?” Cleveland was startled. “What’s that? Ain’t French, I heard a-
plenty of 
that.
”
“It’s the 
Gàidhlig,
” Jamie said with a shrug, and repeated the sentiment in
English. Cleveland smiled in response.
“You’d be right about that, Mr. Fraser,” he said. Bending, he picked up the
heavy iron strip as though it were made of dandelion fluff and stood
meditatively turning it in his hands. “There’s a good bit of talk abroad about
how you came to lose your army commission.”
Despite himself, Jamie felt warmth rise up his neck.
“I resigned my commission, Mr. Cleveland, following the Battle of
Monmouth. I had been temporarily appointed as field general in order to take
command of a number of independent militia companies. These disbanded
following the battle. There was no further need of my services.”
“I’d heard that you quit without notice, leaving half your men alone on the
battlefield, in order to tend your ailing wife.” Cleveland’s bushy brows rose
inquiringly. “Though having met Mrs. Fraser, I can certainly understand your
feelin’s as a man.”
Jamie turned to face him over the wagonload of muskets and powder.“I’ve no need to defend myself to you, sir. If ye’ve something to say to me,
say it and have done. I’ve a privy to dig.”
Cleveland raised one hand, palm out, and bent his head, conciliating.
“No offense intended, Mr. Fraser. I only want to know whether you’re
planning to rejoin the army. In whatever capacity.”
“No,” Jamie said shortly. “Why?”
“Because if not,” Cleveland said, and fixed him with a calculating eye,
“you might be interested to know that a-many of your Whiggish neighbors
over the mountains”—he jerked his chin in the rough direction of Tennessee
County—“landowners, I mean, men who have something to lose—are raising
private militias to protect their families and their property. I thought you
might be considering something of the sort.”
Jamie felt his dislike of the man alter slightly, sliding reluctantly toward
curiosity.
“And if I were?” he said.
Cleveland shrugged.
“It would be good to keep in touch with other groups. There’s no tellin’
where the British might pop up, but when they do—mark me, Mr. Fraser,
when
 they do—I for one would like to know about it in time to take action.”
Jamie looked down into the wagon: muskets, and old ones, for the most
part, with dry, cracked stocks and scratched muzzles—but a few regular
British Brown Besses in better condition. Bought, traded, or stolen? he
wondered.
“Action,” he repeated carefully. “And who are some of these men you
speak of?”
“Oh, they exist,” Cleveland said, answering the thought rather than the
question. “John Sevier. Isaac Shelby. William Campbell and Frederick
Hambright. A good many others thinking on it, I can tell you.”
Jamie nodded but didn’t say more.
“One other thing I heard about you, Mr. Fraser,” said Cleveland, picking
up one of the muskets from the wagon bed, idly checking the flint, “is that
you were an Indian agent. That true?”
“I was.”
“And a good one, by report.” Cleveland smiled, suddenly clumsily playful.
“I hear tell there’s quite a few redheaded children down in the Cherokee
villages, hey?”Jamie felt as though Cleveland had struck him across the face with the
musket. Was that really being said, or was this some piece of foolery by
which Cleveland hoped to involve him in something shabby?
“I’ll wish ye good day, sir,” he said stiffly. “My men will be down with
tools to mend your wheel directly.”
He started walking back up the trace, but Cleveland, who moved quickly
despite his bulk, was right beside him.
“If we’re to have militia, we need guns,” Cleveland said. “That stands to
reason, don’t it?” Seeing that Jamie wasn’t disposed to answer rhetorical
questions, he tried another tack.
“The Indians have guns,” he said. “The British government gives the
Cherokee a good-sized allotment of shot and powder every year, for hunting.
Was that the case when you were an agent?”
“Good day, Mr. Cleveland.” He walked faster, though the exercise was
making his wounded leg throb. Cleveland grabbed his arm and jerked him to
a stop.
“We can talk about guns later,” Cleveland said. “There’s just the one other
thing I had in mind to speak to you about.”
“Take your hand off me.” The tone of his voice made Cleveland let go, but
he didn’t back away.
“A man named Cunningham,” he said, his small brown eyes steady on
Jamie’s. “Ex-navy captain. A Tory. Loyalist.”
That
 made a small, cold hole in Jamie’s middle. Captain Cunningham was
indeed a Loyalist—so were a dozen others of his tenants.
“I hate a Tory,” Cleveland said, reflectively. He shook his head, but Jamie
could see the gleam of his eyes beneath his hat brim. “Hung a few of ’em,
down home. Put a scare into the others, and they left.” He cleared his throat
and spat, landing a gob of yellowish phlegm near Jamie’s foot.
“Now. This Captain Cunningham writes letters. Essays in the papers.
Someone with the captain’s welfare in mind might want to have a word with
him about that. Don’t you think?”
WHEN JAMIE CAME back to the house site, he found the fire made up and
a good smell of something cooking in the cauldron. Roger and Ian were there,
talking to Claire while the shouts of children playing echoed among the treesnear the creek. That’s right; Jenny would be coming to dinner tonight. He’d
nearly forgot, in his annoyance with the blether of yon Cleveland.
“Someone with the captain’s welfare in mind might want to have a word
with him about that. Don’t you think?”
This was not, in fact, bad advice, but knowing that didn’t help his mood
any. He disliked being threatened, he disliked being condescended to, and he
very much disliked being loomed at by a man larger than himself. He didn’t
like Cleveland’s news, either, but he didn’t hold the man responsible for that.
The air of peaceful domesticity reached out for him, soothing, tempting
him to join his family, drink the cold beer Fanny had pulled out of the well,
sit down, and rest his aching leg. But the conversation with Cleveland was
still boiling under his breastbone and he didn’t want to talk to anyone about it
until he’d parsed it for himself.
He waved briefly to Claire as he passed through the site to where his
shovel was waiting, thrust into the ground by the half-dug privy; the effort of
digging would calm him as he thought things through. He hoped.
ROGER HAD SEEN Jamie disappear quietly into the shadows behind the
half-built chimney and assumed that he’d gone for a piss. But when he didn’t
reappear within a few minutes, Roger detached himself from the conversation
—this presently centering on the infinite possibilities for wee Oglethorpe’s
eventual real name—and followed his father-in-law into the gloaming.
He found Jamie standing on the edge of a large rectangular hole in the
ground, evidently lost in contemplation of its depths.
“New privy?” he asked, nodding into the pit. Jamie looked up, smiling at
sight of him, and Roger felt a rush of warmth—on more than one account.
“Aye. I’d only meant it to be the usual, ken, wi’ a single seat of ease.”
Jamie 
gestured at the hole, the last of the sun touching his hair and skin with
a golden light. “But with four more—and maybe yet more, in time? As ye say
ye mean to stay, I mean.” He glanced sideways at Roger, and the smile came
again.
“Then there’s the folk who come to see Claire, too. One of the Crombie
boys came down last week to get a remedy for a case o’ the blazing shits, and
he spent so long gruntin’ and groanin’ in Bobby Higgins’s privy that the
family were all havin’ to trot into the woods, and Amy wasna best pleased at
the state of the privy when he left, I can tell ye.”Roger nodded.
“So ye mean to make it bigger, or make two privies?”
“Aye, that’s the question.” Jamie seemed pleased that Roger had grasped
the essence of the situation so quickly. “See, most o’ the places wi’ families
have a necessary that will accommodate two at once—the McHughs have a
three-hole privy, and a thing of beauty it is, too; Sean McHugh is a canny
man with his tools, and a good thing, what wi’ seven bairns. But the thing is
—” He frowned a little and turned to look back toward the fire, presently
hidden behind the dark bulk of the chimney stack. “The women, ken?”
“Claire and Brianna, you mean.” Roger took Jamie’s meaning at once.
“Aye, they’ve notions of privacy. But a wee latch on the inside of the door
…?”
“Aye, I thought of that.” Jamie waved a hand, dismissing it. “The
difficulty’s more what they think of … germs.” He pronounced the word very
carefully and glanced quickly at Roger under his brows, as though to see if
he’d said it right, or as if he weren’t sure it was a real word to start with.
“Oh. Hadn’t thought of that. Ye mean the sick folk who come—they might
leave …” He waved his own hand toward the hole.
“Aye. Ye should ha’ seen the carry-on when Claire insisted on scalding
Amy’s privy wi’ boiling water and lye soap and pourin’ turpentine into it
after the Crombie lad left.” His shoulders rose toward his ears in memory. “If
she was to do that every time we had sick folk in our privy, we’d all be
shitting in the woods, too.”
He laughed, though, and so did Roger.
“Both, then,” Roger said. “Two holes for the family, and a separate privy
for visitors—or rather, for the surgery. Say it’s for convenience. Ye dinna
want to seem highfalutin by not letting people use your own privy.”
“No, that wouldna do at all.” Jamie vibrated briefly then stilled, but stayed
for a moment, looking down, a half smile still on his face. The smells of
damp, fresh-dug earth and newly sawn wood rose thick around them,
mingling with the scent of the fire, and Roger could almost imagine that he
felt the house solidifying out of the smoke.
Jamie left off what he was thinking, then, and turned his head to look at
Roger.
“I missed ye, Roger Mac,” he said.
ROGER OPENED HIS mouth to reply, but his throat had closed as hard as if
he’d swallowed a rock, and nothing came out but a muffled grunt.
Jamie smiled and touched his arm, urging him toward a big stone at what
Roger assumed would be the front of the house. The stone foundation ran out
at ninety-degree angles from the big stone. It was going to be a sizable house
—maybe even bigger than the original Big House.
“Come walk the foundation with me, aye?”
Roger bobbed his head and followed his father-in-law to the big stone, and
was surprised to see that the word “FRASER” had been chiseled into it, and
below that, “1779.”
“My cornerstone,” Jamie said. “I thought if the house was to burn down
again, at least folk would ken we’d been here, aye?”
“Ah … mm,” Roger managed. He cleared his throat hard, coughed, and
found enough air for a few words. “Lallybroch … y-your da …” He pointed
upward, as though to a lintel. “He put—the date.”
Jamie’s face lit. “He did,” he said. “The place is still standing, then?”
“It was last time I … saw it.” His throat had loosened as the grip of
emotion left it. “Though … come to think—” He stopped, recalling just 
when
he’d last seen Lallybroch.
“I wondered, ken.” Jamie had turned his back and was leading the way
down what would be the side of the house. A smell of roasting meat was
wafting from the fire. “Brianna told me about the men who came.” He
glanced back briefly at Roger, his face careful. “Ye were gone then, of
course, lookin’ for Jem.”
“Yes.” And Bree had been forced to leave the house—their house—
abandoned to the hands of thieves and kidnappers. It felt like the rock had
dropped from his throat into his chest. No use thinking of that just now,
though, and he shoved the vision of people shooting at his wife and children
down into the bottom of his brain—for the moment.
“As it is,” he said, catching up with Jamie, “the last time I saw Lallybroch
was … a bit earlier than that.”
Jamie paused, one eyebrow raised, and Roger cleared his throat. It was
what he’d come back here to say; no better time to say it.
“When I went to find Jem, I started by going to Lallybroch. He knew it, it
was his home—I thought, if he somehow got away from Cameron, he’d
maybe go there.”Jamie looked at him for a moment, then drew breath and nodded. “The lass
said … 1739?”
“You would have been eighteen. Away at university in Paris. Your family
was very proud of you,” Roger added softly. Jamie turned his head sharply
away and stood quite still; Roger could hear the catch in his breath.
“Jenny,” he said. “Ye met Jenny. 
Then.
”
“Aye, I did. She was maybe twenty. Then.” And 
then,
 for him, was less
than a year in the past. And Jenny now was what, sixty? “I thought—I
thought I should maybe say something to ye, before I met her again.”
“In case the shock of it knocked her over?”
“Something like that.”
Jamie had turned back to him now, his expression wavering between a
smile and a considerable shock of his own, Roger thought. Roger could feel
it, the sense of disbelief, disorientation, not knowing where to put your feet
down. Jamie shook his head like a bull trying to dislodge a fly. 
I know the
feeling, mate … all of them.
“That’s … very thoughtful of ye.” Jamie swallowed, and then looked up,
the next thought penetrating the shock—and renewing it. “My father. Ye said
—my family. He …” His voice died.
“He was there.” The voices from the distant fire had settled into the steady
hum of women working: clanking and splashing and scraping noises, voices
on the far side of hearing, punctuated by small bursts of laughter, an
occasional sharp call to an errant child. Roger touched Jamie’s arm and tilted
his head toward the path that led up toward the springhouse and the garden.
“Maybe we should go somewhere and sit for a bit,” he said. “So I can tell it
to ye before your sister comes.” 
So you can handle it without witnesses.
Jamie let out a deep sigh, compressed his lips briefly, then nodded and
turned, leading the way past the big square cornerstone. Which, Roger
suddenly thought, looked very much like the clan stones he’d seen on
Culloden field, big gray stones casting long shadows in the evening light,
each bearing the chiseled memory of one name: McGillivray, Cameron,
MacDonald … Fraser.
ROGER STOOD WITH Jamie on a mossy bank above the creek, dutifully
admiring the fledgling springhouse on the opposite side of the rushing water.“It’s no much yet,” Jamie said modestly, nodding at it. “But it’s what I’ve
had time for. I’ll need to build a bigger one soon, though—maybe by the
spring—the summer rains will flood this one.”
The springhouse was little more at present than a rocky overhang to which
rough stone walls had been added on either side, with openings at the foot of
each wall to let water pass through. Wooden slats ran between the walls,
suspended a couple of feet above the clear brown water of the creek. At the
moment, these supported three pails of milk, each covered with a weighted
cloth to prevent flies or frogs from dropping in, and half of a waxed wheel of
Moravian cheese the size of Roger’s head.
“Jenny’s a fine cheese maker,” Jamie said, with a nod at the latter object.
“But she hasna yet found a good starter, so I brought that from Salem.”
Below the slats, a modest array of stoneware crocks were half sunk in the
creek, these—Jamie said—holding butter, cream, soured cream, and
buttermilk. It was a peaceful spot here, the air cool with the breeze off the
water, and the creek busily talking to itself. On the bank beyond the rocky
lump of the springhouse, a thick growth of willows let their slender branches
flow with the water.
“Like young women washing their hair, aye?” Roger said, gesturing at
them, and Jamie smiled a little, but his mind was plainly not on poetry at the
moment.
“Here,” he said, turning away from the creek and pushing aside the
branches of a red oak sapling. Roger followed him up a small slope and onto
a rocky shelf, where two or three more enterprising saplings had established
themselves in crevices. There was room enough to sit comfortably at the edge
of the shelf, from whence Roger found that they could see the opposite bank
and the tiny springhouse, and also a good bit of the trail leading up from the
house site.
“We’ll see anyone coming,” Jamie said, settling himself cross-legged, with
his back against one of the saplings. “So, then. Ye’ve a thing or two to tell
me.”
“So, then.” Roger sat down in a patch of shade, took off his shoes and
stockings, and let his legs dangle in the cool draft at the edge of the shelf, in
hopes that it would slow his heart. There was no way to begin, except to start.
“As I said, I went to Lallybroch in search of Jem—and of course he wasn’t
there. But Brian—your father—”
“I ken his name,” Jamie said dryly.“Ever call him by it?” Roger said, on impulse.
“No,” Jamie said, surprised. “Do men call their fathers by their Christian
names in your time?”
“No.” Roger made a brief dismissive motion. “It’s just—I shouldn’t have
said that, it’s part of my story, not yours.”
Jamie glanced at the fading sky.
“It’s a good while ’til supper,” he said. “We’ve likely time for both.”
“It’s a tale for another time,” Roger said, shrugging. “But … the meat of it
is that while I came in search of Jem, I found—well, my father, instead. His
name was Jeremiah, too—folk called him Jerry.”
Jamie said something in Gaelic and crossed himself.
“Aye,” Roger said briefly. “As I said—another time. The thing was—when
I found him, he was only twenty-two. I was the age I am now; I could have
been 
his
 father, just. So I called him Jerry; thought of him that way. At the
same time, I kent he was my … well. I couldn’t tell him who I was; there
wasn’t time.” He felt his throat grow tight again and cleared it, with an effort.
“Well, so. It was before, that I met your father at Lallybroch. I nearly fell
over with the shock when he opened the door and told me his name.” He
smiled a little at the memory, rueful. “He was about my own age, maybe a
few years older. We met … as men. Mr. MacKenzie. Mr. Fraser.”
Jamie gave a brief nod, his eyes curious.
“And then your sister came in, and they made me welcome, fed me. I told
your father—well, not the whole of it, obviously—but that I was looking for
my wee lad, who’d been kidnapped.”
Brian had given Roger a bed, then taken him next morning to all the crofts
nearby, asking after Jem and Rob Cameron, without result. But the next day,
he’d suggested riding all the way to Fort William, to make inquiries at the
army garrison.
Roger’s eyes were fixed on a patch of moss near his knee; it grew in
rounded green clumps over the rocks, looking like the heads of young
broccoli. He could feel Jamie listening. His father-in-law didn’t move at all,
but Roger felt the slight tension in him at mention of Fort William. 
Or maybe
it’s my own …
 He thrust his fingers into the cool, wet moss; to anchor
himself, maybe.
“The commander was an officer named Buncombe. Your father called him
‘a decent fellow for a Sassenach’—and he was. Brian had brought two bottles
of whisky—good stuff,” he added, glancing at Jamie, and saw the flicker of areturned smile at that. “We drank with Buncombe, and he promised to have
his soldiers make inquiries. That made me feel … hopeful. As though I might
really have some chance of finding Jem.”
He hesitated for a moment, trying to think how to say what he wanted to,
but after all, Jamie 
had
 known Brian himself.
“It wasn’t so much Buncombe’s courtesy. It was Brian Dhu,” he said,
looking straight at Jamie. “He was … kind, very kind, but it was more than
that.” He had a vivid memory of it, of Brian, riding in front of him up a hill,
bonnet and broad shoulders dark with rain, his back straight and sure. “You
felt—
I
 felt—as though … if this man was on my side, then things would be
all right.”
“Everyone felt that about him,” Jamie said softly, looking down.
Roger nodded, silent. Jamie’s auburn head was bent, his gaze fixed on his
knees—but Roger saw that head turn a fraction of an inch, and tilt as though
in answer to a touch, and a tiny ripple of something between awe and simple
acknowledgment stirred the hairs on his own scalp.
There it is,
 he thought, at once surprised and not surprised at all. He’d seen
it—or rather, felt it—before, but it had taken several repetitions before he’d
realized fully what it was. The summoning of the dead, when those who
loved them spoke of them. He could feel Brian Dhu, here beside this
mountain creek, as surely as he had felt him that dreich day in the Highlands.
Roger gave a brief nod to the ghost who stood with them, thought, 
Forgive
me,
 and went on.
He told of William Buccleigh MacKenzie, who’d once nearly killed Roger
but now was in the way of making amends by helping to find Jem. How
together they had met Dougal MacKenzie, out collecting rents with his men
—
“Jesus,” Jamie said, though Roger noticed he didn’t cross himself at
mention of Dougal. His mouth curved up at the corner. “Did Dougal ken the
—that this man Buck was his son?”
“No,” Roger said dryly. “As Buck hadn’t been born yet. Buck kent Dougal
was his father, though; that was a bit of a shock for him.” 
Not only for him.
“I imagine it would be,” Jamie murmured. A tinge of amusement lingered
on his face, and Roger wondered—not for the first time—at the ability of
Highlanders to step back and forth between this world and the next. Jamie
had killed his uncle when he had to, but had made his peace postmortem;
he’d heard Jamie call on Dougal for help in battle—and seen him get it, too.Roger and Buck had got it, as well: Dougal had lent them horses for their
journey.
But as Roger had said, this wasn’t about his own search for son and father.
This was about what he owed to another father and another son. To the shade
of Brian Dhu—and to Jamie.
“I’ll tell ye the rest sometime. But for now—we went back to Lallybroch,
for Brian had sent word that he’d found a thing that was maybe to do with my
business.
“The thing was a sort of pendant sent to him from the garrison commander
at Fort William. It seemed odd and it had the name 
‘MacKenzie’
 on 
it, so
both the commander and Brian thought I should see it.” There was a
remembered tightness in his chest as he saw the disks in his mind: pressed
cardboard, one red, one green, both imprinted with the name 
“J. W.
MacKenzie”
 and a string of cryptic numbers—the ID dog tags of an RAF
flyer, and proof positive that they were looking for a different Jeremiah.
“We needed to find where those tags had come from, aye? So we went
back to Fort William. And—” He had to stop and breathe deep, to get it out.
“Captain Buncombe had left; the new garrison commander was a Captain
Randall.”
All amusement had vanished from Jamie’s face, which was now blank as a
slate.
“Aye,” Roger said, and coughed a bit. “Him.” The new commander had
been cordial, personable. “Helpful,” Roger said. “It was—” He searched for a
word, then spread his hands, helpless to find it. “It was weird. I mean … I
knew …
 what he’d …”
“Done to me?” Jamie’s eyes were fixed on his, unreadable.
“What he’d do to you. Claire told me—us. When she …” He caught sight
of Jamie’s face and hurried on. “I mean, she kent ye were dead, or I’m sure
she wouldn’t have—”
“She told ye everything, then.” Jamie’s expression hadn’t changed much,
but his face had gone pale.
Oh, shit.
“Well, just the … er … the general outli—” He stopped. 
Ye’ll never make
a decent minister if ye can’t be honest.
 Buck had said that to him, and he was
right. Roger took a breath.
“Yes,” he said simply, and felt his innards hollow out.Without a word, Jamie got to his feet and, turning away, took several steps
into the bushes, stopped, and threw up.
Oh, Jesus. Oh, God. What was I thinking!
Roger felt as though he’d been holding his breath for an hour, and took a
sip of air, and then another. He’d been thinking far ahead—to what he needed
to say to Jamie, to explain and apologize, to ask forgiveness. He needed to do
that, if he and Bree were to live here again. But he hadn’t thought at all that
Jamie might not realize that Roger—
and Bree, for God’s sake!
—knew the
intimate details of his personal Gethsemane; had known them for years.
Bloody, bloody, bloody … oh, hell …
Roger sat with his fists clenched, listening to Jamie gulp air, spit, and pant.
He kept his eyes fixed on a scarlet ladybug with black spots that had lighted
on his knee; it trundled to and fro over the gray homespun, curious antennae
prodding the cloth. At last there was a rustling of bushes, and Jamie came
back and sat down, back pressed against the sapling. Roger opened his
mouth, and Jamie made a short chopping gesture with one hand.
“Don’t,” he said. His shirt was damp with sweat, wilted over his
collarbones. All the evening insects had come out now; clouds of gnats
floated over their heads, and the crickets had begun to chirp. A mosquito
whined past Roger’s ear, but he didn’t lift a hand to swat it.
Jamie sighed and gave Roger a very direct look.
“Go on, then,” he said. “Tell me the rest.”
Roger nodded and met Jamie’s eyes.
“I knew about Randall, and what he was,” he said bluntly. “And what
would happen. Not just to you—to your sister. And your father.”
This time Jamie did cross himself, slowly, and whispered something in
Gaelic that Roger didn’t catch, but didn’t ask to have repeated.
“I told Buck, then—just, about the—the flogging, not about—” The fingers
of Jamie’s maimed hand flickered, as though about to make the chopping
motion again. “About your father, and what happened to him then.”
He felt again the cold horror of that conversation. If he did nothing to stop
Jack Randall, Brian Dhu Fraser would be dead within a year, dead of an
apoplexy suffered while watching his son being flogged to death (as he
thought) by Captain Randall. Jamie would be outlawed, wounded in body and
soul, bearing the guilt of knowing that his father’s death lay upon him,
knowing that he had abandoned his home and tenants to his bereaved andshattered sister. And Jenny, that lovely young girl, left completely alone,
without even a brother’s protection.
Jamie didn’t flinch at the telling, but Roger could feel the words go into his
own flesh like darts. 
Jenny. Christ, how will I face her?
He drew a deep breath. They were nearly there.
“Buck wanted to kill him—Randall. Right away, without hesitation.”
There was the barest breath of a laugh in Jamie’s voice, though it wavered
a bit.
“He 
was
 Dougal’s son, then.”
“Absolutely no doubt about it,” Roger assured him. “You should have seen
the two of them together.”
“I wish I had.”
Roger rubbed a hand over his face, shaking his head.
“The thing is—we could have stopped him. Killed him, I mean. We were
armed. I’d been to see him before, with your da. He’d have no fear of me; I
could have gone into his office with Buck and done it. Or we might have
followed him to his lodgings, done it there; we’d have had a good chance of
getting away.”
Jamie had flinched, just once, at the word “da.” He sat quiet now, though,
his eyes the only thing alive in his face.
“I wouldn’t let Buck do it,” Roger blurted, speaking to those eyes. “I 
knew
what would happen—all of it—and I let it happen. To your family. To you.”
Jamie looked down but didn’t speak. Roger felt fresh air from the creek
come up from below, and felt the cold shadow of the trees touch his burning
face.
At last Jamie stirred, nodding his head once, then twice, deciding.
“And if ye’d killed him?” he said quietly. “If I hadna been an outlaw, I’d
not have been near Craigh na Dun, and in bad need of a healer, on that day
when …” One eyebrow lifted.
Roger nodded, wordless.
“Brianna?” Jamie said softly, her name the sound of cool breeze in the
Gàidhlig
. “Would she have happened? And the bairns? You, for that matter?”
“It—we—might still have happened,” Roger said, and swallowed.
“Another way. But aye. I was scared it might not. But I’m not—” He bit that
off. Jamie knew he wasn’t making excuses.
“Aye, well.” Jamie got to his feet, scattering a cloud of gnats like a shower
of gold dust in the evening light. “Dinna fash, then. I willna let Jenny kill ye.Come on, or the supper will be burnt.”
Roger felt rather as though a rug had been pulled out from under him. He
didn’t know what he’d been expecting, but apparent calm acceptance wasn’t
it.
“You … don’t …” he began hesitantly.
“I don’t.” Jamie reached down a hand, and when Roger took it, hauled him
to his feet so they stood face-to-face, the trees beginning to rustle around
them in the evening breeze.
“I spent a great deal of time thinking, ken,” Jamie said conversationally,
tilting his head toward the creek, “when I lived as an outlaw after Culloden.
Out under the sky, listening to the voices ye hear in the wind. And I would
look back, wondering at the things I’d done—and not done—and thinking
what if I’d done it differently? If we’d not chosen to try to stop Charles Stuart
… it would have been different for us, at least, if not for the Highlands. I’d
maybe have kept Claire by me. If I’d not gone to fight Jack Randall in the
Bois de Boulogne, would I have two daughters now?” He shook his head, the
lines in his face deep and his eyes dark with shadows.
“No man owns his own life,” he said. “Part of you is always in someone
else’s hands. All ye can do is hope it’s mostly God’s hands you’re in.” He
touched Roger’s shoulder, nodding toward the trail. “We should go.”
Roger followed, eased in mind, but unable to see the grubby, coarse shirt
that covered Jamie’s back without still seeing the scars beneath.
“Mind,” Jamie said, turning to Roger at the head of the trail, “I think ye
maybe shouldna tell Jenny what ye just told me. Not first thing, I mean. Let
her get used to ye.”
JAMIE TOOK THE kindling sticks from Fanny and Mandy and bade them
watch to see how you put them in to build up a fire. The fire had been
burning all day, but low, as it wasn’t needed to do anything more than boil
water and cook the stew Claire had made: bits of roasted possum flavoring a
mass of young potatoes with carrots, peas, wild mushrooms, and onions. He
glanced over his shoulder to be sure she was occupied elsewhere, then
beckoned the girls in, conspiratorially.
“Let’s have a wee whiff,” he whispered, and they giggled, pressing in
against his shoulders as he reached out with the pot lifter and slowly raised
the lid, letting out a puff of damp steam, scented with meat and wine andonions. The girls sniffed as hard as ever they could, and he let it come in
through his nose, all the way to the back of his throat. His wame rumbled at
the luscious smell, and the girls burst into giggles again at the sound,
glancing guiltily round.
“What on earth are you doing, Da?” He turned to find his daughter
towering over him, a look of disapproval on her face. “Mandy, watch out!
You’ve got Esmeralda almost in the fire!”
“Only teaching the wee lassies a bit o’ cookery,” he said airily, and,
handing her the pot lifter, bowed and left, the music of girls’ laughter in his
ears.
It was a good time to go; supper would be ready soon, and the light was
going. He’d been looking out for Jenny, meaning to take her aside and
prepare her a bit before she met Roger Mac.
Prepare her, how?
 he wondered. Say, 
“D’ye mind a man who came to
Lallybroch forty years ago, lookin’ for his son? Ye don’t? Oh. Well, he’s here
… only …”
Maybe she 
would
 remember. She’d been a young lass and Roger Mac was
no bad-looking. And from what Roger Mac had told him, Da had spent a
good bit of time in helping him to search, so perhaps …
The realization that he’d thought about Da so casually, thinking of him as
still alive, made him feel as though he’d missed the last stair and come down
staggering.
“Eh?” He became aware that Claire had asked him something and was
waiting for an answer. “Sorry, Sassenach, I was thinking. What did ye say?”
She raised a brow at him, but smiled and handed him a bottle.
“I said, would you please open that?” It was a bottle of last year’s muscat
wine that Jimmy Robertson had given Claire in thanks for her setting his
youngest son’s broken arm.
“Ye think it’ll be worth drinking?” he asked, taking the bottle and
examining it critically. The cork was tight in the bottle-neck, but dry and
brittle; Claire had evidently tried to pull it and the greater part had broken off,
crumbling in her hand.
“No,” she said, “but since when has that consideration ever stopped a Scot
from drinking anything?”
“It hasna stopped any Englishmen I know, either. Maybe a Frenchman
would be more choosy.” He held the brown glass bottle up to the light, to see
the level of the wine inside, then drew his dirk and struck the neck of thebottle with a ringing tap of the blade. The glass broke cleanly, though at an
angle, and he handed it back to her. “It doesna smell corked, at least.”
“Oh, good. I’ll—is that Oggy? Or a catamount?”
“It sounds like a catamount havin’ the griping farts, so it’s likely Oggy.”
She laughed, which made him feel momentarily happy. He took a sip of
the wine, made a face, and gave it back to her.
“Who are ye planning to serve that to?”
“Nobody,” she replied, sniffing gingerly. “I’m going to soak a very tough-
looking chunk of elk in it overnight with the last of the ramps and then boil it
with beans and rice. 
What
 are they ever going to name that child—and when,
do you think?”
“There’s nay rush about it, is there? No one’s going to confuse him wi’ any
other bairn on the Ridge.” No one would. Rachel’s wee man had the best
lungs Jamie had ever heard, and seldom stopped using them. Right now, he
didn’t seem upset, just bellowing for the fun of it.
“I’ll go meet them,” he said. “I want to talk to Jenny before she sees Roger
Mac.”
Claire’s face went blank for an instant and then she turned her head
quickly toward the trees, where Jamie saw Brianna and Roger Mac standing
in close 
conversation. 
Is he telling her what he told me?
 he wondered, with a
resurgence of the “falling off a staircase” feeling in his wame.
“Goodness,” Claire said, a look of intense interest coming into her eyes
like the one she had when she saw the tinker’s anal warts that looked like a
fleshy cauliflower growing out of his bum. “I hadn’t thought of that.”
“Well, I dinna think she’ll faint, because she never does,” he said. “But ye
might have a dram of something ready, just in case.”
AS IT WAS, his sister wasn’t with Ian and Rachel; Rachel said Jenny had
gone aside to thig a wee bit of mother of vinegar from Morag MacAuley, but
would be down right after them. That was a bit of luck, and he thanked her,
pausing to rub the top of Oggy’s head briskly with his palm, an attention that
usually made the bairn laugh. It did this time, too, and he set off up the trail
feeling just that wee bit more settled in himself.
He found Jenny sitting on a stump beside the trail, shaking a stone out of
her shoe. She heard his step and, looking up to see him, leapt to her feet and
flung herself into his arms, ignoring the shoe.“Jamie, 
a chuisle
! Your bonnie lass! I’m fit to burst wi’ joy for ye!” She let
go of his ribs and looked up, eyes brimming, and he felt his own sting, too,
though he couldn’t help laughing through it, her joy reminding him of his
own.
“Aye, me, too,” he said. He wiped his eyes briefly on his sleeve and set her
cap straight for her. “How long ago was it that ye met Brianna? She said
she’d gone to Lallybroch looking for her mother and me. And met you and
Ian and all. 
And
 Laoghaire,” he added, remembering.
Jenny crossed herself at mention of the name, and laughed, too.
“Blessed Mother, the look on Laoghaire’s face when she saw the lass! And
then the one when she tried to claim Mam’s pearls and Brianna shut her up
like a writing desk!”
“Did she?” He regretted not seeing that, but then forgot it, recalling why
he’d come looking for Jenny.
“Brianna’s man,” he said to the top of her head as she bent to put her shoe
back on. “Roger MacKenzie.”
“Aye, what sort of man is he, then? Ye said ye liked him fine, in your
letters.”
“I still do,” he assured her. “It’s just … d’ye recall when Claire and I came
to Scotland to bury Simon the General at Balnain?”
“I’m no likely to forget it,” she said, her face darkening. Nor would she;
that had been during Ian’s long dying, a terrible time for them all, but worst
by far for her. He hated to bring it back to her, even for a moment, but
couldn’t think how else to begin.
“Ye’ll remember, then, what Claire told ye all—about … where she came
from.”
Jenny looked blankly at him, her mind clearly still shadowed by memories,
but then she blinked, frowning.
“Aye …” she said cautiously. “Some taradiddle about stone circles and
faeries, as I recall.”
“Aye, that’s the bit. Now—can ye maybe cast your mind back a bit further,
to—to the time I was away in Paris, just before Da died?”
“I can,” she said tersely, glaring up at him. “But I dinna want to. Why are
ye plaguing me wi’ that, of all things?”
He patted the air with his palm, urging her to hear him out.
“There was a man came to Lallybroch, looking for his kidnapped son. A
dark-haired man, called Roger MacKenzie, from Lochalsh, he said. Do yeremember him?”
The sun was coming down, but there was plenty of light left to show him
the blood draining from her face. She swallowed visibly and nodded, once.
“His wee lad was named Jeremiah,” she said. “I remember, because Da got
a wee bawbee sent him from the garrison commander”—her lips compressed,
and he kent she was thinking of Jack Randall—“and when the dark-haired
man came back, Da gave it to him, and I heard Mr. MacKenzie talking to his
friend later, and saying that it must have belonged to his own father, who was
named Jeremiah, like … Jemmy. His son’s name was Jeremiah and they
called him Jemmy.” She stopped talking and stared at him, her eyes round as
three-penny bits. “Ye’re tellin’ me your grandson is 
that
 Jemmy, and the
dark-haired man is …”
“I am,” he said, and let his breath out.
She sat down again, very slowly.
He let her alone, remembering all too well the mix of incredulity,
bewilderment, and fear that he’d felt when Claire, battered and hysterical
after he’d rescued her from the witch trial in Cranesmuir, had finally told him
what she was.
He also remembered vividly what he’d said at the time. 
“It would ha’ been
easier if ye’d only been a witch.”
 That made him smile, and he squatted
down in front of his sister.
“Aye, I ken,” he said to her. “But it’s no really different than if they’d
come from … Spain, maybe. Or Timbuktu, say.”
She darted a sharp look at him and snorted, but her hands—clenched in her
lap—relaxed.
“So the way of it is that Roger Mac and Brianna were each of them at
Lallybroch—then. Ye met Brianna when she came to find us. But ye’d met
Roger Mac years earlier, looking for his wee lad. Brianna came again a bit
later wi’ the bairns, looking for Roger. Ye didna meet her then, but she saw
Da.”
He paused for a moment, waiting. Jenny’s look changed suddenly and she
sat up straighter.
“She met Da? But he was already dead …” Her voice trailed off as she
tried to juggle it all in her head.
“She did,” he said, and swallowed the lump in his throat. “And Roger Mac
spent some time with Da, too, searching. He—told me things about Da. See
… for the two o’ them, it was nay more than a few months ago that they sawhim,” he said softly, and took her hand, holding it tight. “To hear Roger Mac
speak of him so—it was as though Da stood beside me.”
She let out her breath in a small sob, and squeezed his hand tight between
her own. The tears were in her eyes again, but she wasn’t afraid, and she
blinked them back, sniffing.
“It’s maybe easier if ye think of it as a miracle,” he said, trying to be
helpful. “I mean—it is, no?”
She gave him a look, took out a hankie, and blew her nose.
“Fag mi,”
 she said. Don’t try me.
“Come,” he said, and stood, pulling her up. “Ye’ve a new nephew to meet.
Again.”
ROGER SAW JAMIE first, stepping out from the shadow of the chimney, a
shadow himself, dark against dark—and behind him, another shadow, so
insubstantial that for a moment he wasn’t sure she was there at all. Then he
found himself on his feet, moving to meet her on the edge of the firelight, the
flicker of the flames behind him bright in her eyes and the lovely girl he had
known shining out at him.
“Miss Fraser,” he said softly, and took her hand in both of his, light-boned
and firm as a bird’s foot. “Well met.”
She breathed a laugh, lines creasing round her eyes.
“Last time we met,” she said, “I thought I’d like it if ye kissed my hand,
but ye didn’t.”
He could see the rapid beat of her pulse at the side of her throat, but her
hand was steady in his, and he raised it and kissed it with a tenderness that
was not at all assumed.
“I thought your father might take it amiss,” he said, smiling. A slightly
startled expression crossed her face, and her hand tightened on his.
“It’s true,” she whispered, staring up at him. “Ye saw Da, talked to him—
only a few months ago? Your voice doesna sound like … Ye dinna talk like
ye think he’s dead.” Her voice was filled with wonderment.
Jamie made a soft noise, deep in his throat, and moved out of the shadows,
touching her arm.
“Brianna, too,” he said quietly, and tilted his head toward the fire, where
Roger saw Bree holding Oggy, talking to the other children, her long red hair
lifting in the warm rising air from the fire. She was waving the baby’s podgylittle hand in regal gestures, talking for him in a deep, comic voice, and the
bairns were all giggling.
“She saw Da, too, though she didna get to speak to him. It was in the
burying ground at Lallybroch; she said he knelt by 
Mammeigh
’s stone, and
he’d brought her holly and yew, bound wi’ red thread.”
“Mammaidh …”
Jenny’s voice caught in her throat with a small click, and Roger saw tears
well suddenly in her eyes. He let go of her hand as Jamie put his arm round
her and drew her close, and brother and sister clung together, faces hidden in
each other, holding love between them.
He was still staring at them when he felt Claire beside him. She was
watching them as well, her face smooth and her heart in her eyes. Silently,
she took his hand.9
Animal Nursery Tales
IT TOOK A MONTH, rather than two weeks, but by the time the wild grapes
began to ripen, Jamie, Roger, and Bree—with precarious ceremony and a lot
of giggling from the groundlings below—tacked a large sheet of stained
white canvas (salvaged and stitched together from pieces of the damaged
mainsail of a Royal Navy sloop that was refitting in Wilmington when Fergus
happened to be strolling along the quay) onto the framing of the New
House’s new kitchen.
We had a roof. Of our own.
I stood under it, looking up, for a long time. Just smiling.
People were trooping in and out, carrying things over from the lean-to, up
from the Higginses’ cabin, out of the springhouse, in from the shelter of the
Big Log, down from the garden. It reminded me, suddenly and without
warning, of making camp on an expedition with my Uncle Lamb: the same
higgledy-piggledy bustle of objects, good spirits, relief and happiness,
expectation.
Jamie set down the pie safe, easing it gently onto the new pine floor so as
not to dent or mar the boards.
“Wasted effort,” he said, smiling as he looked up at me. “A week and it’ll
be as though we’d driven a herd of pigs through it. Why are ye smiling? Does
the prospect amuse ye?”
“No, but you do,” I said, and he laughed. He came and put an arm around
me, and we both looked up.
The canvas shone a brilliant white, and the late-morning sun glowed along
its edges. The canvas lifted a little, whispering in the breeze, and multiple
stains of seawater, dirt, and what might possibly be the blood of fish or men
made shadows that shimmered on the floor around our feet, the shallows of a
new life.“Look,” he whispered in my ear, and nudged my cheek with his chin,
directing my gaze.
Fanny stood on the far side of the room, looking up. She was lost in the
snowy light, oblivious to Adso the cat, twining about her ankles in hopes of
food. She was smiling.
JAMIE DUG THE hole. A shallow groove in the black, mica-flecked soil
under the chimney breast, about ten inches long.
He and Roger and Ian had—puffing, gasping, and cursing in Gaelic,
French, English, and Mohawk—carried the big slab of serpentine meant for
the hearthstone down from the Green Spring the day before. It leaned now
against the chimney, waiting.
The bottom of the stone was smeared with dirt and rootlets, and I saw a
small spider emerge from a hollow, venturing an inch or two, then freezing in
bewilderment.
“Wait,” I said to Jamie, who had sat back on his heels and reached up
toward Bree, waiting with the black chisel in her hand. He lifted a brow but
nodded, and the children clustered round me to see what was the holdup. I
picked up the edge of my apron and attempted to move it under the spider
without frightening it. It promptly ran straight up the stone, leapt off into thin
air, and landed on Jamie’s shirt. He clapped a cupped hand over it, and—still
with raised brow—stood carefully, walked to the outer edge of the half-
framed room, and, removing his hand, took hold of the hem of his shirt and
flapped it vigorously between the studs.
“Thalla le Dia!”
 said Jemmy.
“What?” said Fanny, who had been watching this byplay with
openmouthed wonder.
“Go with God,” Jemmy said reasonably. “What else would ye say to a
spider?”
“What indeed,” said Jamie. Patting Jem on the shoulder, he once more
knelt by the open hearth and lifted a hand toward his daughter. Rather to my
surprise, Bree kissed the chisel as though it were a crucifix and laid it gently
in his hand.
He also lifted it to his lips and kissed it as though it were his dirk, then laid
it gently in its burrow and scooped dirt over it with his left hand. He sat back
on his heels again and looked deliberately from face to face. It was only thefamily present: ourselves, Brianna, Roger, Jem and Mandy, Germain, Fanny,
Ian, Rachel, and Jenny, holding a sleeping Oggy.
“Bless Thou, O God, the dwelling,”
 he said,
“And each who rests herein this night;
Bless Thou, O God, my beloved ones
In every place wherein they sleep;
In the night that is to-night,
And every night;
In the day that is to-day,
And every day.
May this sacred iron be witness
To the love of God and the guarding of this house.”
The solemn attention of the assembly lasted for roughly five seconds of
silence.
“Now we eat!” Mandy said brightly.
Jamie laughed with everyone else, but broke off and touched her cheek.
“Aye, 
m’annsachd.
 But no until the hearthstone’s laid. Stand back a wee
bit, out of the way.”
Brianna snared Mandy and moved her well back, gesturing Jem, Fanny,
and Germain into a similar, though reluctant, withdrawal. The men flexed
their shoulders and hands a few times, then at Jamie’s signal bent and seized
the stone.
“Arrrrrgh!”
 shouted Jem and Germain, enthusiastically mimicking the
men, who were all making similar noises. Oggy sprang awake, mouth a
perfect “O” of horror, and Jenny, with perfect timing, stuck her thumb into it.
He reflexively closed his mouth and started to suck, though still round-eyed
with amazement.
A lot of grunting, maneuvering, muttered directions, cries of alarm as the
stone slipped, laughing and chattering among the spectators as it was caught,
and, with a final gasp of effort, the stone was turned flat and dropped into
place.
Jamie was bent over, hands on his knees, panting. He straightened slowly,
red in the face, sweat running down his neck, and looked at me.
“I hope ye like this house, Sassenach,” he said, and took a deep gulp of air,
“because I’m never building ye another.”Gradually, everyone sorted themselves, and we reassembled at the edge of
the new hearth for the final blessing. To my surprise—and to theirs—Jamie
beckoned Roger and Ian and made them stand on either side of him where he
stood before the hearth.
“Bless to me, O God,”
 he said, 
“the moon that is above me.
“Bless to me, O God, the earth that is beneath me,
Bless to me, O God, my wife and my children,
And bless, O God, myself who have care of them;
“Bless to me my wife and my children,
And bless, O God, myself who have care of them.
Bless, O God, the thing on which mine eye doth rest.
Bless, O God, the thing on which my hope doth rest,
Bless, O God, my reason and my purpose.
Bless, O bless Thou them, Thou God of life;
Bless, O God, my reason and my purpose,
Bless, O bless Thou them, Thou God of life.
“Bless to me the bed-companion of my love.
Bless to me the handling of my hands.
Bless, O bless Thou to me, O God, the fencing of my defense.
And bless, O bless to me the angeling of my rest;
Bless, O bless Thou to me, O God, the fencing of my defense.
And bless, O bless to me the angeling of my rest.”
With a nod of his head, he indicated that we should join him, and we did.
“Bless Thou, O God, the dwelling,
And each who rests herein this night;
Bless Thou, O God, my dear ones
In every place wherein they sleep;
In the night that is to-night,
And every single night;
In the day that is to-day,
And every single day.”Amid murmured instructions, everyone picked up a stick of wood and
brought it to the hearth, where Brianna laid it and carefully pressed handfuls
of kindling under her construction.
I took my own deep breath, and, taking the twist of straw she handed me, I
thrust it into the firepot from my surgery, then knelt on the new green stone
and lit the fire.
WE’D EATEN A cold supper on our new front stoop, there being no table or
benches for the kitchen as yet, but for the sake of ceremony, I had made
molasses cookie dough early in the day and set it aside. Everyone trooped
inside and unrolled their miscellaneous bedding—Jamie and I did have a bed,
but everyone else would be sleeping on pallets before the new fire—and sat
down to watch with keen anticipation as I dropped the cookies onto my girdle
and slid the cool black iron circle into the glowing warmth of the brick-lined
cubbyhole Jamie had built into the side of the huge hearth, to serve as an
oven for quick baking.
“How long, how long, how long, Grannie?” Mandy was behind me,
standing on tiptoes to see. I turned and lifted her up so she could see the
girdle and cookies. The fire we had lighted that morning had been fed all day,
and the brick surround was radiating heat—and would, all night.
“See how the dough is in balls? And you can feel how hot it is—don’t 
ever
put your hand in the oven—but the heat will make those balls flatten out and
then turn brown, and when they do, the cookies will be done. It takes about
ten minutes,” I added, setting her down. “It’s a new oven, though, so I’ll have
to keep checking.”
“Goody, goody, goody, goody!” She hopped up and down with delight,
then threw herself into Brianna’s arms. “Mama! Read me a story ’til da
cookies are done?”
Bree’s eyebrows lifted and she glanced at Roger, who smiled and
shrugged.
“Why not?” he said, and went to rootle through the pile of miscellaneous
belongings stacked against the kitchen wall.
“Ye brought a book for the bairns? That’s braw,” Jamie said to Bree.
“Where did ye get it?”
“Do they actually make books now for children Mandy’s age?” I asked,
looking down at her. Bree had said she could read a bit already, but I’d neverseen anything in an eighteenth-century printshop that looked like it would be
comprehensible—let alone appealing—to a three-year-old.
“Well, more or less,” Roger said, pulling Bree’s big canvas bag out of the
pile. “That is, there were—are, I mean—a few books that are 
intended
 for
children. Though the only titles that come to mind at the moment are 
Hymns
for the Amusement of Children, The History of Little Goody Two-Shoes,
 and
Descriptions of Three Hundred Animals.
”
“What sorts of animals?” Jamie asked, looking interested.
“No idea,” Roger confessed. “I’ve not seen any of those books; just read
the titles on a list.”
“Did you ever print any books for children, in Edinburgh?” I asked Jamie,
who shook his head. “Well, what did you read when you were in school?”
“As a bairn? The Bible,” he said, as though this should be self-evident.
“And the almanac. After we learnt the ABC, I mean. Later we did a bit of
Latin.”
“I want 
my
 book,” Mandy said firmly. “Gimme, Daddy. Please?” she
added, seeing her mother’s mouth open. Bree shut her mouth and smiled, and
Roger peered into the sack, then withdrew a bright-orange book that made me
blink.
“What?” said Jamie, leaning forward to peer at it. He looked at me,
eyebrows raised. I shrugged; he’d find out soon enough.
“Read it, Mummy!” Mandy curled into her mother’s side, thrusting the
book into Bree’s hands.
“Okay,” Bree said, and opened it. 
“Do you like green eggs and ham? I do
not like them, Sam-I-Am.”
“What?” said Fanny incredulously, and moved to peer over Bree’s
shoulder, closely accompanied by Germain.
“What 
is
 that?” Germain asked, fascinated.
“Sam-I-Am!” Mandy said crossly, and jabbed a finger at the page. “He
gots a sign!”
“Ah, 
oui.
 And what’s the other thing, then? A Who-Are-You?”
That made Fanny, Jemmy, 
and
 Roger laugh, which turned Mandy
incandescent with rage. She might not have the red hair, I thought, but she
had the Fraser temper, in spades.
“Shut up, shut up, shut 
up
!” she shrieked, and scrambling to her feet made
for Germain with the obvious intent of disemboweling him with her bare
hands.“Whoa!” Roger snared her deftly and lifted her off her feet. “Calm down,
sweetheart, he didn’t mean—”
I could have told him—but if he hadn’t learned it from sharing a household
with assorted Frasers for years, it wouldn’t do any good to tell him now—that
the very last thing you should say to one in full roar was “Calm down.” Like
putting out an oil fire on your stove by throwing a glass of water on it.
“He did!” Mandy bellowed, struggling madly in her father’s grip. “I hate
him, he wuined it, it’s all wuined! Leggo, I hate you, too!” She started
kicking, dangerously in the vicinity of her father’s crotch, and he instinctively
held her out, away from him.
Jamie reached out, wrapped an arm round her middle, gathered her in, and
put a big hand on the nape of her neck.
“Hush, 
a nighean,
” he said, and she did. She was panting like a little steam
engine, red-faced and teary, but she stopped.
“We’ll step outside for a moment, shall we?” he said to her, and nodded to
the rest of the assembled company. “No one’s to touch her book while we’re
gone. D’ye hear?”
There was a faint murmur of assent, succeeded by total silence as Jamie
and Mandy disappeared into the night.
“The cookies!” Smelling the strong scent of incipient scorching, I darted to
the oven, snatched the girdle out, and hastily flipped the cookies off onto the
Big Plate—the only pottery dish we owned at the moment, but capable of
holding anything up to a small turkey.
“Are the cookies okay?” Jem, with a total disregard for his sister’s
immediate prospects, hurried over to look.
“Yes,” I assured him. “A bit brown at the edges, but perfectly fine.”
Fanny had come, too, but was less intent on gluttony.
“Will Mr. Fraser whip her?” she whispered, looking anxious.
“No,” Germain assured her. “She’s too little.”
“Oh, no, she’s not,” Jemmy assured him, with a wary glance at his mother,
whose face was distinctly flushed, if not quite as red as Mandy’s.
All the children had clustered round me, whether out of interest in cookies
or from self-preservation. I lifted an eyebrow at Roger, who went and sat
down beside Brianna. I turned my back, to allow a little marital privacy, and
sent Fanny and Jem out to fetch the big pitcher of milk, presently hanging in
the well—and I did hope none of the local frogs had decided to availthemselves, in defiance of the stone-weighted cloth I’d draped over the
pitcher’s mouth.
“I’m sorry, Grannie.” Germain edged close to me, low-voiced. “I didna
mean to cause a stramash, truly.”
“I know, sweetheart. Everybody knows, except Mandy. And Grandda will
explain it to her.”
“Oh.” He relaxed at once, having total faith in his grandfather’s ability to
charm anything from an unbroken horse to a rabid hedgehog.
“Go get the mugs,” I told him. “Everyone will be back soon.”
The tin mugs had been rinsed after dinner and left upside down to dry on
the stoop; Germain hurried out, carefully not looking at Bree.
Germain thought she was angry with him, but it was apparent to me that
she was upset, not angry. And no wonder, I thought sympathetically. She’d
tried so hard, for so long, to keep Jem and Mandy safe—and happy. First,
during Roger’s long and harrowing absence, and then the search to find him,
the trip through the stones, and the long journey here. Little wonder that her
nerves were still on edge. Luckily, Roger’s instincts as a husband were quite
good; he had his arm round her and her head resting on his shoulder, and was
murmuring things to her, too low for me to catch the words, but the tone of it
was love and reassurance, and the lines of her face were smoothing out.
I heard soft voices in the other direction, too, through the open kitchen
door—Jamie and Mandy, evidently pointing out stars they liked to each
other. I smiled, arranging the cookies on the platter. He probably 
could
 charm
a rabid hedgehog, I thought.
With his own good instincts, Jamie waited until the mob had reassembled
and were eagerly sniffing the warm cookies. Then he carried Mandy back in
and deposited her among the other children without comment.
“Thirty-four?” he said, assessing the array at a glance. “One for Oggy,
aye?”
“Yes. How do you 
do
 that?”
“Och, it’s no difficult, Sassenach.” He leaned over the platter and closed
his eyes, inhaling beatifically. “It’s easier than goats and sheep after all—
cookies dinna have legs.”
“Legs?” said Fanny, puzzled.
“Oh, aye,” he said, opening his eyes and smiling at her. “To know the
number o’ goats ye have, ye just count the legs and divide by four.”The adult members of the audience groaned, and Germain and Jem, who
had learnt division, giggled.
“That—” Fanny began, and then stopped, frowning.
“Sit,” I said briskly. “Jem, pour the milk, please. And how many cookies
does each person get then, Mr. Know-it-all?”
“Three!” the boys chorused. A dissenting opinion from Mandy, who
thought everyone should have five, was quelled without incident and the
whole room relaxed into a quiet orgy of cold, creamy milk and sweet-scented
crumbs.
“Now, then,” Jamie said, and paused, carefully brushing crumbs off his
shirtfront into his palm and licking them off. “Now, then,” he repeated.
“Amanda tells me she can read her book by herself. Will ye maybe read it to
us, 
a leannan
?”
“Yes!”
And with only a brief interruption for the wiping of sticky hands and face,
she was ensconced once more in her mother’s arms—but this time, the vivid
orange book was in her own lap. She opened the cover and glared at her
audience.
“Everybody shut up,” she said firmly. “
I
 read.”
THE SURGERY WAS the only room with complete walls, so once the
cookie crumbs were all devoured, and Mandy’s book read aloud several
times, Ian and his family left for their own cabin and the children lugged their
pallets down the rudimentary hallway, excited at the prospect of sleeping in
their own house.
I went with them to make up a fire in the brazier, the second chimney not
being yet complete, and hung tattered quilts over the open window and
doorway to discourage bats, mosquitoes, foxes, and curious rodents.
“Now, if a raccoon or a possum should come in,” I said, “
don’t
 try to make
it leave. Just come out of the surgery and get your father or your grandsire.
Or your mother,” I added. Bree could certainly deal with a rogue raccoon.
I threw a kiss to the room at large and went back to the kitchen.
The smell of molasses had faded, but the air was still sweet, now with the
scent of whisky. Brianna, sitting on a wooden box of indigo, raised her tin
cup to me.
“You’re just in time,” she said.“For what?”
Jamie handed me a full cup and tapped the rim of his to mine. 
“Slàinte,”
he said. “To the new hearth.”
“For presents,” Bree said, half apologetically. “I thought about it for a long
time. I didn’t know if I’d ever find you—any of you—” she added, with a
serious glance at Roger. “And I wanted to bring something that would last,
even if it got destroyed or lost.”
Jamie and I exchanged a puzzled look, but she was already delving into her
canvas bag. She came up with a chunky blue book and, eyes dancing, put it
into my hands.
“What—” I began, but I knew instantly from the feel of it and let out a
noise that could only be called a squeal. “Bree! Oh, oh …!”
Jamie was smiling but still puzzled. I held it out to him, then clutched it to
my bosom before he could take it. “Oh!” I said again. “Bree, thank you! This
is 
wonderful
!”
She was pink with pleasure, her eyes shiny in response to my excitement.
“I thought you’d like it.”
“Oh …!”
“Let me see it, 
mo nighean donn,
” Jamie said, reaching gently for the
book. I could hardly bear to let go of it, but relinquished it.
“Merck Manual, Thirteenth Edition,”
 he read from the cover, and looked
up, brows raised. “Merck seems a popular writer—that, or he makes the devil
of a lot of mistakes.”
“It’s a—a—medical book,” I explained, beginning to get hold of myself,
though little thrills of elation were still washing through me. “
The Merck
Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.
 It’s a sort of compendium of—of the state
of general medical knowledge.”
“Oh.” He looked at the book with interest, and opened it, though I could
see he didn’t yet grasp its full importance. 
“Controlling the spread of
 E.
histolytica 
requires preventing access of human feces to the mouth,”
 he read,
and looked up. “Oh,” he said softly, seeing the look on my face, and smiled.
“It’s what folk will have found out—then. Things about healing that ye dinna
ken yet, yourself. Though I’m guessing ye do ken not to eat shite?”
I nodded, and he closed the book gently and handed it back. I clasped it to
my bosom, overwhelmed with anticipation. Thirteenth edition—from 1977!
Roger coughed, and when Brianna looked at him, he tilted his head toward
the bag.“And …” she said, smiling at Jamie. “For you, Da.” She pulled out a small,
thick paperback and handed it to him. “And for you …” A second book
followed the first. “And this one’s for you, too.” The third.
“They all go together,” Roger said gruffly. “It’s all one story, I mean, but
printed in three volumes.”
“Oh, aye?” Jamie turned over one of the books gingerly, as though afraid it
might disintegrate in his hands.
“It’s glued, is it? The binding?”
“Aye,” Roger said, smiling. “It’s called a paperback, that sort of wee book.
They’re cheap and light.”
Jamie weighed the book on his hand and nodded, but he was already
reading the back cover.
“Frodo Baggins,” he read aloud, and looked up, baffled. “A Welshman?”
“Not exactly. Brianna thought the tale might speak to ye,” Roger said, his
smile deepening as he looked at her. “I think she’s right.”
“Mmphm.” Jamie gathered the trio of books together and—with a
thoughtful look at the sticky fingerprints Mandy had left on her cup—put
them on the top of my simples closet. He kissed Bree and nodded toward her
bag.
“Thank ye kindly—I ken they’ll be braw. What did ye bring for yourself,
lass?”
“Well … mostly small tools,” she said. “Mostly things that exist now, but
of a better quality, or that I couldn’t get here without a lot of trouble and
expense.”
“What, nay books at all?” Jamie asked, smiling. “Ye’ll be the only illiterate
of the family?”
Bree was already flushed with pleasure and excitement, but grew
noticeably pinker at this question.
“Um. Well … just the one.” She glanced at me, cleared her throat, and
reached into the almost-empty bag.
“Oh,” I said, and the tone of my voice made Jamie look at me, rather than
at the hardbound book in its plastic-covered dust jacket. 
The Soul of a Rebel,
it said. 
The Scottish Roots of the American Revolution.
 By Franklin W.
Randall, PhD.
Bree was looking at Jamie, a small anxious frown between her brows, but
at this, she turned to me.“I haven’t read it yet,” she said. “But you—either of you,” she added,
glancing between me and Jamie, “are welcome to read it anytime. If you want
to.”
I met Jamie’s eyes. His brows lifted briefly and he looked away.
BRIANNA AND ROGER took the sticky cups, mixing bowl, spoon, and
milk pitcher outside to rinse, and I sat down beside Jamie on a large sack of
dried beans to gloat over my 
Merck Manual
 for a few minutes. He was
turning Frank’s book over in his hands with a ginger air indicating that he
thought it might explode, but put it aside and smiled when he saw me
fondling the blue pebbled cover of my new baby.
“D’ye mean to read it through from beginning to end, like the Bible?” he
asked. “Or will ye just wait ’til someone comes to ye with blue spots and
look that up?”
“Oh, both,” I assured him, weighing the chunky little book in my hand. “It
may have new treatments to suggest for things I recognize—but it
undoubtedly describes things I’ve never seen or heard of, too.”
“May I see it again?” He held out a hand, and I carefully laid the book in it.
He opened it at random, read … “Trypanosomiasis.” His eyebrows rose.
“Can ye do anything about trypanosomiasis, Sassenach?”
“Well, no,” I admitted. “But—on the off chance that I should encounter
trypanosomiasis, at least I’d know what it was, and that might save the
patient from being subjected to an ineffective or dangerous treatment.”
“Aye, and give him time to write his will and summon a priest, too,” he
said, closing the book and handing it back.
“Mm,” I said, not really wanting to dwell on the possibility—well, the
dead certainty, in fact—of diagnosing fatal conditions I couldn’t treat. “What
about your books? Do they look interesting?” I nodded toward the stack of
thick paperbacks, and his face lit up. He picked up the first volume and
riffled the pages, slowly, then turned back to the first page and read in a
husky voice:
“Concerning Hobbits. This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and
from its pages a reader may discover much of their character and a little of
their history.”
“That’s just the Prologue,” I assured him. “You could skip that, if you
like.”He shook his head, eyes fixed on the page, smiling.
“If the author thought it was worth his writing it down, then it’s worth my
reading it. I dinna mean to miss a single word.”
A sharp pang struck me then, seeing the reverential way in which he
handled the book, turning over pages with a delicate forefinger. A book—any
book—had a meaning well beyond its contents for a man who’d lived years
at a time with little or no access to the printed word, and only the memory of
stories to provide him and his companions escape from desperate
circumstances.
“Have ye read these, Sassenach?” he asked, looking up.
“No, though I’ve read 
The Hobbit,
 by the same author. Bree and I read that
one together when she was in the sixth grade—about twelve years old, I
mean.”
“Ah. So ye wouldna say these are lewd books?”
“What? No, not at all,” I said, laughing. “Whatever gave you that idea?”
“Nothing, from the cover—I’ve never seen so much printing on the outside
of a book—but ye canna tell, can ye?” He closed the book with obvious
reluctance. “I was thinking, we might read these in the evenings, maybe
everyone taking it in turn to read a chapter. Jem and Germain are old enough
to manage it. D’ye think Frances can read?”
“I know she can. Her sister taught her, she said.” I rose and came over to
him, leaning against his shoulder to look at 
The Fellowship of the Ring.
“That’s a wonderful idea.” We had done that with Jenny and Ian during the
brief months of our early marriage spent at Lallybroch: passed firelit hours of
peace and happiness in the evenings while one person or another read aloud
and the others knitted stockings or mended clothes or small bits of furniture.
The rosy vision of such evenings here, our own family in our own home,
made my heart glow in my chest.
He made a low Scottish noise indicating content and set the book down,
next to the hardcover book Bree had brought for herself. Frank’s book. My
already tenderized heart squeezed a little, at once happy and sad that she had
brought it to remember him, to bring him with her into this new life.
Jamie saw me looking at the book and made another Scottish noise, this
one indicating cautious interest. I nodded at 
The Soul of a Rebel.
 “Are you
going to read that one?”
“I dinna ken,” he admitted, glancing at it. “Have 
you
 read it, Sassenach?”“No.” I felt a small qualm at the admission. The fact was that while I’d
read all of Frank’s articles, books, and essays during what I thought of as our
first marriage, I hadn’t been able to bring myself to read any of the books
he’d written during our second go, save a brief look at one that dealt with the
aftermath of Culloden, when I began to search for the men of Lallybroch.
“This one was published after I … came back,” I said, my throat tight. “It
was the last book he wrote. I’ve not even seen it before.” I wondered, for an
instant, whether Bree had picked that one because the photograph of Frank on
it was what he’d looked like the last time she saw him, or whether she’d
chosen it mostly because of the title.
Jamie caught the tone of my voice and looked sharply at me, but he said
nothing, and picked up Mandy’s 
Green Eggs and Ham
 for further perusal.
Jem had taken his own special book, 
The Scientific American Boy,
 off to bed
with him. He was probably reading it to Germain and Fanny by firelight.
Nothing I could do about that, other than hope it didn’t include step-by-step
instructions for building a trebuchet.10
Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme
IT WAS A WEEK later when we heard the rest.
Fanny and Germain had gone up to Ian’s place to help comb Jenny’s goats.
Jemmy, being barred from this occupation on account of a sprained thumb,
and never liking to be a bystander, had decided to stay at home and play
chess with Jamie.
Roger was picking out “Scarborough Fair” on a simple sort of dulcimer
that he’d made, a counterpoint to the similarly rudimentary conversations that
swirled slowly through the kitchen. By the time Bree and I had kneaded
tomorrow’s dough and put it to rise, set a haunch of venison to soak in herbs
and vinegar, and debated whether the floor need be mopped or only swept,
the room had grown quiet, though. The chess match had ended—Jamie, by
heroic effort, had managed to lose—the dulcimer had fallen silent, and
Mandy and Jemmy both had fallen asleep, slumped like bags of dried beans
in the corners of the settle.
By unspoken consent, the four adults gathered together around the table,
with four cups and a bottle of decent red wine—the gift of Michael Lindsay
for my help in stitching up a couple of long wounds in the flank of his horse,
these the result of a run-in with a bear.
“Your dulcimer sounds bonnie, Roger Mac,” Jamie said, raising his cup
toward the instrument, this now laid on top of the simples cupboard for
safety. Roger raised his eyebrows, surprised.
“You … can make it out?” he said. “I mean—ye ken it’s a song?”
“No,” Jamie said, surprised in turn. “Was it a song? The sound it makes is
nice, though. Like wee bells ringing.”
“It’s a song from … our time,” Brianna said, a little hesitant, and glanced
at the children.“It’s all right,” Roger assured her. “The lyrics to that one could have come
from any time from the Middle Ages on.”
“That’s good. We have to be careful,” Bree said, with a half smile at me.
“We’d just as soon not have Mandy singing ‘Twist and Shout’ in church.”
“Well, not in our church,” Roger said, “though there are certainly more …
um … athletic churches now in which that would be more or less appropriate.
I wonder if there are any snake-handling churches in the area,” he added,
suddenly interested. “I don’t know when that started.”
“Snakes in church … on purpose?” Jamie said dubiously. “Why the devil
would anyone do that?”
“Mark 16:17,” Roger said. “
And these signs shall follow them that believe;
In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;
They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not
hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.
 They do it
—or will do it—to prove their faith,” he explained. “Pick up rattlesnakes and
cottonmouths with their bare hands. In church.”
“Jesus Christ,” Jamie said, and crossed himself.
“Exactly,” Roger said, nodding. “Anything in the Bible’s safe,” he said to
Bree, “but we maybe don’t want to dwell on things that might suggest more
modern things.”
I had glanced involuntarily at my hands when Roger had quoted the Bible
verse, but looked up at this. Jamie looked blank.
Bree took a deep breath, looking once more at the children.
“It’s not that we want them to forget,” she said quietly. “There were—are,
will be—people and things they loved from … our time. And we don’t know
whether they might sometime … eventually … go back. But we have to be
careful which memories from that time we keep among us, talk about.
Remember.” I saw her long throat bob slightly as she swallowed. “It
probably
 wouldn’t cause any trouble if Mandy told people about toilets, for
instance—especially not if I build one,” she added, breaking into a brief
smile. “But there are other things.”
“Aye,” said Jamie, softly. “I suppose there are.” He laid a hand on my
thigh, and I covered it. He could see what I saw: the look on their faces,
Roger and Brianna both. I’d seen it in the days near the end of World War II;
he’d seen it in the months and years after Culloden. The look of exiles,
necessity covering mourning, bravery turning away from memories that
would never be left behind, no matter how deeply they were buried.There was a long moment of silence. Jamie cleared his throat.
“I ken 
why
 ye came back,” he said. “But how?”
The sheer practicality of the question broke the brief spell of regret. Bree
and Roger looked at each other, then at us.
“Is there more wine?” Roger asked.
“WE DIDN’T KNOW whether you can move through both time 
and
 space,”
Bree explained, over a fresh glass. “We don’t know anyone who’s done that,
and this didn’t seem like a good time to experiment.”
“I expect not,” I said, rather faintly. Most of the time, I managed not to
remember what stepping into … 
that …
 was like, but the memory was there,
all right. Like seeing something big and dark cruising just under the water,
and you in a small, small boat on an endless sea.
“So, that decision was easy enough,” Roger said, with a grimace indicating
that “easy” was a relative term. “We’d have to make the voyage from
Scotland to America, regardless. It was partly a matter of whether the passage
through the stones might be better from the stone circle near Inverness, or the
one on Ocracoke.”
“People died on Ocracoke, coming through,” Bree said quietly, putting her
hand on Roger’s. “Wendigo Donner told you so, didn’t he, Mama?”
“He did.” My own throat felt tight, as much from the memories Donner’s
name conjured up as from other associations with the word “Ocracoke,” none
of them good. Bree was very pale, and I thought she had her own memories
of the place; she had been held prisoner there by Stephen Bonnet.
“And even those that didn’t die had—er—anomalies,” Roger said, and
looked at me. “Otter-Tooth—Robert Springer. He meant for his entire group
to go back to … when? The middle of the sixteenth century, earlier? A long
way, anyway. He made it farther back than any of the rest, but still not as far
as he meant to go. The point, though, is that the travel wasn’t the same for the
members of the group.”
“We thought that might be because they went through one at a time,
walking a pattern and chanting,” Bree put in. “We”—she gestured briefly at
the sleeping children—“all came together, holding on to one another. That
might have made a difference.”
“And we 
did
 come through Ocracoke together before,” Roger added. “If
we did it once, we could maybe do it again.”“So it came down to a question of ships, no?” Jamie had been sitting,
intent, fingers tapping lightly against his thigh, but now straightened up.
“Would there be a great difference, did ye think? Between a ship built in
1739 and one built in 1775 or so?”
“Yes,” Brianna said, with some emphasis. “Ships got bigger and faster—
but weather is weather, and if you run into an iceberg or a hurricane”—she
nodded at me—“it doesn’t matter that much whether you’re in a rowboat or
the 
Titanic.
”
“No, it doesn’t,” Jamie agreed, and I laughed. I’d told him—briefly—
about the 
Titanic
.
“From your point of view, a floating plank on the trout pond would be just
as bad as the 
Queen Mary
—that’s a 
really
 big ship.”
“Aye, well, I expect the food would be better on the latter,” he said,
unperturbed by my teasing. “And as long as I had your wee stabbers in my
face, I could choose on that basis. So, did ye ken the weather changed a great
deal in forty years?” he asked, returning the conversation to Bree, who shook
her head.
“Not the storms and wind-type weather—I mean, it might have, but we’d
have no way of knowing that. What we 
did
 know, though, was the political
weather.”
“The war,” Roger said, correctly interpreting my blank look. “The British
were—I mean, they 
are
—blockading and interrupting trade and seizing
American ships right and left these days. What if we chose the wrong ship
and ended up being sunk or captured, or me being pressed into the British
navy, leaving Bree and the kids to decide whether to go through the stones by
themselves, or stay in Jamaica or wherever and try to find me?”
“That’s sensible,” Jamie said. “So ye took ship in 1739, then. How was it?”
“Horrible,” Bree said promptly, just as Roger said, “Terrible!” They
looked at each other and laughed, though with an undertone that belied their
mirth; it was the slightly nervous laughter of survivors who weren’t yet
entirely sure they’d made it.
They’d traveled on a brig called the 
Kermanagh,
 out of Inverness, to
Edinburgh, where they’d found passage on the 
Constance,
 a small merchant
ship, headed for Charles Town.
“No staterooms,” Roger said. “Just a wee nook in the hold, between the
water barrels and stacks of chests full of cloth: linen, muslin, woolens, and
silks. The smell was pretty strong—fuller’s earth and sizing and dyes andurine, ken?—but it could have been worse. The people at the other end of the
hold were squashed between crates of salt fish and barrels of gin. With the
fumes, they were mostly comatose, so far as we could tell in the dark.”
“They were lucky, if so,” Brianna said ruefully. “We hit four—not one, not
two, not three, but 
four
—storms along the way. Between being sure we were
going to the bottom any minute and caroming off the cargo every other
minute—except for Mandy, we were all bruised everywhere. I kept her in my
lap pretty much the whole trip, with my cloak wrapped around us both, for
warmth.”
Jamie looked slightly green, merely listening to this, and I had to admit to
feeling a sympathetic lurch of the insides myself.
“What did you eat?” I asked, in hopes of stabilizing myself and the
conversation.
“Cold parritch,” Roger said with a shrug. “Mostly. Some cold bacon, too.
And neeps. Lots of neeps.”
“
Raw
 neeps?” I asked.
“Oh, come on,” Bree protested. “They’re just like apples, except not sweet.
And I brought apples and raisins, too, 
and
 carrots, and a jar of boiled spinach
and one of pickles—and we got one of the casks of salt fish …”
“Oh, my God,” said Roger, with feeling. “I thought I was going to die of
thirst after eating 
one
 of them …”
“No one told ye to soak them?” Jamie said, grinning.
“We had cheese, too,” Bree said, but it was clear she was fighting a losing
battle.
“Well, the cheese wasn’t that bad, if you washed it down with gin … you
ever seen a cheese mite, up close?”
“
Could
 ye see them?” Jamie asked, interested. “I’ve been in a ship’s hold
more than once and I couldna see my hand in front of my face.”
“Aye,” Roger said. “We couldn’t have an open light in the hold, of course,
so the only time we 
had
 light was when they opened the hatch cover. Which
they did whenever the weather was fine,” he added, with an attempt at
fairness.
“That doesna sound sae bad,” Jamie said. “Ye dinna even notice cheese
mites, if ye’re hungry. And raw neeps are very filling …”
Bree made a small noise of amusement; I didn’t. He was teasing, but not
joking. I recognized the vivid memory of long years of near-starvation in the
Highlands after Culloden, and something not far from it in Ardsmuir Prison.“How long were you at sea?” I asked.
“Seven weeks, four days, and thirteen and a half hours,” Brianna said. “It
was a pretty quick trip, thank God.”
“Aye, it was,” Roger agreed. “The last storm hit us near the coast, though,
and we had to come ashore at Savannah. I didn’t think I’d get this lot onto
another boat”—he waved casually at his wife and children—“but then we
asked just how far it was, and faced with the prospect of walking five
hundred miles … we found another boat.”
This one was a fishing boat. “An open boat, thank God,” Bree said
fervently. “We slept on deck.”
“So ye came to the stones at last, then,” Jamie said. “How was it?”
“We almost didn’t make it,” Roger said quietly. He looked at the children,
asleep on the settle. Mandy had fallen over and was sprawled on her face,
limp as Esmeralda. “It was Mandy who got us through—and you,” he added,
raising his eyes to Jamie with a slight smile.
“Me?”
“You wrote a book,” Bree said softly, looking at him. “
A Grandfather’s
Tales.
 And you thought to put a copy in the box with your letters.”
Jamie’s face changed and he looked down at the floor, suddenly abashed.
“Ye … read it?” he asked, and cleared his throat.
“We did.” Roger’s voice was soft. “Over and over.”
“And over,” Bree added, eyes warm with the memory. “Mandy could
recite some of her favorite stories word for word.”
“Aye, well …” Jamie rubbed his nose. “But what has that to do wi’ …”
“She found you,” Roger said. “In the stones. We all were thinking as hard
as we could, about you and Claire and the Ridge and—and everything we
recalled, I suppose. Too much, maybe—too many different things.”
“I can’t begin to describe it,” Bree said, and of course she couldn’t—but
the shadow of it lay on her face. “We—couldn’t get out. We stepped through
and we were … it’s kind of like exploding, Da,” she said, trying. “But so
slowly you can … sort of feel yourself coming apart. When we did it before
—it was like that, but it was over pretty fast. This time … it didn’t stop.”
I felt the memory of it, at her words, and everything inside me lurched as
though I’d been thrown off a cliff. Bree had gone pale, but she swallowed
and went on.
“I—we—you can’t really 
talk,
 but you’re sort of aware of who’s with you,
who you’re holding on to. But Mandy—and Jem, a little—are … kind ofstronger than either Roger or me. And I—we—could 
hear
 Mandy, saying,
‘Grandda! Blue pictsie!’ And suddenly, we were … all on the same page, I
guess you could say.”
Roger smiled at that, and took up the story.
“We were all thinking of you, and of that specific story; it’s the one with
the illustration of a blue pictsie. And … then we were lying on the ground,
almost literally in pieces, but … alive. In the right time. And together.”
Jamie made a small sound in his throat—the only inarticulate Scottish
noise I’d ever heard from him. I looked away and saw that Jem was awake;
he hadn’t moved but his eyes were open. He sat up slowly and leaned
forward, elbows on his knees.
“It’s okay, Grandda,” he said, his voice froggy with sleep. “Don’t cry. Ye
got us here safe.”Part Two
NO LAW EAST OF THE PECOS
11
Lightning
ROGER STEPPED INTO THE clearing and stopped so abruptly that Bree
nearly crashed into him, and saved herself only by gripping his shoulder.
“Bloody hell,” she said softly, looking past him at the ruin that confronted
them.
“That’s … putting it mildly.” He’d been told, of course—everyone from
Jamie to Rodney Beardsley, aged five, had told him—that the cabin that had
served the Ridge as church, schoolhouse, and Masonic Lodge had been struck
by lightning and burned down a year ago, during Jamie and Claire’s absence.
Seeing it, though, was an unexpected shock.
The timbers of the doorframe had burned but still stood, a fragile black
welcome to the charred emptiness on the other side.
“They took away most of the burnt wood.” Brianna took a deep breath,
walked up to the empty doorway, and looked around. “Probably charcoal for
smoking meat or making gunpowder. I wonder how hard it is to get sulfur
these days.”
He glanced at her, not sure whether she was serious or just trying to keep
the conversation light until the shock of seeing his first—his only—church
destroyed had passed. The only place he’d been—for a little while—a real
minister. His chest felt tight and so did his throat—but he put aside his sense
of disquiet for the moment and coughed.
“You’re intending to make gunpowder? After what happened with the
matches?”
She narrowed her eyes at him, but he could tell now that she was
deliberately making light of things.
“You 
know
 that wasn’t my fault. And I 
could.
 I know the formula for
gunpowder, and we could dig saltpeter out of people’s old privies.”“Well, 
you
 can, if digging up ancient privies is your notion of fun,” he
said, smiling despite himself. “Did your researches tell you how not to blow
yourself up while making gunpowder?”
“No, but I know who to ask,” she said, complacent. “Mary Patton.”
Whether she’d intended it or not, the distraction of her conversation was
working. The feeling of having been gut-punched had passed, and if he still
felt the pangs of memory, he was able to put them aside to be dealt with later.
“And who’s Mary Patton, when she’s at home?”
“A gunpowder maker—I don’t know if there’s a name for that profession.
But she and her husband have a powder mill on the Powder Branch of the
Wautauga River—that’s why it’s called the Powder Branch. It’s about forty
miles from here,” she said casually, squatting to pick up a blackened chunk of
charcoal. “I thought I might ride out there next week. There’s a trail—even a
road, part of the way.”
“Why?” he asked warily. “And what are you planning to do with that
charcoal?”
“Draw,” she said, and tucked it into her bag. “As for Mrs. Patton … we’re
going to need gunpowder, you know.”
Now
 she was serious.
“You mean a lot of gunpowder,” he said slowly. “Not just for hunting.” He
didn’t know how much powder the household had; he was no kind of a shot,
so didn’t hunt with a gun.
“I do.” She turned her head, and he saw her long, pale throat move as she
swallowed. “I read some of Daddy’s book. 
The Soul of a Rebel.
”
“Oh, Jesus,” he said, and the qualm he’d suppressed at sight of his ex-
church came back with a vengeance. “And?”
“Have you heard of a British soldier called Patrick Ferguson?”
“No. Am I about to?”
“Probably. He invented the first effective breech-loading musket. And he’s
going to start a fight 
here
”—she waved a hand, indicating their surroundings
—“pretty soon. And it’s going to end up at a place called Kings Mountain,
next year.”
He searched his memory for any mention of such a place, but came up
empty. “Where’s that?”
“Eventually, it’ll be on the border between North and South Carolina.
Right now, it’s about a hundred miles or so …” She turned, squinting up atthe sun for direction, then stabbed a long charcoal-blackened finger toward a
copse of white oak saplings. “… That way.”
“You know the one about how, to an American, a hundred years is a long
time, and to an Englishman, a hundred miles is a long way?” he asked. “If the
folk hereabout aren’t all Englishmen, they’re definitely not Americans yet. I
mean, it 
is
 a long way. You’re not telling me ye think we’re going to have to
go to Kings Mountain for some reason?”
She shook her head, much to his relief.
“No. I just meant that when I said Patrick Ferguson was going to start a
fight 
here
 … I meant … here. The backcountry.” She’d pulled a grubby
handkerchief from her pocket and was absently rubbing the charcoal smudges
from her fingers.
“He’s going to raise a Loyalist militia,” she added quietly. “From the
neighbors. We won’t be able to stay out of it. Even here.”
He’d known that. 
They’d
 known it. Talked about it, before finally deciding
to try to reach her parents. Sanctuary. But even reaching for that sanctuary,
they’d known that war touches everyone and everything in its path.
“I know,” he said, and put an arm around her waist. They stood still for a
little, listening to the wood around them. Two male mockingbirds were
having their own personal war in the nearby trees, singing their little brass
lungs out. Despite the charred ruin, there was a deep sense of peace in the
little clearing. Green shoots and small shrubs had come up through the ashes,
vivid against the black. Unresisted, the forest would patiently heal the scar—
take 
back its ground and go on as though nothing had happened, as though
the little church had never been here.
“Do you remember the first sermon you preached here?” she asked softly.
Her eyes were fixed on the open ground.
“Aye,” he said, and smiled a little. “One of the lads set a snake loose in the
congregation and Jamie snatched it up before it could cause a riot. One of the
nicest things he’s ever done for me.”
Brianna laughed, and he felt the warm vibration of it through her clothes.
“The look on his 
face.
 Poor Da, he’s so afraid of snakes.”
“And no wonder,” Roger said with a shrug. “One almost killed him.” He
felt a lingering shudder himself at the memory of an endless night in a dark
forest, listening to Jamie telling him—with what both of them thought would
be Jamie’s last few breaths—what to do and how to do it, if and when he,
Roger, found himself suddenly in charge of the whole Ridge.“A lot of things have almost killed him,” she said, the laughter gone. “One
of these days …” Her voice was husky.
He put a hand round her shoulder and massaged it gently.
“It’ll be one of these days for everyone, 
mo ghràidh
. If it weren’t, people
wouldn’t think they need a minister. As for your da … as long as your
mother’s here, I think he’ll be all right, no matter what.”
She gave a deep sigh, and the tension in her body eased.
“I think everybody feels like that about them both. If they’re here,
everything will be all right.”
You feel that way about them,
 he thought. And in fairness, so did he. 
I hope
the kids will feel that way about us.
“Aye. The essential social services of Fraser’s Ridge,” he said dryly.
“Your mother’s the ambulance and your da’s the police.”
That made her laugh, and she turned to him, arms about him, smiling.
“And you’re the church,” she said. “I’m proud of you.” Letting go then,
she turned back and waved a hand toward the ghostly door.
“Well, if Mama and Da can rebuild from ashes, so can we. Will we rebuild
here, or do you want to choose another place? I mean, I don’t know whether
people would be superstitious about it being destroyed by lightning.”
He shrugged, feeling warm from her words.
“It’s not supposed to strike twice in the same place, is it? What could be
safer? Come on, then; Lizzie and her 
ménage
 will be waiting.”
“Surely you mean her menagerie,” Bree said, kilting up her skirts for the
hike to the Beardsley cabin. “Lizzie, Jo and Kezzie, and … I’ve forgotten
how many children Mama said they have now.”
“So have I,” Roger admitted. “But we can count them when we get there.”
It wasn’t until the forest closed behind them and the path rose before them
that he thought to ask. She hadn’t wanted to look beyond day-to-day survival
during the worst of their journey, but he was sure that her vision of the
present wasn’t limited to washing clothes and shooting turkeys.
“What do you think your own job might be? Here.”
He was following her; she turned her head briefly toward him and the sun
touched her hair with flames.
“Oh, me?” she said. “I think maybe I’m the armorer.” She smiled, but the
look in her eyes was serious. “We’re going to need one.”12
Erstwhile Companions
Mount Josiah Plantation, Royal Colony of Virginia
WILLIAM SMELLED SMOKE. NOT hearth fire or wildfire; just an ashy
tang on the wind, tinged with charcoal, grease—and fish. It wasn’t coming
from the dilapidated house; the chimney had collapsed, taking part of the roof
with it, and a big red-tinged creeper shrouded the scatter of stones and
shingles.
There were poplar saplings growing up through the buckled boards of the
small porch, too; the forest had begun its stealthy work of reclamation. But
the forest didn’t smoke its meat. 
Someone
 was here.
He dismounted and tethered Bart to a sapling, primed his pistol, and made
his way toward the house. It could be Indians on a hunt, smoking their game
before carrying it back to wherever they’d come from. He’d no quarrel with
hunters, but if it was squatters who’d thought to take over the property, they
could think again. This was his place.
It 
was
 Indians—or one, at least. A half-naked man squatted in the shade of
a huge beech tree, tending a small firepit covered with damp burlap; William
could smell fresh-cut hickory logs, mingled with the thick smell of blood,
fresh meat, smoke, and the pungent reek of drying fish—a small rack of split
trout stood beside an open fire. His belly rumbled.
The Indian—he looked young, though large and very muscular—had his
back to William and was deftly dressing out the carcass of a small hog that
lay on a flattened burlap sack beside the firepit.
“Hallo, there,” William said, raising his voice. The man looked round,
blinking against the smoke and waving it out of his face. He rose slowly, the
knife he’d been using still in his hand, but William had spoken pleasantly
enough, and the stranger wasn’t menacing. He also wasn’t a stranger. Hestepped out of the tree’s shadow, the sunlight hit his hair, and William felt a
jolt of astonished recognition.
So did the young man, by the look on his face.
“Lieutenant?” he said, disbelieving. He looked William quickly up and
down, registering the lack of uniform, and his big dark eyes fixed on
William’s face. “Lieutenant … Lord Ellesmere?”
“I used to be. Mr. Cinnamon, isn’t it?” He couldn’t help smiling as he
spoke the name. The young man’s hair was now little more than an inch long,
but only shaving it off entirely would have disguised either its distinctive
deep 
reddish-brown color or its exuberant curliness. A French mission
orphan, he owed his name to it.
“John Cinnamon, yes. Your servant … sir.” The erstwhile scout gave him a
presentable half bow, though the “sir” was spoken with something of a
question.
“William Ransom. Yours, sir,” William said, smiling, and thrust out his
hand. John Cinnamon was a couple of inches shorter than himself, and a
couple of inches broader; the scout had grown into himself in the last two
years and possessed a very solid handshake.
“I trust you’ll pardon my curiosity, Mr. Cinnamon—but how the devil do
you come to be here?” William asked, letting go. He’d last seen John
Cinnamon three years before, in Quebec, where he’d spent much of a long,
cold winter hunting and trapping in company with the half-Indian scout, who
was near his own age.
He wondered briefly if Cinnamon had come in search of him, but that was
absurd. He didn’t think he’d ever mentioned Mount Josiah to the man—and
even if he had, Cinnamon couldn’t possibly have expected to find him here.
He’d not been here since he was sixteen.
“Ah.” To William’s surprise, a slow flush washed Cinnamon’s broad
cheekbones. “I—er—I … well, I’m on my way south.” The flush grew
deeper.
William cocked an eyebrow. While it was true that Virginia was south of
Quebec and that there was a good deal of country souther still, Mount Josiah
wasn’t on the way to anywhere. No roads led here. He had himself come
upriver with his horse on a barge to the Breaks, that stretch of falls and
turbulent water on the James River where the land suddenly collapsed upon
itself and put a stop to water travel. He’d seen only three people as he rode on
above the Breaks—all of them headed the other way.Suddenly, though, Cinnamon’s wide shoulders relaxed and the look of
wariness was erased by relief.
“In fact, I came to see my friend,” he said, and nodded toward the house.
William turned quickly, to see another Indian picking his way through the
raspberry brambles littering what used to be a small croquet lawn.
“Manoke!” he said. Then shouted, “Manoke!” making the older man look
up. The older Indian’s face lighted with joy, and a sudden uncomplicated
happiness washed through William’s heart, cleansing as spring rain.
The Indian was lithe and spare as he’d always been, his face a little more
lined. His hair smelled of woodsmoke when William embraced him, and the
gray in it was the same soft color as smoke, but it was still thick and coarse as
ever—he could see that easily; he was looking down on it from above,
Manoke’s cheek pressed into his shoulder.
“What did you say?” he asked, releasing Manoke.
“I said, ‘My, how you have grown, boy,’” Manoke said, grinning up at
him. “Do you need food?”
MANOKE WAS HIS father’s friend; Lord John had never called him
anything else. The Indian came and went as he pleased, generally without
notice, though he was at Mount Josiah more often than not. He wasn’t a
servant or a hired man, but he did the cooking and washing-up when he was
there, kept the chickens—yes, there were still chickens; William could hear
them clucking and rustling as they settled in the trees near the ruined house—
and helped when there was game to be cleaned and butchered.
“Your hog?” William asked Cinnamon, with a brief jerk of the head
toward the covered firepit. He’d seen to Bart, then joined the Indians for
supper on the crumbling porch, the men enjoying the soft evening air and
keeping an eye on the drying fish, in case of marauding raccoons, foxes, or
other hungry vermin.
“
Oui.
 Up there,” Cinnamon said, waving a big hand toward the north.
“Two hours’ walk. A few pigs in the wood there, not many.”
William nodded. “Do you have a horse?” he asked. It was a small hog,
maybe sixty pounds, but heavy to carry for two hours—especially as
Cinnamon presumably hadn’t known how far he’d have to go. He’d already
told William that he’d never visited Mount Josiah before.Cinnamon nodded, his mouth full, and jerked his chin in the direction of
the sheds and the ramshackle tobacco barn. William wondered how long
Manoke had been in residence; the place looked as though it had been
deserted for years—and yet there were chickens …
The clucking and brief squawks of the settling birds reminded him
suddenly and sharply of Rachel Hunter, and in the next breath, he found the
scent of rain, wet chickens—and wet girl.
“… the one my brother calls the Great Whore of Babylon. No chicken
possesses anything resembling intelligence, but that one is perverse beyond
the usual.”
“Perverse?” Evidently she perceived that he was contemplating the
possibilities inherent in this description and finding them entertaining, for
she snorted through her nose and bent to open the blanket chest.
“The creature is sitting twenty feet up in a pine tree, in the midst of a
rainstorm. Perverse.” She pulled out a linen towel and began to dry her hair
with it.
The sound of the rain altered suddenly, hail rattling like tossed gravel
against the shutters.
“Hmmph,” said Rachel, with a dark look at the window. “I expect she will
be knocked senseless by the hail and devoured by the first passing fox, and
serve her right.” She resumed drying her hair. “No great matter. I shall be
pleased never to see any of those chickens again.”
The scent of Rachel’s wet hair was strong in his memory—and the sight of
it, dark and straggling in tails down her back, the wet making her worn shift
transparent in spots, with shadows of her soft pale skin beneath.
“What? I mean—I beg your pardon?”
Manoke had said something to him, and the smell of rain vanished,
replaced by hickory smoke, fried cornmeal, and fish.
Manoke gave him an amused look but obligingly repeated himself.
“I said, have you come to stay? Because if so, maybe you want to fix the
chimney.”
William glanced over his shoulder; the vine-shrouded rubble was just
visible, past the edge of the porch.
“I don’t know,” he said, shrugging. Manoke nodded and went back to his
conversation with Cinnamon; the two of them were speaking French. William
couldn’t make the effort to listen, suddenly overcome by a tiredness that sank
to the marrow of his bones.Would
 he stay? Not now; but maybe later, when he’d done his work, when
he’d found either his cousin Ben or absolute proof of his death. Maybe he’d
come back. He didn’t know what he’d intended by coming here now; it was
just the only place he could go where he could think in peace and wouldn’t be
obliged to make constant explanations. His stepmother—though he’d always
thought of her as simply Mother Isobel—had left the place to him. He
wondered suddenly whether she had ever seen it.
He’d found more of the Virginia militiamen who’d been at Middlebrook
Encampment while Ben was a prisoner there. Most of them had never heard
of Captain Benjamin Grey, and those few who had knew only that he was
dead.
Except he wasn’t. William clung stubbornly to that conviction. Or 
if
 he
was, it wasn’t from the ague or pox, as reported by the Americans.
He was going to find out what had happened to his cousin. Once he had …
well, there were other things to be thought about then. He needed to clear his
mind. Make sense of things, decide what to do. First, of course, Ben. But then
he’d need to rise up and take action, to make things right.
“Right,” he said under his breath. “Hell and death.” 
Nothing
 could be made
right.
Rachel was married now, to bloody Ian Murray—a man who was
something between a Highlander and a Mohawk, and was 
also
 William’s
bloody cousin, just to rub salt into the wound. 
That
 couldn’t be fixed.
Jane …
 His mind shied away from his last sight of Jane. That couldn’t be
fixed, either—nor erased from his memory. Jane was a small, hard pebble
that rattled sometimes in the chambers of his heart.
Nor could the thousand-spiked fact of William’s true paternity be fixed.
Brought face-to-face with Jamie Fraser, having spent a hellish night with him
in the futile hope of rescuing Jane … there was no possible way to deny the
truth. He’d been sired by a Jacobite traitor, a Scottish criminal … a
goddamned 
groom,
 for God’s sake. But. 
Ye’ve a claim to my help for any
venture ye deem worthy,
 the Scot had said.
And Fraser had given that help, hadn’t he? At once and without question.
Not only for Jane, but for her little sister, Frances.
William had barely been able to speak when they’d buried Jane.
Remembered grief clutched him now and he bent his head over the half-eaten
chunk of fish in his hand.William had just thrust little Frances into Fraser’s arms and walked off.
And now, for the first time, wondered why he’d done that. Lord John had
been there, too, attending at the sad, tiny funeral. His own father—he could
certainly have given Fanny safely into Lord John’s keeping. But he hadn’t.
Hadn’t even thought about it.
No. No, I am not sorry.
 The words echoed in his ear, and the touch of a
big, warm hand cupped his cheek for an instant. An overlooked fish bone
caught in his throat and he choked, coughed, choked again.
Manoke looked briefly at him, but William waved a hand and the Indian
returned to his intense Algonquian conversation with John Cinnamon.
William got up and went, coughing, round the corner of the house to the well.
The water was sweet and cold, and with a little effort he dislodged the
bone and drank, then poured water over his head. As he sluiced the dirt from
his face, he felt a gradual sense of calm come over him. Not peace, not even
resignation, but a realization that if everything couldn’t be settled right now
… perhaps it didn’t need to be. He was twenty-one now, had come into his
majority, but the Ellesmere estate was still administered by factors and
lawyers; all those tenants and farms were still someone else’s responsibility.
Until he returned to England to claim and deal with them. If he did. Or … or
what?
It was deep twilight now, one of his favorite times of day here. The forest
settled with the dying of the light, but the air rose, shedding the burden of the
day’s heat, passing cool as a spirit through the murmuring leaves, touching
his own hot skin with its peace.
He 
would
 stay here, he thought, wiping a hand over his wet face. For a
little while. Not think. Not struggle. Just be still for a little while. Perhaps
things would begin to sort themselves in his mind.
He ambled back to the porch, to find both Manoke and Cinnamon looking
at him oddly.
“What?” he said, passing a self-conscious hand over the crown of his head.
“Have I got burrs stuck in my hair?”
“Yes,” said Manoke, “but it doesn’t matter. Our friend has something to
say to you, though.”
William glanced at Cinnamon in surprise. It was too dark to see if the man
was blushing, but he rather thought so, given Cinnamon’s hunched shoulders
and overall look of belligerent embarrassment.“Go on,” Manoke urged, nudging Cinnamon gently. “You have to tell him
sometime. Now is a good time.”
“Tell me what?” William sat down, cross-legged, to meet Cinnamon’s eyes
on a level. The man’s lips were pressed thin, but he did meet William’s eyes
straight on.
“What I said,” he blurted. “Before. About why I’m here. I came in case— I
thought perhaps—well, it was the only place I knew to start looking.”
“Looking for what?” William asked, baffled.
“For Lord John Grey,” Cinnamon said, and William saw the broad throat
move as he swallowed. “For my father.”
MANOKE DIDN’T HUNT much, but was a good fisherman; he’d taught
William to make a fish trap, to cast a line, and even to grabble a catfish by
boldly thrusting his hand into holes in the banks of the muddy water where
they lived, then yanking the fish out bodily when it clamped onto his hand.
An echo of this sensation came back to William now, a brief ripple up his
spine and the sense of turbid water rolling cold and sluggish over his head,
fingers tingling at thought of the sudden iron clamp of unseen jaws.
“Your father,” he said carefully.
“Yes,” said John Cinnamon. His head was down, eyes focused on the corn
fritter he’d been eating.
William looked at Manoke, feeling as though someone had hit him behind
the ear with a stuffed eel skin. The older Indian nodded; his expression was
serious, but he looked happy.
“Indeed,” William said politely, though his stomach had congealed into a
hard mass beneath his ribs. “I congratulate you.”
No one said anything further for several minutes following Cinnamon’s
bombshell, Cinnamon seeming nearly as shocked by it as William.
“Lord John is a … good man,” William said, feeling that he really ought to
add something.
Cinnamon murmured something inarticulate, bobbing his head, and then
reached hastily for a small fried trout, which in his agitation he crammed
whole into his mouth, thereafter making only chewing noises, punctuated by
small coughs.
Manoke, normally silent, continued to be silent, calmly eating his fried fish
and corn fritters with complete disregard for the turmoil in the bosoms of histwo companions.
William could barely look at Cinnamon and yet his eyes kept swiveling
toward the man in morbid fascination, stealing quick glances before looking
sharply away.
Cinnamon clearly bore the marks of mixed blood, though he was
handsome enough. And that hair could have come only from a European
parent. But those tight, exuberant curls bore no resemblance to Lord John’s
thick blond thatch.
Cinnamon rose suddenly from the cracked porch where they’d perched to
eat in the growing dusk.
“Where are you going, 
mon ami
?” said Manoke, surprised.
“To tend the fire,” Cinnamon replied, with a jerk of the head toward the
smoking pit under the big oak. The burlap covering it was getting too dry,
beginning to char and smoke; the stink reached William an instant later.
Cinnamon’s mother was half French. He’d told William that before, when
they spent the winter hunting in Quebec. Did Frenchmen often have curly
hair?
There was a bucket and a large clay water jug under the tree—William
recognized it; it was gray, badly chipped, and painted with two white bands.
Lord John had bought it from a river trader when they first came to Mount
Josiah. Cinnamon poured water into the palm of his hand, sprinkling it over
the burlap, which quit smoking and resumed its quiet steaming, only allowing
wisps of smoke from the fire below to seep out under its pegged sides.
Cinnamon squatted and thrust several small faggots into the fire under the
rack of drying fish beside the firepit, then rose, his head turning toward the
veranda. His face was nearly pale in the gloom. William looked down,
crumbling a bit of fritter between his fingers, and felt hot blood rise in his
cheeks, as though he’d been caught doing something shameful.
The eyes … perhaps there was something about the shape of the eyes that
was reminiscent of Papa— He stopped cold, unable to finish a thought that
had the word “Papa” in conjunction with … this …
The thought of it was a blow in the pit of the stomach, every time. 
Son.
Lord John’s son. It was bloody impossible. But there it was, nonetheless.
Manoke never lied. Nor was he a man to be easily gulled. Neither would
he ever do anything that might damage Lord John; William was sure of that.
If Manoke said that Cinnamon’s story was true … then it was. But … there
must be some mistake.MANOKE’S PRESENCE, WHILE very welcome, had obliterated William’s
romantic notion of solitary wandering about the plantation, alone with his
thoughts for days on end. John Cinnamon’s revelation had put paid altogether
to the notion of retreat. He could walk as far as he liked; he couldn’t escape
the reality of the man, big and solid and Indian—and the thought: 
He’s
Papa’s real son. And I’m not.
The fact that William had no blood relationship at all to John Grey had
never seemed important to either of them. Until now.
Still, if Lord John had had a casual encounter with an Indian woman—or,
God help him, an Indian mistress in Quebec—it was no one else’s business.
Cinnamon said his mother had died when he was an infant; it would have
been entirely in keeping with Lord John’s sense of honor to see that the boy
was cared for.
And just what will Papa do when he sees this … this … fruit of his
whoremongering loins?
That was too much. He stood up and walked away.
He’d just wanted a piss and a moment’s privacy to settle his mind, but it
didn’t want to settle, and he kept walking, though darkness was falling.
He didn’t care where he was going. Turning his back on the fire, he headed
toward the fields that lay behind the house. Mount Josiah had boasted only a
score of acres in tobacco when he had known it years before; was the land
even cultivated now?
Rather to his surprise, it was. It was too early to harvest the crop, but the
sap-thick smell of uncured tobacco lay like incense on the night. The scent
soothed him, and he made his way slowly across the field, toward the black
shape of the tobacco barn. Was it still in use?
It was. Called a barn for courtesy’s sake, it was little more than a large
shed, but the back of it was a large, airy space where the stalks were hung for
stripping—there were only a few there now, dangling from the rafters, barely
visible against the faint starlight that leaked through the wide-set boards. His
entrance caused the few dried, stacked leaves on the broad curing platform at
one side to stir and rustle, as though the shed took notice of him. It was an
odd fancy, but not disturbing—he nodded to the dark, half conscious of
welcome.
He bumped into something that shied away with a hollow sound—an
empty barrel. Feeling about, he counted more than a score, waiting. Someold, a few new ones, judging by the smell of new wood that added its tang to
the shed’s perfume.
Someone was working the plantation—and it wasn’t Manoke. The Indian
enjoyed smoking tobacco now and then, but William had never seen him take
any part in the raising or harvesting of any crop. Neither did he reek of it. It
wasn’t possible to touch green tobacco without a black, sticky sort of tar
adhering to your hands, and the smell in a ripe tobacco field was enough to
make a grown man’s head swim.
When he had lived here with Lord John—the name caused a twinge, but he
ignored it—his father had hired laborers from the adjoining property upriver,
a large place called Bobwhite, who could easily tend Mount Josiah’s modest
crop in addition to Bobwhite’s huge output. Perhaps the same arrangement
was still in place?
The thought that the plantation was still working, even in this ghostly
fashion, heartened him a little; he’d thought the place quite abandoned when
he saw the ruined house.
Thought of the house made him glance back. The flicker of firelight shone
through the empty front windows, giving the illusion that somebody still
lived there. He sighed and began to walk slowly back.
He hadn’t found peace, but the effort his mind made to avoid thinking
about his paternity, his title, his responsibilities, the goddamned shape of the
rest of his life, and 
now
 Lord fucking John’s bloody fucking son had caused it
instead to squirm off in the other direction, latching on to the problem of Ben.
Someone had put a stranger with no ears in the grave marked 
Benjamin
Grey,
 and whomever it was almost certainly knew what had happened to
Ben. He’d talked to—at latest count—twenty-three militiamen who’d been in
the Watchung Mountains with Washington during the time when Ben had
theoretically died. Four of them had 
heard
 of Ben and heard that he was
dead, but none of them had seen the body or the grave, and he’d swear that
none of them were lying.
But. Uncle Hal had received a letter telling him of Ben’s death. It had been
passed to him by an aide to General Clinton, who had received the letter from
some officer on the American side. Who had written that letter?
“Why the bloody hell didn’t you ask to see it?” he muttered to himself.
Because you were too busy being on your high horse about your damned
dignity,
 his mind replied.That 
was
 the logical next thing to do, though. Find out the name of the
American officer who wrote the letter and then … find the officer, if he
hadn’t been shot, been captured, or died of syphilis in the meantime.
The next step was logical, too: Uncle Hal would certainly have kept the
letter—and Uncle Hal (and Papa …) had the sorts of army connections that
might allow them to make inquiries about the whereabouts of a specific
American officer.
He’d have to go to Savannah, then, and hope that the British army was still
holding the city. And that his father and Uncle Hal were still with said army.
MANOKE AND CINNAMON were smoking tobacco on the porch when he
came back. The smoke mingled with the rising ground mist, a sweet, cool
vapor, smelling of plants.
Evidently they’d been discussing things while he was gone, for Manoke
removed his pipe when William sat down.
“Do you know where he is?” he asked directly. “Our Englishman?”
Our
 Englishman, forsooth, William thought, and glanced at Cinnamon.
The Indian’s head was bent, absorbed in stuffing his pipe, but William
thought he could see a certain stiffening of the big shoulders.
“No,” William said, but honesty compelled him to add, “The last time I
saw him, he was with the army in Savannah. That’s in Georgia.” Manoke
nodded, but with a certain blankness of expression that betokened complete
ignorance of what or where Georgia might be. Wherever Manoke’s private
paths might take him, it evidently wasn’t south.
“How far is that?” Cinnamon asked, his voice casual.
“Maybe four hundred miles?” William hazarded. It had taken him nearly
two months to make the journey to Virginia, but he hadn’t been moving with
any real sense of intent; he asked questions about Ben as he went, but in
reality he was just drifting uncertainly toward the only place where he’d
always felt happy and at home since leaving Helwater, his home in the Lake
District of England.
If he said no more, presumably Cinnamon would set off for Georgia,
leaving William to what peace he could find here. William wiped his face
with his sleeve; the smell of smoked meat, fish, and tobacco hung heavy in
his clothes; Mount Josiah would travel with him for some time.He could send a letter with Cinnamon, asking Uncle Hal to make inquiries
for the American officer who’d sent the notification of Ben’s death. He could
do what he’d come to do: sit and think.
And let Papa meet this fellow without warning?
 He was honest enough to
admit that his disinclination to allow this had nothing to do with the potential
embarrassment to Lord John or inconvenience to Cinnamon, but with a
mixture of curiosity and … well, simple jealousy. If Lord John was going to
meet his natural son as a grown man, he, William, wanted to be there to
witness the meeting.
“The army moves a lot, you know,” he said at last, and Manoke smiled at
him.
Cinnamon made a soft sound of acknowledgment and bobbed his head,
though he kept his eyes fixed on the beaded tobacco pouch on his knee.
“Do you want me to take you to him?” William asked, his voice a little
louder than he’d intended it to be. “To Lord John?”
Cinnamon lifted his head, startled, and looked at William for a long,
inscrutable moment.
“Yes,” he said at last, softly, and then bending his head again said more
softly still, “Thank you.”
Well, what the devil,
 William thought, taking the pipe Manoke offered him.
I can think on the way.13
“what Is Not Good for the Swarm Is Not Good
for the Bee” (Marcus Aurelius)
Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina
THE FIRST FLOOR HAD now been walled in from the outside, though
much of the inside was still just timber studs, which gave the place rather a
nice sense of informality as we walked cheerfully through the skeletal walls.
My surgery had no coverings for its two large windows, nor did it have a
door—but it did have complete walls (as yet unplastered), a long counter with
a couple of shelves over it for my bottles and instruments, a high, wide table
of smooth pine (I had sanded it myself, taking great pains to protect my
future patients from splinters in their bottoms) on which to conduct
examinations and surgical treatment, and a high stool on which I could sit
while administering these.
Jamie and Roger had begun the ceiling, but there were for the moment
only joists running overhead, with patches of faded brown and grimy gray
canvas (salvaged from a pile of decrepit military tents found in a warehouse
in Cross Creek) providing actual shelter from the elements.
Jamie had promised me that the second floor—and my ceiling—would be
laid within the week, but for the moment I had a large bowl, a dented tin
chamber pot, and the unlit brazier strategically arranged to catch leaks. It had
rained the day before, and I glanced upward to be sure there were no sagging
bits holding water in the damp canvas overhead before I took my casebook
out of its waxed-cloth bag.
“What ith—
is
 that?” Fanny asked, catching sight of it. I had put her to
work picking off and collecting the papery skins from a huge basket of
onions for steeping to make yellow dye, and she craned her neck to see,
keeping her onion-scented fingers carefully away.“This is my casebook,” I said, with a sense of satisfaction at its weight. “I
write down the names of the people who come to me with medical
difficulties, and describe each one’s condition, and then I put down what it
was that I did or prescribed for them, and whether it worked or not.”
She eyed the book with respect—and interest.
“Do they always get better?”
“No,” I admitted. “I’m afraid they don’t always—but very often they do.
‘
I’m a doctor, not an escalator,
’” I quoted, and laughed before remembering
that it wasn’t Brianna I was talking to.
Fanny merely nodded seriously, evidently filing away this piece of
information.
I coughed.
“Um. That was a quote from a, er, doctor friend of mine named McCoy. I
think the general notion is that no matter how skilled a person might be,
every skill has its limits and one is well advised to stick to what one’s good
at.”
She nodded again, eyes still fixed in interest on the book.
“Do you … think I might read it?” she asked shyly. “Only a page or two,”
she added hastily.
I hesitated for a moment, but then laid the book on the table, opened it, and
paged through to the spot where I had made a note about using gallberry
ointment for Lizzie Wemyss’s malaria, as I hadn’t any Jesuit bark. Fanny had
heard me talk about the situation to Jamie, and Lizzie’s recurrent ague was
common knowledge on the Ridge.
“Yes, you may—but only the pages before this marker.” I took a slim
black crow’s feather from the jar of quills and laid it next to the book’s spine
at Lizzie’s page.
“Patients are entitled to privacy,” I explained. “You oughtn’t to read about
people that are our neighbors. But these earlier pages are about people I
treated in other places and—mostly—a long time ago.”
“I prrromise,” she said, her earnestness giving emphasis to her r’s, and I
smiled. I’d known Fanny for only a few months, but I’d never once known
her to lie—about anything.
“I know,” I said. “You—”
“Ho there, Missus Fraser!” A distant shout from outside interrupted me
and I glanced through the window, down at what was becoming a well-marked trail running from the creek to the house. I blinked, then looked
again. I knew that tall, thin, shambling figure …
“John Quincy!” I said, and thrusting the casebook into Fanny’s surprised
hands hurried outside to meet him.
“Mr. Myers!” I nearly threw my arms around him but was abruptly
checked by the fact that he was carrying a large, battered straw basket in his
arms, and was surrounded—well, quite covered, in fact—by a swarm of bees,
these buzzing so loudly that I could barely make out what he was saying. He
saw this and courteously leaned down toward me, bringing the bees into
uncomfortably close proximity.
“Brought ye some bees, Missus!” he shouted over the rumbling thrum of
his passengers.
“I see!” I hollered back. “How lovely!” Fuzzy striped bodies were
bumping and waggling in a brownish carpet over the threadbare homespun of
his coat, and streaks and grains of yellow pollen in his beard, this somewhat
longer, grayer, and stragglier than when I had first met him on the streets of
Wilmington, twelve years ago.
Bree and Rachel—with Oggy—had heard the noise and come from the
kitchen. They were staring at Myers in fascination.
“My daughter!” I shouted, pointing and standing on tiptoe in hopes of
reaching his ear—Myers stood a good six foot seven in his stocking feet, and
towered even over Brianna. “And Rachel Murray—Young Ian’s wife!”
“Young Ian’s woman?” Myers’s smile, always sweet, if half toothless,
widened into a delighted grin. “And his young’un, too, I expect? It’s a
pleasure, ma’am, a real pleasure!” He reached out a long arm toward Rachel,
who went pale at sight of the heaving mass of bees, but swallowed and edged
close enough to take his proffered hand, holding Oggy as far behind her as
she could with one hand. I hastily stepped aside and took the baby from her,
and she took a long breath.
So did I. The noise was making my skin twitch, memories of the sounds
I’d heard amongst the standing stones burrowing toward the surface.
“I’m pleased to meet thee, Friend Myers,” Rachel said, raising her voice.
“Ian speaks of thee in the warmest terms!”
“Much obliged to him for his good opinion, Missus.” He shook her hand
warmly, then turned to Bree, who anticipated him by reaching for his hand
herself, a wary eye on the bees.
“So pleased to meet you, Mr. Myers,” she shouted.“Oh, no need to be ceremonious, ma’am—John Quincy’ll do fine.”
“John Quincy it is. I’m Brianna Fraser MacKenzie.” She smiled at him,
then nodded delicately at his living waistcoat. “Can we offer your bees some
… er … hospitality, as well as yourself?”
“Got any beer, have ye?” Myers lowered his basket and I saw that it was a
stained and ragged bee skep, upside down, with a chunk of dripping
honeycomb inside it. This also was crawling with bees, not surprisingly.
“Well … yes,” I said, exchanging glances with Bree. “Of course. Um …
do bring them up to the house site. We’ll get them … settled,” I said,
watching the swarm warily. They didn’t seem hostile at all; I saw several of
them lighting on Bree’s shoulders and hair. She saw them, too, and tensed a
little but didn’t swat at them. One sailed lazily past Oggy’s nose; he followed
it in a cross-eyed sort of way and made a grab at it, but luckily only got a
handful of my hair.
The children had grouped together on the trail above, goggling, but Jem
and Mandy had come down to join their mother. Mandy was clinging to
Brianna’s leg, but Jem was pressing close, fascinated by the swarm.
“Do the bees drink beer?” he called up at their proprietor.
“That they do, son, that they do,” Myers replied, beaming down at him out
of a cloud of bees. “Bees is the smartest kind of bug they is.”
“So they are,” I said, disentangling Oggy’s chubby fingers and taking a
deep breath of the honeyed air. “Jem, go find Grandda, will you?”
IN THE END, I found Jamie myself, spotting him coming down through the
trees with four rabbits he’d snared.
“Very timely,” I said, standing on tiptoe to kiss him. He smelled of fresh
game and damp fir trees. “We’ve company for dinner, and as it’s John
Quincy …”
His face lighted.
“Myers?” he said, handing me the bag of rabbits. “Did ye inquire after his
balls?”
“I did not,” I said. “But he told me, anyway. Apparently everything is still
where I put it. And functioning well, he assures me. He’s brought us a swarm
of bees, among other things.”
“Has he? How did he carry them?”
“He wore them,” I said with a shrug.“Oh, aye,” he said. “What other things did he bring?”
“Letters. He says one is for you.”
Jamie didn’t break his stride, but I caught the faint hesitation as he turned
his head to look at me.
“From whom?”
“I don’t know. He was busy divesting himself of the bees, and Jem
couldn’t find you, so I came to look for you.” I nearly added, 
“Perhaps it’s
from Lord John,”
 because for several years it might have been, and a
welcome letter, too, reinforcing the bonds of a long friendship between Jamie
and John Grey. Fortunately, I bit my lip in time. While the two of them were
on speaking terms—just barely—they were no longer friends. And while I
would, if pushed, deny absolutely that it was my fault, it 
was
 undeniably on
my account.
I kept my eyes on the trail, just in case Jamie might catch a wayward
expression on my face and draw uncomfortable conclusions. He wasn’t the
only person who could read minds, and I’d been looking at his face. I had a
very strong impression that when I had said “letter,” Lord John’s name had
leapt to his mind, just as it had to mine.
“I’ll have a bit of a wash at the creek before I come in, Sassenach,” he said,
touching my back lightly. “Shall I bring ye some cress for the supper?”
“Please,” I said, and rose on tiptoe to kiss him.
As the house came in sight a moment later, I saw Brianna coming up the
slope from the Higgins cabin with several loaves of bread in her arms, and I
pushed all thoughts of Jamie and John Grey hastily out of my mind.
“I’ll do that, Mama,” she said, nodding at the bag of rabbits. “Mr. Myers
says the sun is coming down and you should go and bless your new bees
before they go to sleep.”
“Oh,” I said, uncertainly. I’d kept bees now and then, but the relationship
hadn’t been in any way ceremonial. “Did he happen to say what sort of
blessing the bees might have in mind?”
“Not to me,” she said cheerfully, taking the bloodstained bag from my
hand. “But he probably knows. He says he’ll meet you in the garden.”
THE GARDEN STOOD like a small, spiky brown fortress inside its deer-
proof palisades. The fence wasn’t proof against everything, though, and as
always, I opened the gate cautiously. Once I had caught three huge raccoonsdebauching themselves amidst the remains of my infant corn; on another the
intruder had been a huge eagle, sitting atop my water barrel, wings spread to
catch the morning sun. When I opened the door suddenly, the eagle had
uttered a shriek nearly as loud as mine before launching himself past my head
like a panicked cannonball. And …
A brief, violent shudder went through me as I thought of the beehives in
my old garden—knocked over by the flight of a murderer, the scent of honey
from the broken combs mingling with crushed leaves and the sweet, butcher-
thick smell of spilled blood.
This time, though, the only foreign body inside the fence was John Quincy
Myers, tall and ragged as a scarecrow, and looking quite at home among the
red-flowered bean vines and sprouting turnips.
“There you be, Missus Fraser!” he said, smiling widely at sight of me.
“You’re well come in your time, as the Good Book says.”
“It does?” I had some vague notion that the Bible might include some
mention of bees—perhaps John Quincy’s blessing came from the Psalms or
something? “Er … Brianna said that I should come and … bless the bees?”
“Fine-lookin’ woman, your daughter,” Myers said, shaking his head in
admiration. “Seen precious few women that size, and none of ’em what you’d
call handsome. All pretty lively, though. How did she come to wed a
preacher? You wouldn’t think a prayin’ man would be able to do right by her
—I mean, in the ways of the flesh, as you might—”
“The bees,” I said, somewhat louder. “Do you know what I should be
saying to them?”
“Oh, to be sure.” Recalled to the matter at hand, he turned toward the
western edge of the garden, where the battered bee skep had been placed on a
board atop a rickety stool. To my surprise, he reached into his bulging
knapsack and withdrew four shallow pottery bowls made of the soft white
glazed porcelain called creamware, which lent a disconcertingly formal note
to the occasion.
“For the ants,” he said, handing me the bowls. “Now, there’s a mort o’ folk
what keep bees,” he explained. “The Cherokee do, and the Creek and
Choctaw and doubtless some kinds of Indian I don’t know the names of, too.
But there’s the Moravians, down to Salem—that’s where I got the ant bowls
and the skep. And they got their own ways, too.”
I had a vision of John Quincy Myers, clad in a buzzing blanket of bees,
strolling down the streets of Salem, and smiled.“Wait,” I said. “You surely didn’t carry those bees all the way from
Salem!”
“Why, no,” he said, looking mildly surprised. “Found ’em in a tree just a
mile or so from your house. But when I heard you ’n’ Jamie was back in your
place, I had it in mind to bring you some bees, so I was a-looking out for ’em,
see?”
“That was a very kind thought,” I assured him, with great sincerity. It was,
but a small, disquieting question popped up in the back of my mind. John
Quincy was a law unto himself, and if we were being biblical today, one
might easily call him a brother to owls. He roamed the mountains, and if
anyone knew where he went or why, they hadn’t told me.
But from what he’d said, he’d been coming to Fraser’s Ridge on purpose,
knowing that Jamie and I were here. There were the letters he’d brought, to
be sure … but the way the backcountry post worked was for letters to be
passed from hand to hand, friend or stranger carrying them on, so long as the
letters’ direction lay in their own path—and handing them to someone else
when it diverged. For John Quincy to come here with the specific intent of
delivering letters implied that there was something rather special about them.
I had no time to worry about the possibilities, though: Myers was winding
up a brief exegesis on Irish and Scottish beekeepers, and coming to the point
at issue.
“I know a few of the blessings folk use for their hives,” he said. “Not that
I’d call what them Germans say sounds much like my notion of a blessing.”
“What do they say?” I asked, intrigued.
His bushy gray brows drew together in the effort of recall.
“Well, it’s … what you may call abrupt. Let me see now …” He closed his
eyes and tilted up his chin.
“Christ, the bee swarm is out here!
Now fly, you my animals, come.
In the Lord’s peace, in God’s protection,
come home in good health.
“Sit, sit, bees.
“The command to you from the Holy Mary.
You have no holiday; don’t fly into the woods;Neither should you slip away from me.
Nor escape from me.
“Sit completely still.
“Do God’s will,”
 he finished, opening his eyes. He shook his head. “Don’t
that beat all? Tellin’ one bee to sit still, let alone a thousand of ’em at once?
Why would bees put up with something unmannerly like that, I ask you?”
“Well, it must work,” I said. “Jamie’s brought home honey from Salem,
many times. Maybe they’re German bees. Do you know a more … mannerly
blessing?”
His lips pursed dubiously, and I caught a glimpse of one or two ragged
yellow fangs. Could he still chew meat? I wondered, revising the dinner
menu slightly. I could dice the rabbit meat small and stir it into scrambled
eggs with chopped onions …
“I suspect I remember most of this’n …
“
O God, Creator of all critters, You bless the seed and make it profitable
…
 is that right, profitable? Yes, I reckon that’s it … 
profitable to our use. By
the intercession of …
 well, there’s a passel of saints or somesuch in there, but
dang if I recall anybody but John the Baptist—though if anybody should
know about honey, you’d think it’d be him, wouldn’t you? What with the
locusts and livin’ in a bearskin—though why anybody’d do like that in a hot
place like I hear the Holy Land is, I surely couldn’t say. Anyway …” His
eyes closed again, and he stretched out his hand, almost unconsciously,
toward the bee skep, wreathed in a slow-moving cloud of flying bees.
“
By the intercession of whoever might want to intercede, will You be
mercifully hearin’ our prayers. Bless and sanctify these here bees by Your
compassion, that they might …
 Well,” he said, opening his eyes and frowning
at me, “it says, 
abundantly bear fruit,
 though any damn fool knows it’s honey
you want ’em to be abundant with. Still.” The wrinkled lids closed against the
dying 
sunlight again, and he finished, “
for the beauty and adornment of Your
holy temple and for our humble use.
“They’s a bit more,” he added, dropping his hand and turning to me, “but
that’s the meat of it. What it comes down to, I’d say, is you can bless your
bees any way as seems fit to you. The only important thing—and you maybe
know this already—is that you got to talk to ’em regular.”“About anything in particular?” I asked warily, flexing my fingers and
trying to recall if I’d ever had a conversation with my previous hives.
I probably had, but not consciously. I was, like most gardeners, in the habit
of muttering to myself among the weeds and vegetables, execrating bugs and
rabbits and exhorting the plants. God knew what I might have said to the bees
along the way …
“Bees are real sociable,” Myers explained, and blew one of them gently off
the back of his hand. “And they’re curious, which only makes sense, them
goin’ back and forth and gatherin’ news with their pollen. So you tell ’em
what’s happening—if someone’s come a-visitin’, if a new babe’s been born,
if anybody new was to settle or a settler depart—or die. See, if somebody
leaves or dies,” he explained, brushing a bee off my shoulder, “and you 
don’t
tell the bees, they take offense, and the whole lot of ’em will fly right off.”
I could see quite a few similarities between John Quincy Myers and a bee,
in terms of gathering news, and smiled at the thought. I wondered if he’d be
offended at finding out that someone had kept a juicy piece of gossip from
him, but on the whole, I doubted that anyone did. He had a gentleness that
invited confidence, and I was sure that he kept many people’s secrets.
“Well, then.” The sun was coming down fast now; the damp scent of the
plants was strong and rays of light knifed between the palisades, vivid amid
the rustling shadows of the garden. “Best get on with it, I suppose.”
Given the disparate examples offered by John Quincy, I was fairly sure I
could roll my own with regard to the blessing. We filled the four dishes with
water and put them under the legs of the stool, to keep ants from climbing up
to the hive, drawn by the scent of honey. A few of these voracious insects
were already making their way up the stool’s legs and I brushed them away
with a fold of my skirt—my first gesture of protection toward my new bees.
John Quincy smiled and nodded at me as I straightened up, and I nodded
back, reached out a tentative hand through the veil of bees coming in to the
hive, and touched the smooth twisted straw of the skep. It might have been
imagination, but I thought I could feel a vibration through my skin, just
below the threshold of hearing, a strong and certain hum.
“Oh, Lord,” I said—and wished I knew the name of the patron saint of
bees, for surely there must be one—“please make these bees feel welcome in
their new home. Help me to protect and care for them, and may they always
find flowers. Er … and quiet rest at the end of each day. Amen.”“That’ll do just fine, Mrs. Claire,” John Quincy said, and his voice was low
and warm as the hum of the bees.
We left, closing and fastening the gate carefully behind us, and made our
way down, out of the shadow of the towering chimney and along the eastern
wall of the house. It was getting dark fast now, and the cooking fire leapt up
as we came into the kitchen, shedding light on my waiting family. 
Home.
“Speaking of news,” I said casually to Myers, “you said you’d brought
letters. If one is for Jamie, who are the others for?”
“Why, one for the boy,” he said, skillfully skirting the hole Jamie had dug
for the new privy. “Mr. Fergus Fraser’s boy, Germain, I mean. And t’other
for some’un called Frances Pocock. You got somebody here by that name?”14
Mon Cher Petit Ami
I WAS NO LONGER amazed by the quantity of food required to feed eight
people at a time, but seeing vast, steaming mounds of rabbit, quail, trout,
ham, beans, succotash, onions, potatoes, and cress vanish within minutes into
the bellies of twenty-two gave me a fresh qualm of apprehension about the
coming winter.
Granted, it was still summer, and with luck, we would have good weather
through the autumn … but that was only three or four months, at most. We
had almost no livestock, other than the horses, Clarence the mule, and a
couple of goats for milk and cheese.
Jamie and Bree spent half their time hunting, and we had a good supply of
venison and pork hanging in the smoke shed at the moment, but even with
hunting, trapping, and fishing by all hands, we’d likely need to trade for meat
(oh, and butter!) before snowfall—and someone would have to go down to
Salem or Cross Creek and bring back oatmeal—lots of oatmeal—rice, beans,
parched corn, flour, salt, sugar … Meanwhile, I’d need to plant, pick, dig,
and preserve like a mad thing in order to have enough to keep us from
scurvy: turnips, carrots, and potatoes in the root cellar, along with garlic,
apples, onions, mushrooms, and grapes hung to dry, tomatoes to be preserved
by sun-drying or immersion in oil, if the bloody hornworms didn’t get them
… oh, Christ, I couldn’t miss a day of the sunflower season; I needed all the
seeds I could get, both for oil and for protein … and the medicinal herbs …
My mental list was interrupted by Brianna’s announcement that supper
was ready, and I plumped down at the table next to Jamie, suddenly realizing
all at once how hungry I was, how tired I was, and grateful for respite as well
as food.
The Higginses had all come up for supper in order to hear John Quincy’s
news, and with Ian, Rachel, Jenny, and the baby, the kitchen was a solid massof people and talk. Luckily Rachel’s basket was a generous one and Amy
Higgins had provided two enormous game pies made of doves and turkey, as
well as the bread, and the pervasive scent of food acted like a sedative.
Within moments, the only words heard were muffled requests to pass the
corn relish, more pie, or the rabbit hash, and the kitchen worked its everyday
magic, providing peace and nourishment.
Gradually, as people became full, conversation began again, but in a
subdued fashion. Finally, John Quincy pushed away his empty tin plate with
a deep sigh of repletion and gazed benignly round the table.
“Missus Fraser, Missus MacKenzie, Missus Murray, Missus Higgins …
y’all done us right well tonight. I ain’t et that much at one sittin’ since last
Christmas.”
“It was our pleasure,” I assured him. “I haven’t seen anyone eat that much
since last Christmas.”
I thought I heard a muffled snigger behind me, but I ignored it.
“So long as we’ve a crust in the house, ye’ll always eat with us, man,”
Jamie told him. “And drink, I hope?” he added, producing a full bottle of
something undoubtedly alcoholic from under his bench.
“I wouldn’t say no, Mr. Fraser.” John Quincy belched slightly and beamed
benevolently at Jamie. “I cain’t insult your hospitality, now, can I?”
Ten adults. I reckoned quickly through the available drinkware and, rising,
managed to sort out four teacups, two horn cups, three pewter cups, and one
wineglass, which I set in proud array on the table in front of Jamie.
While I was so occupied, though, John Quincy had opened the ball, so to
speak, by producing a handful of letters from somewhere inside his tattered
vest. He squinted thoughtfully at them and handed one across the table to
Jamie.
“That ’un’s yours,” he said, nodding at it, “and this one here’s for a
Captain Cunningham—don’t know him, but it says 
Fraser’s Ridge
 on it. He
one o’ your tenants?”
“Aye. I’ll see he gets it.” Jamie reached across and took both covers.
“Thank ye kindly. And this’n here is for Miss Frances Pocock.” He waved
the remaining letter gently, looking round for its recipient.
“Fanny!” Mandy shouted. “Fanny, you gots a letter!” She was red in the
face with excitement, standing on the bench next to Roger, who was
clutching her round the middle. Everyone turned, murmuring in curiosity,
looking for Fanny.Fanny herself rose slowly off the barrel of salt fish she’d been sitting on in
the corner. She looked about, confused, but Jamie beckoned to her and she
reluctantly came forward.
“Oh, so you’re Miss Frances! Why, ain’t you a comely lass, now.” John
Quincy unfolded himself from the bench, gave her a low, courtly bow, and
put the letter in her unresisting hand.
Fanny clutched the letter to her bosom with both hands. Her eyes were
huge and had a look in them like those of a panicked horse on the verge of
bolting.
“Hasn’t anybody ever written you a letter before, Fanny?” Jem asked,
curious. “Open it and find out who sent it!”
She stared at him for a moment, and then her eyes swiveled to me, in
search of support. I set the butter aside and beckoned her to come put the
letter down on the table. She did, very gently, as though it might break.
It was no more than a single piece of rough paper, folded in thirds and
sealed with a grayish-yellow blob of what looked like candle wax—grease
from it had spread through the paper, and a few words showed black through
the transparent spot. I picked it up, as delicately as I could, and turned it over.
“Yes, it’s definitely your letter,” I assured her. “
Miss Frances Pocock, in
care of James Fraser, Fraser’s Ridge, Royal Colony of North Carolina.
”
“Open it, Grannie!” Mandy said, hopping up and down in an effort to see.
“No, it’s Fanny’s letter,” I told her. “She gets to open it. And she doesn’t
have to show it to anybody unless she wants to.”
Fanny turned to John Quincy and, looking up at him with great
seriousness, said, “Who gave you the letter to bring to me, sir? Did it come
from Philadelphia?”
Her face seemed to grow a shade paler as she said this, but Myers shook
his head and raised a shoulder.
“It ain’t likely from Philadelphia, but I cain’t say for sure where it 
is
 from,
darlin’. It was give into my hand in New Bern, when I happened to be there
last month, but wasn’t the man who wrote it what give it to me. He were just
passin’ it on, like, as folk do.”
“Oh.” The tension had left her shoulders, and she breathed more easily. “I
see. Thank you, sir, for bringing it.”
She’d at least 
seen
 letters before, I thought; she slid her thumb under the
fold without hesitation, though she loosened the seal, rather than breaking it,
and set it down beside the unfolded letter. She stood close, looking down atit, but I could easily see it over her shoulder. She read it out loud, slowly but
clearly, following the words with her finger.
“To Miss Frances Pocock
From Mr. William Ransom
Dear Frances,
I write to enquire after your health and well-being. I hope you are
happy in your present situation and beginning to feel settled.
Please give my earnest thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Fraser for their
generosity.
I am all right, though very much occupied at the moment. I will
write again when the opportunity of a messenger offers.
Your most humble and obedient servant,
William Ransom”
“Wil-yum,” she murmured to herself, her finger touching the letters of his
name. Her face had changed in an instant; it glowed with a sort of awed
happiness.
Jamie moved slightly, beside me, and I glanced up at him. His eyes were
warm with firelight, reflecting Fanny’s glow.
FANNY FLED WITH her letter, and, puzzled, I leaned toward John Quincy.
“Didn’t you say that you’d brought a letter for Germain, too?” I asked
under the rising hum of talk.
John Quincy nodded. “Oh, I did, ma’am. I give it to him already, though—
met him coming back from the privy.” He glanced round the room, then
shrugged. “Reckon he might have wanted to read it in private—was from his
mother, I think.”
I exchanged wary looks with Jamie. Fergus had written in the early spring,
with assurances that all was well with his family. Marsali felt as well as a
woman eight months’ pregnant could reasonably be expected to feel; and he
also listed the various objects he was sending north to Cross Creek for us. On
both occasions, he’d sent brief but fond wishes to Germain. I had read oneletter to Germain, Jamie the other—and on both occasions, Germain had just
nodded, stone-faced, and said nothing.
Germain didn’t appear for dessert—slices of Amy’s bread with apple
butter made by Sarah Chisholm as payment for my attending her younger
daughter’s childbed—and I began to be seriously worried. He might have
chosen to eat or stay the night with a friend; he often did, with or without
Jemmy, but he was supposed to tell someone when he went visiting, and
usually did.
Beyond that … I couldn’t think of any reason why he would choose to be
absent when there was a visitor. 
Any
 visitor, let alone a colorful one like John
Quincy Myers, whose very appearance promised entertaining stories as well
as news. People would be coming by to visit for the next few evenings to
hear him; I knew he’d be staying for a bit—but for tonight, he was ours
alone.
Mandy was curled up on Myers’s lap at the moment, gazing up at him in
wonder—though in her case, I thought it was his massive gray-streaked beard
that was interesting her, rather than the story he was telling, which had to do
with a case of adultery in Cross Creek last month that had resulted in a duel
with pistols in the middle of Hay Street, in which the participants had both
missed their opponents but had hit, respectively, a public water butt and a
horse hitched to a gig, which had—the wound being minor but startling—
caused the horse to run away with Mrs. Judge Alderdyce, who was sitting in
the gig while her groom fetched a parcel for her.
“Was the poor lady hurt?” Bree asked, struggling to keep a straight face.
“Oh, no, ma’am,” John Quincy assured her. “Madder ’n a wet hornet,
though, and that’s pretty mad. When they stopped the gig and helped her out
of it, she stomped right down the street to Lawyer Forbes’s rooms and made
him write up a lawsuit ’gainst the man that winged her horse, right that very
minute.”
The humor in Bree’s face changed in an instant at the mention of Neil
Forbes, who had kidnapped her and sold her to Stephen Bonnet, but I saw
Roger lay his hand over hers and squeeze. She sucked in one cheek for a
moment, but then turned to him briefly and nodded, relaxing.
“Didn’t she take care of the horse first?” Jemmy asked, openly
disapproving.
“Jim-Bob Hooper did,” Myers assured him. “That’s Mrs. Judge’s groom,
what had been driving. Bit o’ salve and a nose bag—had the poor beast fixedup peart in no more than a minute.”
Jamie and Jemmy nodded as one, satisfied.
Talk turned back to the cause of the duel, but I didn’t stay to hear it. Fanny
had come quietly back and was sitting on the end of a kitchen bench, smiling
to herself as she listened to John Quincy talk. I bent to whisper in her ear as I
passed.
“Do you know where Germain is?”
She blinked, pulled away from John Quincy’s spell, but answered readily.
“Yes’m. I think he’s on the roof. He said he didn’t want company.”
GERMAIN 
WAS
 ON the roof. Huddled up on the floor in our second-floor
bedroom lean-to, his knees raised, arms crossed over them, and head buried
in his forearms, a dark lump against the paleness of the bedclothes behind
him.
The picture of woe—and the picture of someone desperate to be asked
what the matter was, in hopes of reassurance. 
Well,
 I reflected, 
as Jenny says
—what’s a grannie for, then?
I picked my way carefully round the edge of the floor, clinging to the
timber studs for balance and thanking God that it was neither raining nor
blowing up a hurricane. In fact, the night was calm and starlit, full of the half-
heard susurrus of pine trees and night-going insects.
I eased myself carefully down beside him, hands sweating just a little.
“So,” I said. “What’s the matter, sweetheart?”
“I—” he started, but stopped, glancing over his shoulder, then moved close
to me. “I have a letter,” he whispered, putting a hand over his breast. “Mr.
Myers brought it for me; it has my name on it.”
That 
would
 be startling, I thought. As was the case with Fanny, it was
undoubtedly the first personal letter he’d ever received.
“Who is it from?” I asked, and heard him swallow.
“My mam,” he said. “It— I know her writing.”
“You haven’t opened it yet?” I asked.
He shook his head, pressing his hand against his chest as though fearing
the letter might fly out by itself.
“Germain,” I said softly, and rubbed his back, feeling his shoulder blades
sharp under the flannel shirt. “Your mother loves you. You don’t need to be
af—”“No, she doesn’t!” he burst out, and curled up tight, trying to contain the
hurt. “She doesn’t, she can’t … I—I killed Henri-Christian. She c-can’t …
can’t even look at me!”
I got my arms round him and pulled him to me. He wasn’t a tiny boy by
any means, but I pressed his head into my shoulder and held him like a baby,
rocking a little, making soft shushing sounds while he cried, big gulping sobs
that he couldn’t hold back.
What could I say to him? I couldn’t just tell him he was wrong; simple
contradiction never works with children, even when it’s the obvious truth.
And in all honesty, this wasn’t obvious.
“You didn’t kill Henri-Christian,” I said, keeping my voice steady with
some effort. “I was there, Germain.” I 
had
 been there, and I didn’t want to go
back. Just Henri-Christian’s name, and it was all there, surrounding us 
both:
the reek of smoke and the boom of exploding barrels of ink and varnish and
the roar of flames coming up through the loft, Germain clinging to a rope,
dangling high above the cobblestones. Reaching for his little brother …
It was no use. I couldn’t hold back my own tears and I held him hard, my
face pressed against his hair with its smell of boy and innocence.
“It was awful,” I whispered. “So terrible. But it was an accident, Germain.
You tried all you could to save him. You know you did.”
“Yes,” he managed, “but I 
couldn’t
! Oh, Grannie, I 
couldn’t
!”
“I know,” I whispered, over and over, rocking him. “I know.”
And slowly, the horror and the grief subsided into sorrow. We sniffled and
wept and I found a handkerchief for him and wiped my own nose on my
apron.
“Give me the letter, Germain,” I said, clearing my throat. I sat back against
the bed. “I don’t know what it says, but you have to read it. Some things you
just have to go through.”
“I can’t read it,” he said, and gave a small forlorn laugh. “It’s too dark.”
“I’ll go and get a candle from the surgery.” I got my feet under me and
stood up; I was stiff from crouching on the floor, and it was a moment before
I could be sure of my balance. “There’s water on the table, there. You have a
drink and lie down on the bed. I’ll be right back.”
I went downstairs in that sort of grim resignation one enters when there’s
nothing else to be done, and climbed the stairs again, the candle’s glow
softening the rough boards of the stairwell, shadowing my steps.The truth was that while Marsali naturally didn’t blame Germain for Henri-
Christian, he was probably right about her not having been able to look at
him without being torn apart by the memory of it. That was why, without
much being said about it, we had brought Germain with us to the Ridge, in
hopes that both he and his family would heal more easily with a little
distance.
Now he probably thought that his mother had written to tell him that she
didn’t want him back, ever.
“Poor things,” I whispered, meaning Germain, Henri-Christian, and their
mother. I was quite sure—well, almost quite sure—that Marsali intended no
such thing, but I could feel his fear.
He was sitting on the edge of the bed, gripping his knees, and looked up at
me with his eyes huge, dark with longing. The letter lay by his side and I
picked it up, sat down beside him, and opened it. I made a gesture, offering it
to him, but he shook his head.
“All right,” I said, cleared my throat, and began to read.
“Mon cher petit ami—”
I paused, both from surprise and because Germain had stiffened.
“Oh,” he said, in a very small voice. “Oh.”
“Oh!” I said myself, suddenly understanding, and my clenched heart
relaxed. 
Mon cher petit ami
 was what Marsali had called him when he was
very small, before the girls had been born.
It would be all right, then.
“What does it say, Grannie? What does it say?”
Germain was pressed up tight against my side, suddenly eager to look.
“Do you want to read it yourself?” I asked, smiling and offering it to him.
He shook his head violently, blond hair flying.
“You,” he said, husky. “You, Grannie. Please.”
“Mon cher petit ami,
We have just found a new house, but it will never be home until you
are here.
Your sisters miss you terribly (they have sent locks of their hair—
in case you were wondering what these straggly things are—or in
case you’ve forgotten what they look like, they say. Joanie’s hair is
the light brown, and Félicité’s the dark one. The yellow ones belongto the cat), and Papa longs for you to come and help him. He forbids
the girls to go into taverns to deliver the papers and broadsheets—
though they want to!
You also have two new little brothers who—”
“Two?” Germain grabbed the page from me and held it as near the candle
as he could without setting it on fire. “Did she say 
two
?”
“Yes!” I was nearly as excited as he was to hear it, and bent over the page,
shoulder-to-shoulder with him. “Read the next bit!”
He straightened up a little and swallowed, then read on:
“We were all very surprised, as you might think! To be honest, I
had been afraid all the time, to think about what the new baby might
be. Because I wanted to see a child just like Henri-Christian, of
course—to feel as though we had him back—but I knew that couldn’t
happen, and at the same time, I was afraid that the new little one
might be a dwarf, too—maybe your Grannie has told you that people
who are born like that have a lot of troubles; Henri-Christian nearly
died several times when he was very small, and Papa told me long
ago about some of the dwarf-children he had known in Paris, and that
most didn’t live a long life.
But a new baby is always a surprise and a miracle and never what
you expect. When you were born, I was so enchanted that I would sit
by your cradle and watch you sleep. Just letting the candle burn down
because I couldn’t bear to put it out and let the night hide you from
me.
We thought at first, when the babies were born, that perhaps we
should name one of them Henri and the other Christian, but the girls
wouldn’t have it. They both said that Henri-Christian was not like
anyone else, and no one else should have his name.
“Papa and I agreed that they were right”—
Germain was nodding his head
as he read
—“and so one of your brothers is named Alexandre and the other
one Charles-Claire …”
“What?” I said, incredulous. “Charles-
Claire
?”
“… for your Grandda and Grannie,”
 Germain read, and looked up,
grinning hugely at me.“Go on,” I said, nudging him. He nodded and looked back at the page,
running his finger along the words to find his place.
“So,”
 he read, and his voice choked suddenly, then steadied. 
“So,”
 he
repeated, 
“please, mon cher fils, come home. I love you and I need you to be
here, so the new house will be home again.
“With my love always …”
He pressed his lips tight together, and I saw tears well in his eyes, still
fixed on the paper.
“Maman,”
 he whispered, and pressed the letter to his chest.
IT WAS ANOTHER hour before the children were put to bed—Germain
among them—and I found myself once more in our airy bedroom, this time
with Jamie. He stood at the end of the open floor, clad in his shirt, looking
out over the night below, while I wriggled out of my stays, sighing in relief as
the cool night breeze passed through my shift.
“Are your ears ringing, Sassenach?” he said, turning and smiling at me.
“It’s been some time since I heard so much talk in such a small space.”
“Mm-hmm.” I came and put my arms round his waist, feeling the weight
of the day and the evening slip away. “It’s so quiet up here. I can hear the
crickets in the honeysuckle round the privy.”
He groaned and rested his chin on top of my head, letting me hold a little
of his weight.
“Dinna mention privies. I’m nay more than half done wi’ the one for your
surgery. And if we’ve much more company like tonight, I’m going to have to
dig another for the house within a month.”
“I know you know that Roger would do it if you asked,” I remarked. “You
just won’t let him.”
“Mmphm. He wouldna do it right.”
“Is there an art to digging privies?” I asked this, teasing, because if Jamie
was a perfectionist about anything—and in all truth, he was a perfectionist
about quite a number of things, nearly all having to do with tools or weapons
—it was digging a proper privy. “Wasn’t it Voltaire who said that the perfect
is the enemy of the good?”
“Le mieux est le mortel ennemi du bien,”
 he said. “The best is the mortal
enemy of the good. And I’m sure Voltaire never dug a privy in his life. Whatwould he ken about it?” He straightened up and stretched, slowly and
luxuriously. “God, I want to lie down.”
“What’s stopping you?”
“I mean to enjoy the anticipation as much as the lyin’ down. Besides, I’m
hungry. Have we any food to hand?”
“If none of the children have found it, yes.” I bent and rummaged under
the bed, pulling out the basket I’d secreted during the afternoon against just
such a contingency. “Cheese and a wedge of apple pie do you?”
He made a Scottish noise indicating thanks and deep contentment and sat
down to wade in.
“Germain’s had a letter from Marsali,” I said. The corn husks in the
mattress rustled as I sat down beside him. “Did John Quincy tell you?”
“Germain told me,” he said, smiling. “When I went out to tell the bairns to
come in, he was out by the well tellin’ Jem and Fanny about his new wee
brothers, and his hair standin’ on end with excitement. He said he couldna
sleep for wanting to see his folk, so I gave him paper and ink to write his
mam a letter.
“Fanny’s helping him wi’ the spelling,” he added, brushing crumbs off his
shirt. “Who d’ye think taught her to write? It’s no a skill likely to be of value
in a brothel, surely.”
“Someone has to keep the books and write occasional genteel blackmail
letters, but perhaps that’s the madam’s job. As for Fanny, she’s never said,
but I think it must have been her sister.”
My heart contracted a little at this reminder of Fanny’s recent past. She
never spoke of it, or of her sister.
“Aye,” Jamie said, and a shadow crossed his face at the mention of Jane
Pocock. Arrested and sentenced to death for killing a sadistic client who had
bought her little sister’s maidenhead, she had killed herself the night before
she would have been hanged—only hours before William and Jamie reached
her.
He pressed his lips together briefly and then shook his head. “Aye, well.
We must send Germain home as soon as we can, of course. I’m afraid
Frances will miss him, though.”
I’d bent to scoop up our discarded outer garments, but straightened up at
this.
“Do you think we should send Fanny with him? To stay with Fergus and
Marsali for a while? She’d be a help with the children.”He paused, a slice of cheese in hand, then shook his head.
“No. Seven is more than enough mouths for Fergus to feed, and the lass is
happy enough here, I think. She’s accustomed to us; I wouldna like her to
think we dinna want her—or to feel uprooted, aye? And”—he hesitated, then
added in an offhand way—“William gave her to me. He meant me to keep
her safe.”
“And you think he might come here to see her,” I added gently.
“Aye,” he said, a little gruffly. “I wouldna want him to come and not find
her here, I mean.” He took a bite of cheese and chewed it slowly, looking
away.
I patted his arm, then rose and started straightening our discarded clothes,
doing the best I could to lay them out in some way that would both prevent
them being blown off the roof in case of a high wind but not end up
impossibly crumpled. As I laid Jamie’s sporran on top of the pile with my
shoes to help weigh things down, I saw the edge of a folded paper peeking
out.
“Oh—Myers said he’d brought you a letter, too,” I said. “Is this it?”
“It is.” He sounded wary, as though not wanting me to touch it, and I drew
back my hand. He set down the piece of cheese he’d been eating, though, and
nodded at it. “Ye can read it, Sassenach. If ye like.”
“Is it disturbing news?” I asked, hesitating. After the emotional upheavals
of Marsali’s letter, I didn’t want to ruin the peace of the summer night with
something that could wait ’til morning.
“Nay, not really. It’s from Joshua Greenhow—ye recall him, from
Monmouth?”
“I do,” I said, feeling momentarily dizzy.
I had been stitching a wound in Corporal Greenhow’s forehead when I’d
been shot during the battle, and his appalled face, my needle and ligature
dangling absurdly from his bloody forehead, was the last thing I saw as I fell.
It wouldn’t be stretching things to say that what happened next was the worst
physical experience of my life, as I lay on the ground in a spinning world of
leaves and sky and overwhelming pain, bleeding to death and listening to a
courier from General Lee trying to get Jamie to abandon me in the mud.
I glanced at the letter, but the light was too poor for me to read it, even if
I’d had my spectacles to hand.
“What does he say?”“Ach, mostly just where he is and what he’s doing—which is none sae
much at the moment; just sitting about in Philadelphia. Though there is a bit
about General Arnold in there.” He nodded at the letter. “Joshua says he’s
married Peggy Shippen—ye’ll remember 
her,
 I expect—and he’s bein’ court-
martialed for speculating. Arnold, I mean, not Mr. Greenhow.”
“Speculating in what?” I asked, folding the letter. I remembered Peggy, all
right: an eighteen-year-old girl, beautiful and knowing it, flaunting herself
before the thirty-eight-year-old general like a trout fly. “I can see why he’d
marry 
her
—but why on earth would she want to marry 
him
?” Benedict
Arnold had considerable charm and animal magnetism, but he also had one
leg shorter than the other and—to the best of my knowledge—neither
property nor money.
Jamie gave me a patient look.
“He’s the military governor of Philadelphia, for one thing. And her family
are Tories. Ye ken what the Sons of Liberty did to her cousin—maybe she’s
thinking she’d rather they didna come back and burn her father’s house over
her head.”
“You have a point.” The night breeze was beginning to chill me through
my damp shift, and I shivered. “Give me that shawl, will you?”
“As for what Arnold’s speculating in,” Jamie added, wrapping the shawl
round my shoulders, “it could be anything. Most of the city will be for sale,
should the price be right.”
I nodded, looking out at the night, which spread its velvet cloak around us
—momentarily spangled by a shower of sparks that shot out of the chimney
on the other side of the house, fading to black before they touched down.
“I can’t stop Benedict Arnold,” I said quietly. “I couldn’t stop him, even if
he was here right in front of me this minute. Could I?” I turned my head to
him, appealing.
“No,” he said very softly, and took my hand. His was large and strong, but
as cold as my own. “Come lie wi’ me, Sassenach. I’ll warm ye and we’ll
watch the moon come down.”
SOMETIME LATER, WE lay curled together, naked in the cool night, happy
in the warmth of each other’s body. The moon was coming down in the west,
a sliver of silver that let the stars shine bright. The pale canvas rustled and
murmured overhead, the scents of fir and oak and cypress surrounded us, anda random firefly, distracted from its business by a passing 
wind current,
landed on the pillow by my head and sat for a moment, its abdomen pulsing
with a regular cool-green light.
“Oidhche mhath, a charaid,”
 Jamie said to it. It waved its antennae in an
amiable fashion and sailed off, circling down toward the distant flicker of its
comrades on the ground.
“I wish we could keep our bedroom like this,” I said wistfully, watching its
tail light disappear into the darkness below. “It’s so lovely, being part of the
night.”
“Nay so much when it rains.” Jamie lifted his chin toward our canvas
ceiling. “Dinna fash, though; I’ll have a solid roof on before snow flies.”
“I suppose you’re right,” I said, and laughed. “Do you remember our first
cabin, when it snowed and the roof leaked? You insisted on going up to fix it,
in
 the pelting blizzard—and stark naked.”
“Well, and whose fault was that?” he inquired, though without rancor. “Ye
wouldna let me go up in my shirt; what choice did I have?”
“You being you, none at all.” I rolled over and kissed him. “You taste like
apple pie. Is there any left?”
“No. I’ll go down and fetch ye a bite, though.”
I stopped him with a hand on his arm.
“No, don’t. I’m not really hungry and I’d rather just stay like this. Mm?”
“Mmphm.”
He rolled toward me, then scooted down the bed and lifted himself
between my thighs.
“What are you doing?” I demanded, as he settled comfortably into
position.
“I should think that was obvious, Sassenach.”
“But you’ve just been eating apple pie!”
“It wasna that filling.”
“That … wasn’t quite what I meant …” His thumbs were thoughtfully
stroking the tops of my thighs, and his warm breath was stirring the hairs on
my body in a very disturbing way.
“If ye’re afraid of crumbs, Sassenach, dinna fash—I’ll pick them off after
I’ve finished. Is it baboons ye said that do that? Or was it fleas they pick?”
“I don’t 
have
 fleas” was all I could manage in the way of a witty riposte,
but he laughed, settled his shoulders, and set to work.“I like it when ye scream, Sassenach,” he murmured a little later, pausing
for breath.
“There are children downstairs!” I hissed, fingers buried in his hair.
“Well, try to sound like a catamount, then …”
A LITTLE LATER, I asked, “How far is it from here to Philadelphia?”
He didn’t answer at once, but gently massaged my bottom with one hand.
Finally, he said, “Ken what Roger Mac said to me once? That to an
Englishman, a hundred miles is a long way; to an American, a hundred years
is a long time.”
I turned my head a little, to look at him. His eyes were fixed on the sky and
his face was tranquil, but I knew what he was saying.
“How long, then?” I asked quietly, and laid a hand over his heart, to feel
the reassurance of its slow, strong beating. He smelled of my own musk and
his, and a tremor from the last little while echoed up my spine. “How long do
we have, do you think?”
“Not long, Sassenach,” he said softly. “Tonight, it’s as far away as the
moon. Tomorrow it may be in the dooryard.” The hairs on his chest had risen,
whether from chilly air or the conversation, and he grasped my hand, kissed
it, and sat up.
“Have ye ever heard of a man called Francis Marion, Sassenach?”
I paused in the act of reaching for my shift. He’d spoken very casually, and
I glanced briefly at him. He had his back turned, and the scars on it were a
mesh of fine silver lines.
“I might have,” I replied, looking critically at the hem of my shift. Slightly
grubby, but it would do for one more day. I pulled it over my head and
reached for my stockings. “Francis Marion … Was he known as the Swamp
Fox?” I had vague memories of watching a Disney show by that name, and I
thought
 the character’s name had been something Marion …
“He isn’t yet,” Jamie said, turning to look over his shoulder at me. “What
d’ye know of him?”
“Very little, and that only from a television show. Though Bree could
probably still sing the theme song—er, that’s music that was played at the
beginning of each … er, performance.”
“The same music each time, ye mean?” A brow cocked with interest.“Yes. Francis Marion … I recall him being captured by a British redcoat
and tied to a tree in one episode, so he probably was a …” I stopped dead.
“Now,” I said, with that odd qualm of dread and awe that always came
when I ran into one of Them. First Benedict Arnold, and now … “Francis
Marion is … 
now,
 you mean.”
“So Brianna says. But she didna remember much about him.”
“Why are you interested in him, particularly?”
“Ach.” He relaxed, back on firmer ground. “Have ye ever heard of a
partisan band, Sassenach?”
“Not unless you mean a political party, and I’m quite sure you don’t.”
“Like Whigs and Tories? No, I don’t.” He picked up the jug of wine,
poured a cup, and handed it to me. “A partisan band is much like a band o’
mercenaries, save that they mostly dinna work for money. Something like a
private militia, but a good deal less orderly in its habits.”
I’d seen a good many militia companies during the Monmouth campaign,
and this made me laugh.
“I see. What does a partisan band do, then?”
He poured a cup of his own and lifted it to me in brief toast.
“Apparently they roam about, troubling Loyalists, killing freed slaves, and
in general bein’ a burr under the saddle of the British army.”
I blinked. Walt Disney had apparently decided to omit a few things from
the 1950s version of the Swamp Fox, and no wonder.
“Killing freed slaves? Whatever for?”
“The British are in the habit o’ freeing slaves who undertake to join the
army. So Roger Mac says. Apparently Mr. Marion took—will take?—
exception 
to this.” He frowned. “I think he’s maybe no doing it yet. I’ve not
heard of any such thing, at least.”
I took a mouthful of the wine. It was muscat wine, cool and sweet, and it
went down well on a night full of shadows.
“And where is Mr. Swamp Fox doing this?”
“Somewhere in South Carolina; I didna take notice of the details—I was
taken up by the notion, ken?”
“Of a partisan band, you mean?” I’d been uneasy since I pulled my
stockings on and had the absurd thought that perhaps I should take them off
again. No running away from this particular conversation, though.
The fingers of his right hand moved slowly against his thigh, the soundless
drumbeat of his thinking.“Aye,” he said at last, and closed his fingers into a fist. “It’s what
Benjamin Cleveland—ken, the great fat Overmountain bugger who tried to
threaten me?—was proposing to me—in a roundabout way, but he was clear
enough.” He looked down at me, eyes dark and serious in the dim flicker of
the night.
“I shallna fight again wi’ the Continental army,” he said. “I’ve had enough
of armies. And I dinna think General Washington would have me back, for
that matter.” He smiled at that, a little ruefully.
“From what Judah Bixby told me, you resigned your commission pretty
thoroughly. I’m sorry I missed it.” I smiled, too, with no less rue. I’d missed
it because at the moment Jamie had resigned his commission, writing his
resignation on the back of the messenger who’d come to summon him to
duty, I was lying on the ground at his feet, in the process of bleeding to death.
In fact, Judah—one of his young lieutenants, who had been present—told me
that Jamie had actually written his brief refusal with mud soaked through
with my blood.
“Aye,” he said dryly. “I didna hear what Washington thought about it, but
at least he didna send to have me arrested and hanged for desertion.”
“I imagine he’s had a few other things on his mind since then.” I hadn’t
been in any condition to hear—or care about—the progress of the war for
some time after becoming one of the final casualties of the Battle of
Monmouth. But it wasn’t possible to avoid for long. We’d lived in Savannah
when the British invaded and occupied the city—they were still there, so far
as I knew. But news, like water, runs downhill and was inclined to puddle in
the coastal cities with newspapers, shipping, and the brand-new postal
service. Hauling it up into the mountains was a slow, difficult process.
“Am I to deduce that you’re actually planning to start a partisan band of
your very own?” I asked, trying to keep it light.
“Oh,” he said, in a similar tone, “I thought I might. Nay so much for the
raiding and killing, mind—it’s been a long time since I rode in a raid,” he
added, with a distinct note of nostalgia. “For protection on the Ridge, though.
And then … as the war goes on, well … it might happen that a wee gang
might be of use here or there.” This last was added in such a casual manner
that I sat up straight and gave him a narrow look.
“A gang? You want to start a 
gang
?”
He looked surprised at that.
“Aye. Had ye not heard that word before, Sassenach?”“I have,” I said, and sipped from the cup of wine, in hopes of inducing
calm. “But I didn’t think 
you
 would have.”
“Well, of course I have,” he said, lifting a brow at me. “It’s a Scottish
word, no?”
“It is?”
“Aye. It’s just the men ye gang oot with, Sassenach. 
Slàinte.
” He took the
cup from me, lifted it in brief salute, and drained it.15
Which Old Witch?
MANDY AND I STOOD on either side of the table—she standing on the
bench—looking down into the small yellow bowl between us with intense
concentration.
“
How
 long, Grannie?”
“Ten minutes,” I replied, and glanced at the silver filigree chiming watch
that Jenny had lent me. “It’s only been two. You can sit down; it won’t
happen any faster just because we’re watching.”
“Jes it will.” She made this pronouncement with a calm confidence that
made me smile. Seeing that, she tossed her head and said, “Jemmy says you
gots to watch hard or it gets away.” Realizing that she’d taken her eyes off
the bowl, she thrust her head forward and glowered sternly into it, forbidding
the yeast to slither over the side and crawl away.
“I don’t think he meant yeast, sweetheart. Probably rabbits.” Still, I
couldn’t bring myself to turn away. I sniffed the air over the bowl, and
Mandy did the same, with great vigor.
“I’m sure the yeast is good,” I said. “It smells … yeasty.”
“YEEeeestee,” she said, nodding agreement and snorting.
“If it wasn’t still active—still good—” I explained, “it would smell bad.”
I’d wait the full ten minutes, so I could show her the foam that active yeast
makes when you mix it with warm sugar-water, but I was sure in my own
mind that the yeast was all right—and felt relieved on that account. One
could
 make raised biscuits with soda ash, but it was a good deal more
complicated.
“We’ll put some of the yeast in milk,” I said, spooning a large dollop from
the small crock in which I kept the starter into a clean one. “To make more
for next time.”
Jamie’s head appeared in the doorway.“Will ye lend me the wee lass for a minute, Sassenach?”
“Yes,” I replied promptly, grabbing Mandy’s hand an inch away from the
full—and open—sack of flour on the table. “Grandpa needs you to help him,
sweetheart.”
“Okay,” she said affably, and stuffed one of the raisin cookies we’d made
earlier into her mouth before I could stop her. “Whaffoont, Gmp?”
“I need ye to sit on something for a moment.” Jamie’s long, straight nose
twitched at the scent of butter and raisins, and his hand snaked out toward the
tray.
“All right,” I said, resigned. “
One.
 But eat it in here, for God’s sake; if the
boys see you with that, they’ll be in here like a swarm of locusts.”
“Wasslocst?”
“Mandy! Have you got 
another
 cookie in your mouth?”
Mandy’s eyes bulged as she made a heroic effort and swallowed most of
what was in her mouth.
“No,” she said, spraying crumbs. Jamie finished his own cookie and
swallowed, somewhat more neatly.
“That’s good, Sassenach,” he said, nodding at the tray. “Ye’ll make a
decent cook yet.” He grinned at me, took Mandy by the hand, and headed for
the door.
Lacking anything like a cookie jar—could I make one? I wondered.
Doubtless Brianna could, once she’d resurrected her kiln—I shoveled the
fresh cookies into the smaller kettle and put a large plate on top, then picked
up two of the big river stones we kept by the hearth to use as bed warmers
when the truly cold weather came and put them on top of the plate. It
wouldn’t deter the boys, but it would keep insects and—maybe—marauding
raccoons out. The kitchen walls were sound, but there was no glass in most of
the windows as yet.
I gazed thoughtfully at the kettle for a bit, envisioning the possibilities, and
then lugged it down the hall to the surgery, where I shut it up in the cupboard
where I kept distilled spirits, bottles of saline solution, and other items
unlikely to attract anyone’s interest. I heard Jamie and Mandy out on the
front porch, talking, and went to the front door to see what they were up to.
Jamie was on his knees, scraping the wood of what was clearly meant to be
a toilet seat—Mandy-sized. “Try that,” he said, sitting back on his heels. “Sit
on it, I mean.”
Mandy giggled, but did.“Whatsis for, Grampa?”
“Ken the wee mouse that got into your room last week?”
“Jes. You caughts it in your hand. Did it bites you, Grampa?” she asked
with sympathy.
“Nay, 
a leannan,
 it ran up my sleeve and jumped out my collar and made
off across the landing and into our room and hid under your grannie’s good
shoes. D’ye no remember that?”
Her small brow furrowed in concentration.
“Jes. You scweamed.”
“Aye. Well, now and again we have wee mice—and other wee beasties—
who run to hide in the privy, if something’s frightened them outside. Now,
such things mostly willna hurt ye”—he raised a finger at her—“but they
might give ye a start. And if one does, I dinna want ye to loose your hold and
fall down through the hole into the privy.”
“Eeeeyewww!” Mandy said, giggling.
“Dinna laugh,” Jamie said, smiling. “Your uncle William fell into a privy
some years ago, and wasna best pleased about it.”
“Who’s Unca Willam?”
“Your mam’s brother. Ye’ve no met him yet.”
Mandy’s small black brows drew together in a frown.
He glanced briefly up at me and lifted a shoulder in a half shrug. “Nay
point in not talkin’ about him,” he said to me. “Likely we’ll see him again,
before too long.”
“Sure about that, are you?” I said dubiously. True, there hadn’t been any
open acrimony the last time Jamie and William had met in the flesh, but there
hadn’t been any indication that William had reached a sense of resignation
regarding the circumstances of his birth, either.
“I am,” Jamie said, eyes on the hole he was drilling. “He’ll come to see
about Frances.”
I heard a tiny intake of breath behind me and glanced round to see Fanny,
who had come down the trail from the garden, a basket full of greenery on
her arm. Her lovely face had gone pale and her eyes quite round, fixed on
Jamie.
“Will he—you think he’ll … come?” she said. “Here? To see me?” Her
voice rose and cracked a little on the last word.
Jamie looked at her for a moment over his shoulder, then nodded.
“I’d come back, Frances,” he said simply. “So will he.”I WENT BACK to the kitchen to check the yeast. Sure enough, there was a
dirty-looking foam on the surface of the water—and the watch indicated that
it had been eleven minutes. Checking the ingredients for the biscuits, though,
I discovered that some miscreant had eaten all the butter from the kitchen
crock and we had no lard. No one else was in the house; Jamie and Mandy
were still chatting on the porch. Time enough for me to nip up to the
springhouse and fetch enough cream to churn more butter while the biscuit
dough was rising.
I was making my way slowly along the path from the springhouse,
carrying two heavy pails of cream-laden milk, when I saw a woman
approaching the house. She was tall, with a determined step, and wore a
black dress with a broad-brimmed straw hat that she held with one hand to
prevent it sailing away on the breeze.
Jamie had disappeared, probably to fetch a tool, but Mandy was still on the
porch, sitting on her new toilet seat and singing to Esmeralda. She paid no
attention to the woman—a more elderly lady than I had thought from her
stick-straight posture and easy gait; closer to, I could see the lines in her face,
and the gray hair showing at her temples beneath the cap she wore under her
hat.
“Where is your father, child?” she demanded, stopping in front of Mandy.
“I dunno,” Mandy replied. “This is Esmeralda,” she said, holding up her
doll.
“I wish to speak with your father.”
“Okay,” Mandy replied amiably, and resumed singing. “Ferra JACuh,
Ferra JACuh, dormi 
vooo
 …”
“Stop that,” the woman said sharply. “Look at me.”
“Why?”
“You are a very impertinent child and your father should beat you.”
Mandy went very red in the face and scrambled to her feet, standing on her
new seat.
“You go away!” she said. “I fwush you down the toilet!” She slapped her
hand at the air, miming a handle. “WOOOSH!”
“What in the name of perdition do you mean by that, you wicked child?”
The woman’s face was growing rather red, too. I had stopped in fascination,
but now set down the buckets, feeling that I had better take a hand before
things escalated. Too late.“I put you in the toilet and I fwush you like POOP!” Mandy shouted,
stamping her feet. Quick as a snake, the woman’s hand shot out and cracked
against Mandy’s cheek.
There was a split second of shocked silence and then a number of things
happened at once. I lunged toward the porch, tripped over one of the buckets,
and fell flat on the path in a deluge of milk, Mandy let out a shriek that could
have been heard as far as the wagon road, and Jamie popped out of the front
door like the Demon King in a pantomime.
He grabbed Mandy up in one arm, leapt off the porch, and was nose-to-
nose with the woman before I had even got to my knees.
“Leave my house,” he said, in the sort of calm voice that made it clear the
only other option was instant death.
To her credit, the lady wasn’t backing down. She snatched off her broad
black hat, the better to glare at him.
“The girl spoke rudely to me, sir, and I will not have it! Evidently no one
has sought to discipline her properly. No wonder.” Her gaze raked him
scornfully up and down. Mandy had stopped shrieking but was sobbing, her
face buried in Jamie’s shirtfront.
“Well, speaking of rudeness,” I said mildly, wringing out my wet apron. “I
don’t believe we have the honor of your acquaintance, do we?” I wiped a
hand on the side of my skirt and extended it. “I’m Claire Fraser.”
Her face didn’t lose its expression of outrage, but it froze. She didn’t say a
word but backed away from me, one step at a time. Jamie hadn’t moved,
other than to pat Mandy comfortingly; his face was as fixed and stark as hers.
She reached the edge of the path, stopped dead, and lifted her chin toward
Jamie.
“You are all,” she said evenly, sweeping her hat in an arc that
encompassed me, Jamie, Mandy, and the house, “undoubtedly going to Hell.”
With which pronouncement, she tossed a small package onto the porch,
turned her back upon us, and sailed away like a bird of ill omen.
“WHO THE DEVIL was that?” Jamie asked.
“Da Wicked Witch,” Mandy answered promptly. Her face was still red,
and her lower lip pushed out as far as it would go. “I 
hates
 her!”
“Quite possibly,” I said. I bent and gingerly picked up the small package. It
was wrapped in oiled silk, tied with an odd-looking cord, with a number ofextraneous knots. I lifted it to my nose and sniffed cautiously.
Even through the murky scent of the oiled silk, the bitter smell of quinine
was strong enough that I could taste it at the back of my mouth.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said, looking at Jamie in wonder. “She’s
brought me Jesuit bark.”
“Well, I did tell ye, Sassenach, that if ye mentioned your need of it to
Roger Mac and Brianna, likely ye’d get some. And in that case,” he said
slowly, looking at the direction in which our visitor had disappeared, “I think
perhaps yon woman is maybe Mrs. Cunningham.”16
Hound of Heaven
Two weeks later
I WAS SOMEWHERE DEEPER than dreams, and came to the surface like a
fish hauled out of water, thrashing and flapping.
“Whug—” I couldn’t remember where I was, who I was, or how to speak.
Then the noise that had roused me came again, and every hair on my body
stood on end.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Words and sense came back in a rush and I
flung out both hands, groping for some physical anchor.
Sheets. Mattress. Bed. I was in bed. But no Jamie; empty space beside me.
I blinked like an owl, turning my head in search of him. He was standing
naked at the glassless window, bathed in moonlight. His fists were clenched
and every muscle visible under his skin.
“Jamie!” He didn’t turn, or seem to hear—either my voice, or the thump
and agitation of other people in the house, also roused by the howling
outside. I could hear Mandy starting to wail in fear, and her parents’ voices
running into each other in the rush to comfort her.
I got out of bed and came up cautiously beside Jamie, though what I really
wanted to do was dive under the covers and pull the pillow over my head.
That 
noise …
 I peered past his shoulder, but bright as the moonlight was, it
showed nothing in the clearing before the house that shouldn’t be there.
Coming from the wood, maybe; trees and mountain were an impenetrable
slab of black.
“Jamie,” I said, more calmly, and wrapped a hand firmly round his
forearm. “What is it, do you think? Wolves? A wolf, I mean?” I 
hoped
 there
was only one of whatever was making that sound.He started at the touch, swung round to see me, and shook his head hard,
trying to shake off … something.
“I—” he began, voice hoarse with sleep, and then he simply put his arms
around me and drew me against him. “I thought it was a dream.” I could feel
him trembling a little, and held him as hard as I could. Sinister Celtic words
like 
ban-sithe
 and 
tathasg
 were fluttering round my head, whispering in my
ear. Custom said that a 
ban-sithe
 howled on the roof when someone in the
house was about to die. Well … it wasn’t on the bloody roof, at least, because
there wasn’t one …
“Are your dreams usually that loud?” I asked, wincing at a fresh ululation.
He hadn’t been out of bed long; his skin was cool, but not chilled.
“Aye. Sometimes.” He gave a small, breathless laugh and let go of me. A
thunder of small feet came down the hallway, and I hastily flung myself back
into his arms as the door burst open and Jem rushed in, Fanny right behind
him.
“Grandda! There’s a wolf outside! It’ll eat the piggies!”
Fanny gasped and clapped a hand to her mouth, eyes round with horror.
Not at thought of the piglets’ imminent demise, but at the realization that
Jamie was naked. I was shielding as much of him from view as I could with
my nightgown, but there wasn’t a great deal of nightgown and there was a
great deal of Jamie.
“Go back to bed, sweetheart,” I said, as calmly as possible. “If it’s a wolf,
Mr. Fraser will deal with it.”
“Moran taing,
 Sassenach,
”
 he whispered out of the corner of his mouth.
Thanks a lot. “Jem, throw me my plaid, aye?”
Jem, to whom a naked grandfather was a routine sight, fetched the plaid
from its hook by the door.
“Can I come and help kill the wolf?” he asked hopefully. “I could shoot it.
I’m better than Da, he says so!”
“It’s no a wolf,” Jamie said briefly, swathing his loins in faded tartan. “The
two of ye go and tell Mandy it’s all right, before she brings the roof down
about our ears.” The howling had grown louder, and so had Mandy’s, in
hysterical response. From the look on her face, Fanny was all set to join
them.
Bree appeared in the door, looking like the Archangel Michael, all flowing
white robe and ferocious hair, with Roger’s sword in her hand. Fanny let out
a small whimper at the sight.“What were ye planning to do wi’ that, 
a nighean
?” Jamie inquired,
nodding at the sword as he prepared to pull his shirt over his head. “I dinna
think ye can run a ghost through.”
Fanny looked goggle-eyed from Bree to Jamie, then sat down on the floor
with a thump and buried her head in her knees.
Jem was goggle-eyed, too. “A ghost,” he said blankly. “A 
ghost
 wolf?”
I glanced uneasily at the window. Jemmy was old enough to have heard of
werewolves … and the word conjured up an unpleasantly vivid picture in my
own mind, as a particularly desolate and penetrating moan pierced the
momentary silence.
“I told ye, it’s no a wolf,” Jamie said, sounding both cross and resigned.
“It’s a dog.”
“Rollo?” Jemmy exclaimed, in tones of horror. “He’s come 
back
?”
Fanny jerked her head up, wide-eyed, Bree made an involuntary noise, and
just as involuntarily I grabbed Jamie’s arm again.
“Jesus Christ,” he said, rather mildly under the circumstances, and
detached my grip. “I doubt it.” But I’d felt the wiry hairs on his arm bristling
at the thought, and my own skin rippled into gooseflesh.
“Stay here,” he said briefly, and turned toward the door. Callously
abandoning Bree to deal with the children’s conniptions, I followed him.
Neither of us had paused to light a candle, and the stairwell was dark and
cold as an actual well. The howling was muffled here, though, which was a
slight relief.
“You’re sure it’s a dog?” I said to Jamie’s back.
“I am,” he said. His voice was firm, but I heard him swallow, and a thread
of uneasiness tightened down my back. He turned left at the foot of the stair
and went into the kitchen.
I let out my breath as the stored warmth of the big room flowed over me.
The smoored hearth glowed faintly, showing the comfortably rounded, solid
shapes of cauldron and kettle, hanging in their places, the faint gleam of
pewter on the sideboard. The door was bolted. Despite the snug feeling of the
kitchen, my scalp stirred uneasily. The sound was louder now, rising and
falling in a rhythm much at odds with my own breathing. I couldn’t tell for
sure, but I thought it was louder, closer than it had been.
Jamie had thrust a faggot into the embers of the hearth; he pulled it out
now and blew carefully on the ragged end of the torch until a small flamerose from the glowing wood. His frown relaxed as the fire took, and he
smiled briefly at me.
“Dinna fash, 
a nighean,
” he said. “It’s no but a dog. Truly.”
I smiled back, but there was still an uncertain note in his voice, and I
quietly picked up the stone rolling pin as I followed him to the door. He lifted
the heavy bar and set it down, then lifted the latch without hesitation and
pulled the door open. The cold damp of a mountain night swept in, fluttering
my nightdress and reminding me that I ought to have put on my cloak. There
wasn’t time for that, though, and I bravely followed Jamie out onto the back
stoop.
The noise was louder out here, but suddenly seemed less agitated—it
settled into something like an owl’s cry. I scanned the hillside that rose
behind the house, but couldn’t see anything in the faint flicker of the torch.
Despite being so exposed, I felt steadier. Jamie might have his own doubts,
but he didn’t think this mysterious dog was dangerous, or he wouldn’t be
letting me stand here with him.
He sighed deeply, put two fingers in his mouth, and gave a piercing
whistle. The noise stopped.
“Well, come on, then,” he said, raising his voice a little, and gave a second,
softer whistle.
The woods were silent, and nothing happened for the space of a minute or
more. Then something moved. A blot detached itself from the tomato vines
around the privy and came slowly toward us. I heard feet coming down the
distant stairs and the muffled sound of voices, but all my attention was
focused on the dog.
For a dog it was; I caught a glimpse of golden eyes glowing in the dark,
and then it was close enough to see the shambling, long-legged gait and the
sinuous curve of backbone and tail.
“A hound?” I said.
“It is.” Jamie handed me the torch, sank onto his haunches, and stretched
out a hand. The dog—it was what they called a bluetick hound, with a heavy
dappling of blue-black spots over most of its coat—seemed to sink a little as
it came to him, head low.
“It’s all right, 
a nighean,
” he said to the dog, his voice low and husky.
“You 
know
 this dog?”
“I do,” he said, and I thought there was a note of regret in his voice. He
stroked her head, though, and she came up close, tail wagging tentatively.“She’s starving, poor thing,” I said. The hound’s ribs were visible even by
torchlight, her belly drawn up like a purse string.
“Have we a bit of meat, Sassenach?”
“I’m sure we do.” The others were in the kitchen but had stopped talking,
hearing our voices outside. They’d be out here in a moment.
“Jamie,” I said, and laid a hand on his bare back. “Where did you see this
dog before?”
I felt him swallow.
“I left her howling on her master’s grave,” he said quietly. “Dinna mention
it to the bairns, aye?”
THE DOG SEEMED visibly taken aback at sight of so many people flooding
out onto the back porch, and turned away as though to flee back into the
bushes. But she couldn’t bring herself to leave the smell of food, and kept
turning in circles, with small apologetic wags of her long, feathered tail.
At length, Jamie succeeded in quelling the hubbub and making everyone
go into the kitchen while he lured the hound close with small pieces of
leftover corn bread soaked in bacon grease. I stayed, hovering behind him
with the torch. The hound came willingly for the food, ducking her head
submissively, and when Jamie reached tentatively to scratch her behind the
ears, she let him, picking up the tempo of her wagging.
“There’s a good lass,” he murmured to her and gave her another bit of
bread. Despite her hunger, she took it delicately from his hand, not snapping.
“She’s not afraid of you,” I said quietly. I didn’t mean to ask him; never
would ask him. But that didn’t mean I didn’t wonder.
“No,” he said, just as softly. “No, she’s not. She only saw me bury him.”
“You’re not … bothered by her? Her coming here, I mean.” Plainly he 
had
been disturbed by the howling; who wouldn’t have been? But I couldn’t tell
now; his face was calm in the flicker of the torchlight.
“No,” he said, and glanced over his shoulder to be sure the children were
out of earshot. “I was, when I saw her—but …” His greasy hand paused,
resting for a moment on the dog’s rough coat. “I think it’s maybe absolution
—that she should ha’ come to me.”
INSIDE, THE DOG ate ravenously, but with an odd delicacy, nibbling up the
scraps of bread and meat with tiny darts of her head. It didn’t seem quite
right, somehow, and I began to watch more closely. The children were
entranced, taking turns to hold bits of food in their palms for her to take, but I
saw Jamie frown slightly, watching.
“There’s summat amiss with her mouth, I think,” he said after a moment.
“Shall we have a look?”
“Oh, let her finish eating, please, Mr. Fraser,” Fanny said, looking up at
him, earnest. “She’s 
so
 hungry!”
“Aye, she is,” he said, squatting down beside them. He ran a hand gently
down the dog’s knobbly backbone and her tail moved briefly, but her whole
attention was focused on the food. “Why is she starving, I wonder?”
“Why?” I asked. I glanced at him, careful what I said. “Perhaps she’s lost
her master.”
“Aye, but she’s a hound. She can hunt for herself—and it’s summer;
there’s food everywhere. Master or no, she shouldna be in this case.”
Curious, I got down on my knees and looked closely. He was right; she
was gulping the small bites of food, simply swallowing, with little or no
mastication. That might be her personal habit, or perhaps any dog would do
that with small bits of food like this, but … there 
was
 something wrong.
Something not quite a wince, but …
“You’re right,” I said. “Let her finish, and I’ll have a look.”
The hound polished off the last of the scraps, sniffed hungrily for more—
though by now her stomach was visibly distended—then lapped water and,
after a glance at the assembled company, nosed Jamie’s leg and lay down
beside him.
“Bi sàmhach, a choin
 … 
”
 he said, running a light hand down her long
back. Her tail wagged gently and she let out a great sigh, seeming to melt into
the floorboards. “Well, then,” he said, in the same soft tones, “come and let
me see your mouth, 
mo nighean gorm,
” The dog looked surprised but didn’t
resist as he rolled her onto her side.
“She 
is
 blue, isn’t she?” Fanny crawled closer, fascinated, and put out a
tentative hand, though she didn’t quite touch the dog.
“Aye, they call this kind a bluetick hound—they’re the color o’ mattress
ticking. Let her smell your fingers, lass, so as she kens who ye are. Then just
move slow, but she seems a friendly bitch.”
Fanny blinked at the word, and glanced at Jamie.“Have you never had a dog, Fanny?” Bree asked, seeing this little byplay.
“No,” Fanny replied uncertainly. “I mean … I remember a dog. From
when I was very little. It—he—I remember petting him.” Her hand touched
the dog’s back, and the hound’s tail stirred. “It was on the ship. I sat under
the big sail when the weather was good and he’d come and thit—sit—with
me and let me pet him.”
Bree exchanged a quick glance with Roger, who was on the settle, holding
Amanda, half asleep.
“The ship,” she said to Fanny, her voice light and casual. “You were on a
ship. Before you came to Philadelphia?”
Fanny nodded, only half paying attention. She was watching me as I ran a
finger along the black inner lip, lifting it away from the dog’s teeth. The
gums were all right, so far as I could see by firelight—not bleeding, maybe a
little pale, maybe not. It was common to find parasites in dogs, and that could
cause pale gums from internal blood loss, but I didn’t know of any parasitic
infections that occurred 
in
 the mouth …
Jem had sat down on the floor with us and was scratching the dog behind
the ears with a practiced hand.
“Like this, Fanny,” he said. “Dogs like to have their ears scratched.” The
dog sighed in bliss and relaxed a little, letting me open her mouth. The teeth
were good, very clean—
“Why do people say ‘clean as a hound’s tooth’?” I asked, feeling the
angles of her jaw, the temporomandibular joints—no apparent tenderness—
and the lymph nodes in the neck—not lumpy, but there 
was
 some swelling on
the side of the lower jaw and she winced and whined at my touch. “Her teeth
are
 clean, but do hounds really have cleaner teeth than other dogs?”
“Oh, maybe.” Jamie leaned forward to look in the dog’s mouth. “She’s a
young bitch—maybe nay more than a year or so. Hunting dogs that eat their
prey usually have clean teeth, though—from the bones.”
“Really.” I was only half listening. Turning the dog’s head a little more
toward the fire, I’d seen the shadow of something. “Jamie—can you bring a
candle or something closer here? I think she has something stuck between her
teeth.”
“Were your parents with you, Fanny?” Roger’s voice was quiet, barely
pitched above the crackle of the fire. “On the ship?” Fanny’s hand stopped
for a moment, resting on the dog’s head, but then resumed scratching, more
slowly.“I fink so,” she said, hesitant.
The candle flame wavered as Jamie glanced at Fanny, then steadied.
“Yes, there it is!” It was a small chip of bone, wedged tightly between the
dog’s lower premolars. It was evidently sharp; the gum had been cut and was
swollen and spongy-looking around the site of the injury. I pressed gently and
the dog whimpered and tried to pull her head away.
“Jemmy, run to the surgery and fetch me the little first-aid box—you know
the one?”
“Sure, Grannie!” He hopped up and made off into the darkness of the front
hall without a qualm.
“Will she be all right, Mithuth—Mrs. Fraser?” Fanny leaned forward
anxiously, trying to see.
“I think so,” I said, trying to wiggle the bone chip with my thumbnail. The
dog didn’t like it, but didn’t snarl or offer to bite. “She has a bit of bone stuck
between her teeth, and it’s made her mouth sore, but if it hasn’t made an
abscess under the tooth … You can let her go for a minute, Jamie. I can’t get
it out ’til Jem comes back with my forceps.”
Released, the dog leapt up, shook herself vigorously, and then shot off,
rushing down the hall after Jem. Fanny rose up on her knees, but before she
could get up altogether, the dog came roaring back, paws thundering on the
wooden floor. She let out an excited bark at seeing us, ran around the room 
in
circles, and finally leapt on Fanny, knocking her sideways, then stood over
her, panting happily and wagging.
“Get off!” Fanny said, giggling as she squirmed out from under the dog.
“You thilly thing.” I smiled and, glancing at Jamie, saw him smiling, too.
Fanny laughed with the boys, but seldom otherwise.
“Here, Grannie!” Jem dropped the first-aid box on my lap, then dropped to
his knees and started boxing with the dog, feinting slaps to one side of her
face and then the other. The hound panted happily and made little wuffs,
darting her head at Jem’s hands.
“She’ll nip ye, Jem,” Jamie said, amused. “She’s quicker than you are.”
She was, and she did, though not hard. Jem yelped, then giggled. “Thilly
thing,” he said. “Shall we call her Thilly?”
“No,” said Fanny, giggling, too. “That’s a thilly name.”
“That poor dog will never get her mouth taken care of if the lot of you
don’t stop stirring her up,” I said severely—for Brianna and Jamie werelaughing, too. Roger was smiling but not laughing, not wanting to wake
Mandy, now sound asleep on his shoulder.
Bree calmed the incipient riot by going to the pie safe and extracting half
of a large dried-apple pie, which she distributed to everyone, including a
small piece of crust to the dog, who wolfed it happily.
“All right.” I swallowed the last flaky, cinnamon-scented bite of my own
slice, dusted crumbs off my fingers—the dog promptly snuffled them up off
the floor—and laid out my small splinter-forceps, my smallest tenaculum, a
square of thick gauze, and—after a moment’s thought—the bottle of honey-
water, the mildest antibacterial I had. “Let’s go, then.”
Once we’d got the dog immobilized on her side—no easy matter; she
writhed like an eel, but Jem flung himself on top of her back half and Jamie
pressed her down with one hand on her shoulder and one on her neck—it
took no more than a couple of minutes to work the bone chip loose, with
Fanny carefully holding the candle so as not to drip wax on me or the dog.
“There!” I held it up in the forceps, to general applause, then tossed it into
the fire. “Now just a bit of cleanup …” I pressed the gauze over the gum,
firmly. The dog whined a little but didn’t struggle. A small amount of blood
from the lacerated gum, and what might be a trace of pus—hard to tell, by
candlelight, but I brought the gauze to my nose and couldn’t detect any scent
of putrefaction. Meat scraps, apple pie, and dog breath, but no noticeable
smell of infection.
Once the bone chip was out, interest in my activities waned, and the
conversation turned back to dog names. Lulu, Sassafras, Ginny, Monstro (this
from Bree, and I looked up and met her eye with a smile, visualizing the
toothy whale from Disneyland as plainly as she did), 
“Seasaidh
 …
”
Jamie didn’t take part in the naming controversy, but he did—for the first
time—stroke the dog’s head gently. Did he already know what her name
was? I wondered. I rinsed the gum well with the honey-water—the dog
lapped and swallowed, even lying down—but most of my attention was on
Jamie.
“I left her howling on her master’s grave.”
 Something too faint to be a
shiver ran over me, and I felt the hairs on my forearms lift, stirring in the
warm draft 
from the fire. I was morally sure that Jamie had 
put
 the dog’s
master in his grave—and that I was the unwilling cause of it.
His face was calm now, shadowed by the fire. Whatever he might be
thinking, nothing showed. And his hand was gentle on the dog’s spotted fur.“
Absolution,”
 he’d said.
“What was your dog’s name, Fanny?” Jem said, behind me. “The one you
had on the ship.”
“Ssspotty,” she said, making an effort with the “s.” It was only a few
months since I had clipped her tongue-tie, and she still struggled with some
sounds. “He had a white spot. On his nose.”
“We could call this one Spotty, too,” Jem offered generously. “If you want.
She’s got lots of spots. Lots of spots,” he repeated, giggling at the rhyme.
“Lots and lots of spots and spots.”
“Now 
you’re
 a thilly thing,” Fanny said to him, laughing.
“Maybe you should wait and see if your grandda means to keep her, Jem,”
Roger said. “Before you give her a name.”
Plainly, the possibility that we might not keep the dog hadn’t entered the
children’s heads, and they were aghast at the notion.
“Oh, please, Mr. Fraser!” Fanny said, urgent. “I’ll feed her, I promise I
will!”
“And I’ll take the ticks out of her fur, Grandda!” Jemmy put in. “Please,
please, can’t we keep her?”
Jamie’s eyes met mine, and his mouth turned up a little at one side—in
resignation, I thought, rather than humor.
“She came to me for help,” he said to me. “I canna very well turn her
away.”
“Then maybe you should name her, Da,” Bree put in, quelling Jem’s and
Fanny’s exhibitions of relieved delight. “What would you call her?”
“Bluebell,” he said without hesitation, surprising me. “It’s a good Scottish
name—and it fits her, aye?”
“Bwoo—Bu
lu
bell.” Fanny stroked the dog’s back, and the long plumed
tail moved lazily to and fro. “Can I call her Bluey? For short?”
Jamie did laugh then, and rose slowly to his feet, knees cracking from
kneeling on the boards for so long.
“Call her anything she’ll answer to, lass. But for now, she needs her bed,
and so do I.”
The children coaxed the newly christened Bluebell to come with them,
offering more bits of piecrust, and the adults began to gather ourselves,
settling for bed. There was a momentary silence as Bree took Mandy from
Roger, and as I knelt to smoor the hastily stirred-up fire again, I heard Jem’s
and Fanny’s voices on the stair landing.“What happened to your dog, Spotty?” Jem asked, the question distant but
clear. Fanny’s answer was just as clear, and I saw Jamie’s head turn sharply
toward the open door as he heard it.
“The bad men threw him into the sea,” she said. “Can Bluey sleep with me
tonight? You can have her tomorrow.”17
Reading by Firelight
THE FRAMING FOR THE second story was done. It would be some time
yet before it was completely walled in and a roof put on, but his nights of
cool sleeping under the naked stars with Claire were numbered. Jamie felt a
slight pang of regret at the thought, but this was at once eclipsed by the cozy
vision of them sleeping in a featherbed before a warm hearth, three months
hence, the shutters closed against howling wind and plastering snow.
He sank slowly into the big chair by the fire, half enjoying the pain as his
joints relaxed, both mind and knees knowing that the bliss of rest was at
hand. The household was abed, but Claire had gone to a birthing, near the
bottom of the cove. He missed her, but it was a pleasant pain, like the stretch
in his backbone. She would be back, likely tomorrow. For now, he had a
good fire warming his feet, a glass of soft red wine, and books to hand. He
took the spectacles from his pocket, unfolded them, and settled them on his
nose.
The house’s entire library stood in two modest piles on the table beside his
wineglass. A small Bible bound in green cloth, very much the worse for
wear. He touched it gently, as he did every time he saw it; it was an old
companion—a friend that had seen him through many bad times. A coverless
copy of 
Roxana: The Fortunate Mistress …
 he’d best take that one up to the
bedroom; Jem hadn’t shown any interest in it yet, but the lad could certainly
read well enough to make out what it was about if he did.
A not-bad copy of Mr. Pope’s translation of 
The Odyssey
—maybe he’d
read a bit of that with Jem; he’d likely find the ships and monsters interesting,
and it would be an excuse to cram a bit of Latin into the lad’s head while they
were about it. 
Joseph Andrews …
 a waste of paper, that one; he’d maybe
trade it to Hugh Grant, who liked silliness. 
Manon Lescaut,
 in French and afine morocco binding. He frowned briefly at that one; he’d not opened it.
John Grey had sent it to him, before …
He grunted irritably and, on impulse, took the book at the bottom of the
stack—Mandy’s big bright-orange 
Green Eggs and Ham.
 The color, the title,
and the comical beast on the cover made him smile, and a few minutes with
Sam-I-Am eased his temper.
The thump of steps coming down the stairs made him sit up, but it was
only Bluebell, who padded up to him, tail wagging gently, sniffed him in case
he had any food about his person, gave that up, and went to stand by the back
door in a meaningful manner.
“Aye, 
a nighean,
” he said, opening the door for her. “Look out for
painters.” She vanished into the night with a swipe of her tail, but he stood
for a moment, looking out and listening to the dark.
It was quiet, save for the trees talking among themselves, and he stepped
outside and stood looking up at the stars, letting go of the lingering
annoyance roused by 
Manon Lescaut
 and letting their peace come into him.
Took a deep breath of the fresh piney air and let it out slowly.
“Aye, I forgive ye, ye bloody wee bugger,” he said to John Grey, and felt
the lightening of soul he’d been unconsciously seeking.
A rustling in the bushes by the privy heralded the dog’s return. He waited
for her to finish her industrious sniffing and held the door open for her. She
passed him with a brief wag of her tail and bounded softly up the stairs.
He felt more settled in himself, and walked a little way by starlight to the
red cedar that grew near the well, to drink water and pluck a twig. He liked
the smell of the berries—Claire told him they were used to flavor gin, which
he didn’t care for, but the scent was fine.
Inside again, the door bolted and the fire poked up, he went back to the
books, the cedar twig making a small fresh smell for him that went well with
the wine. He took up one of the small thick books about Hobbits that Bree
had brought for him, but even with his spectacles, the print was dense enough
to make him feel tired looking at it, and he put it down again, eyes seeking
something else in the pile.
Not 
Manon,
 not yet. His forgiveness was sincere, but distinctly grudging,
and he kent well enough it would need to be repeated a few times before he
spoke to John Grey again.
Nay doubt it was the thought of reluctant forgiveness that made him pick
up the book Brianna had brought for herself—Frank Randall’s book. 
TheSoul of a Rebel.
“Mmphm,” he said, and drew it out of the stack, turning it over in his
hands. It felt strange; a good weight and size, sound binding, but the paper
cover was printed with a very peculiar tartan background in pink and green,
on which there was a square of pale green with a decent wee painting of the
basket hilt of a Scottish broadsword and a bit of the blade. Below the square,
the subtitle, 
The Scottish Roots of the American Revolution.
 What made it feel
odd, though, was the fact that it was wrapped in a transparent sheet of
something that wasn’t paper, slick under his touch. Plastic, Brianna had told
him when he asked. He kent the word, all right, but not with this meaning. He
turned the book over to look at the photograph—he was becoming halfway
accustomed to photographs, but it still took him back a bit to see the man
looking out at him like that.
He pressed his thumb firmly over Frank Randall’s nose, then lifted it. He
tilted the book from side to side, letting light from the fire play over the
plastic covering. He’d made a very faint smudge, not visible if you were
looking straight at it.
Suddenly ashamed of this childishness, he erased the mark with his
shirtsleeve and set the book on his knee. The photograph looked calmly up at
him through dark-rimmed spectacles.
It wasn’t only the writer that disturbed him. Hearing bits of what was to
come from Claire and Bree and Roger Mac frequently alarmed him, but their
physical presence was reassuring; whatever horrible events were to happen,
many folk had survived them. Still, he kent well enough that while none of
his family would ever lie to him, they did often temper what they said to him.
Frank Randall was another thing: an historian, whose account of what was
going to happen in the next few years would be …
Well, he didn’t ken exactly 
what
 it might be. Frightening, perhaps.
Upsetting, maybe. Maybe reassuring … in spots.
Frank Randall wasn’t smiling, but he looked pleasant enough. Lines in his
face that cut deep. Well, the man had been through a war.
“To say nothing of bein’ married to Claire,” he said aloud, and was
surprised at the sound of his voice. He picked up his wineglass and took a
mouthful, holding it for a moment, but then swallowed and turned the book
over.
“Well, I dinna ken if I forgive ye or not, Englishman,” he murmured,
opening the cover and taking a cleansing breath of cedar. “Or you me, butlet’s see what ye have to say to me, then.”
HE WOKE THE next morning to an empty bed, sighed, stretched, and rolled
out of it. He’d thought he’d dream about the events described in Randall’s
book, but he hadn’t. He’d dreamed, rather pleasantly, about Achilles’s ships,
and would have liked to tell Claire about it. He shook off the remnants of
sleep and went to wash, making a mental note of some of the things he’d
dreamed so as not to forget them. With luck, she’d be home before supper.
“Mr. Fraser?” A delicate rap on the door, Frances’s voice. “Your daughter
says breakfast is ready.”
“Aye?” He wasn’t smelling anything of a savory nature, but “ready” was a
relative term. “I’m coming, lass. 
Taing.
”
“Tang?” she said, sounding startled. He smiled, pulled a clean shirt over
his head, and opened the door. She was standing there like a field daisy,
delicate but upright on her stem, and he bowed to her.
“Taing,”
 he said, pronouncing it as carefully as he could. “It means
‘thanks’ in the Gaelic.”
“Are you sure?” she said, frowning slightly.
“I am,” he assured her. “
Moran taing
 means ‘thank you very much,’
should ye want something stronger.”
A faint flush rose in her cheeks.
“I’m sorry—I didn’t really mean are you th—sure. Of course you are. It’s
only that Germain told me ‘thank you’ is ‘tabag leet.’ Is that wrong? He
might have been practicing on me, but I didn’t think so.”
“Tapadh leat,”
 he said, restraining the urge to laugh. “No, that’s right; it’s
only that 
moran taing
 is … casual, ye might say. The other’s when ye want to
be formal. If someone’s saved your life or paid your debts, say, ye’d say,
‘Tapadh leat,’
 where if they passed ye the bread at table, ye’d say, 
‘Taing,’
aye?”
“Aye,” she said automatically, and flushed deeper when he smiled. She
smiled back, though, and he followed her down the stairs, thinking how oddly
engaging she was; she was reticent, but not shy at all. He supposed one
couldn’t be shy, if raised with the expectation of becoming a whore.
Now he could smell parritch—slightly scorched parritch. He wrinkled his
nose, adjusted his expression to one of stoic pleasantry, and went along to the
kitchen, casting an eye at the unfinished walls of his study and the barelyframed front room. He might get an hour at the study this afternoon, if he was
back in time from …
“Madainn mhath,”
 he said, pausing in the open space where the door
would be—next week, maybe—to greet the assembled members of his
family.
“Grandda!” Mandy scrambled off her bench, knocking her parritch bowl
into the milk jug. Brianna, barely sitting down, lunged forward and grabbed
it, just in time.
He caught Mandy and swung her up into his arms, smiling at Jem, Fanny,
Germain, and Brianna.
“Mam burnt the parritch,” Jem informed him. “But there’s honey, so you
don’t notice so much.”
“It’ll be fine,” he said, sitting down and setting Mandy on his knee. “The
honey’s no from Claire’s bees, is it? They’ll need still to settle a bit, aye?”
“Yes,” Brianna said, and pushed a bowl toward him, followed by milk jug
and honey pot. She was flushed herself, doubtless from the heat of the fire.
“This is part of Mama’s wages from setting Hector MacDonald’s broken leg.
Sorry about the porridge; I thought I could make it to the smoke shed and
back before it needed to be stirred again.” She nodded toward the hearth,
where slices of bacon were just beginning to sputter in the big spider.
“Where’s your man, lass?” he asked, tactfully ignoring her apology and
helping himself to a modest drizzle of honey.
“One of the MacKinnon kids came to fetch him, just after daybreak. You
were tired,” she added, seeing him frown at the thought that he hadn’t heard
the visitor. “And no wonder. Don’t worry,” she said quickly, “it wasn’t really
an emergency; old Grannie MacKinnon woke up dying again—that’s the
third time this month—and wanted a minister. Oh, the bacon!” She leapt up,
but Fanny had already moved to turn the sizzling slices and Jamie’s wame
contracted pleasantly at the savory smoke.
“Thank you, Fanny.” Bree sat back down and took up her spoon again.
“Mr. Fraser?” Fanny said, waving the smoke away from her eyes.
“Aye, lass?”
“How do you say ‘You’re welcome’ in Gaelic?”18
Distant Thunder
I FOUND A SHALLOW, gravelly spot in the creek and hastily wriggled out
of my apron and dress, trying not to breathe. Bar gangrenous limbs and long-
dead corpses, nothing smells worse than pig shit. 
Nothing.
Still holding my breath, I wadded the smeared garments into a loose ball
and dropped it into the shallows. I kicked off my shoes and waded in after it,
holding a couple of large rocks I had snatched up. The dress had already
begun to unwrap itself, spreading faded indigo swaths out over the gravel like
the shadow of a passing manta ray. I dropped a rock on it, and, spreading out
the canvas apron with my bare foot, weighted that down as well.
Crisis managed for the moment, I waded out a little farther and stood calf-
deep in the cold, rushing water, breathing gratefully.
Animal husbandry was not really my specialty—unless you wanted to
count Jamie and the children—but necessity makes veterinarians of us all. I
had been visiting young Elmo Cairns’s cabin to check on the progress of his
broken arm when his also-young and immensely pregnant pig began to show
signs of difficulty with her first farrowing. This was noticeable, as the pig had
been sprawled, her enormous sides heaving sporadically, on the floor at
Elmo’s feet, she being—as he explained—“summat of a pet.”
Elmo being incapacitated by his broken arm, I had done the necessary, and
while the result was gratifying—a 100 percent survival rate, and a healthy
litter of eight, six of them female (one of them mine, Elmo had assured me,
“if the sow doesna eat ’em all”)—I hadn’t thought I could make it all the way
home wearing the by-products.
It was a hot day, with that heavy stillness in the air that portends thunder,
and standing in cold water with cool air rising through my undergarments
was pleasant. I decided that removing my sweaty stays would make itpleasanter still, and was in the act of pulling these off over my head when I
heard a loud cough from the creek bank behind me.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” I said, jerking the stays off and whirling
round. “Who the bloody hell are you?”
There were two of them: gentlemen, by their rather inappropriate dress.
Not that I was in any position to put on airs about appropriate attire, but they
did have foxtails stuck in their silk stockings, mud clogged in the buckles of
their shoes, and smears of pine pitch on their broadcloth—and one had a
large rent in his coat that showed the yellow silk lining.
Both of them looked me over from (disheveled) head to (bare) foot, their
mouths slightly open and their gazes lingering on my breasts, which were
rather on display, the damp muslin of my shift having stuck to them and the
cool air off the water having stiffened my nipples. Inappropriate, forsooth …
I delicately plucked the muslin loose from my skin and dropped it, giving
them stare for stare.
The one with the rent in his coat recovered first, and nodded to me, a
cautious interest in his eyes.
“My name is Mr. Adam Granger and this”—nodding at his younger
companion—“is my nephew, Mr. Nicodemus Partland. Can you tell us the
way to Captain Cunningham’s house, my good woman?”
“Certainly,” I said, resisting the impulse to try to tidy my hair. “It’s that
way”—I pointed toward the northeast—“but it’s a good three miles. I’m
afraid you’ll be caught by the storm.”
They would be, too. A rising breath of air fluttered the leaves of the
willows along the creek, and a boil of dark-gray clouds was rising in the
west. 
You could see a mountain storm coming from quite a distance, but they
moved quickly.
Moved in part by the requirements of hospitality and in larger part by
curiosity, I waded ashore, scooping up my wet clothes.
“You’d better come down to the house,” I said to Mr. Granger as I wrung
out my clothes and folded them up in my stays. “It’s quite nearby and you
can shelter there until the storm passes. One of the boys can guide you to
Captain Cunningham’s place once the rain goes by; his cabin is rather
remote.”
They glanced at each other, up at the darkening sky, and then nodded as
one and prepared to follow me. I hadn’t liked the way Mr. Partland had eyed
my breasts and didn’t want him ogling my bottom while I walked, so Igestured them firmly before me onto the trail, pushed my wet feet into my
shoes, and set out for home, dripping.
I estimated Mr. Granger’s age at perhaps fifty, Partland younger, perhaps
in his mid-thirties. Neither was fat, but Nicodemus Partland was tall and
rangy, with the sort of eyes that looked past you even as they looked at you.
He kept glancing over his shoulder, as though to be sure I was still there.
We reached the house within twenty minutes, but the air had already begun
to smell of ozone and I could hear thunder rumbling in the distance.
“Welcome to New House, gentlemen,” I said, nodding toward the front
door. Jamie appeared on the threshold, holding Adso the cat, who leapt out of
his arms and hared past me, pursued by Bluebell, barking happily. She
skidded to a halt, seeing the strangers, and started barking at them, with
raised hackles and serious intent.
Jamie came down off the porch and took hold of the dog by the scruff of
her neck.
“That’ll do, lass,” he said to her, and with a gentle shake let her go. “Your
pardon, gentlemen.”
Mr. Partland had drawn back when Bluebell menaced them, and had a
hand on his pocket in a way suggesting that he might have a small pistol
therein. He didn’t take his eyes off the dog, even when Fanny came out,
summoned by Jamie, and coaxed her back into the house.
Mr. Granger, though, had no eyes for dogs. He was staring at Jamie. Jamie
noticed this, and offered his hand with a slight bow.
“James Fraser, your servant, sir.”
“I—that is—” Mr. Granger shook his head rapidly and took Jamie’s hand.
“Mr. Adam Granger, sir. Are you—are you not 
General
 Fraser?”
“I was,” Jamie said briefly. “And you, sir?” He turned to Partland, who
was now also examining him as he might a horse he meant to buy.
“Nicodemus Partland, your most obedient, sir,” Partland said, smiling, but
with a tone that suggested obedience was the last thing he intended. Or
respect, for that matter.
“Your, um”—Mr. Granger, belatedly recalling my presence, turned to look
at me—“woman suggested that we might find shelter from the storm here.
But if our presence is inconvenient …”
“Not at all.” Jamie’s mouth twitched slightly as he looked me over. “Allow
me to introduce my wife, sir—
Mrs.
 General Fraser.”
FANNY APPEARED 
IN the doorway, coming to see what Bluebell was
barking about now, with Brianna behind her. Jamie made the introductions,
then motioned the visitors into the house and raised a brow at Bree, who
nodded obligingly.
“My daughter will see to your needs, gentlemen. I’ll join ye shortly.”
He waited just long enough for them to go inside before turning to me.
“What the devil have ye been doing, Sassenach?” he hissed.
“Delivering pigs,” I said succinctly, and handed him the bundle of wet
clothing, from which the unmistakable scent of porcine excrement still oozed,
bearing witness to my story.
“Christ,” he said, holding the bundle out at arm’s length. “Frances, lass,
take this, will ye? Soak it in something—or must it be burnt?” he asked,
turning back to me.
“Soak them in cold water with soft soap and vinegar,” I said. “We’ll boil
them later. And thank you, Fanny.”
She nodded and took the bundle, nose wrinkled.
“Who are these men?” Jamie asked, jerking his chin toward the door where
Partland and Granger had disappeared. “And how the devil did ye come to be
in their company in nothing but your shift?”
“I was washing in the creek when they turned up,” I said, rather irritated. “I
didn’t invite them to join me.”
“No, of course not.” He took a breath and began to calm down. “I just
didna like the way the younger one was looking at ye.”
“Neither did I. As for who they are—” I began, but was interrupted by
Fanny, who was headed for the side yard and the laundry tub with Bluebell,
but turned round at this.
“The young one is an officer,” she said, and nodded in affirmation of her
observations. “They always think they can do anything they want.”
I stared after her, nonplussed, as she vanished.
“They don’t look like soldiers,” I said, with a shrug. “The older one called
me ‘my good woman,’ though. They probably thought I was your skivvy.”
“My what?” He looked startled, and then offended.
“Oh—it just means a cleaning woman,” I said, realizing that he’d leapt to a
not-unreasonable eighteenth-century interpretation of the meaning of
“skivvy.” “Anyway, they said they were looking for Captain Cunningham.
And as it was about to rain …”It was. The wind was moving through the grass and through leaves and
needles and twigs; the whole forest was breathing and the clouds had covered
more than half the sky, big, black, and dangerous with flickering lightning.
Brianna came out, holding a towel, and offered it to me.
“I put those men in your study, Da,” she said. “Is that all right?”
“Aye, fine,” he assured her.
“Wait, Bree,” I said, emerging from the towel as she turned to go. “Would
you and Fanny go down to the root cellar and fetch up some vegetables and
maybe … I don’t know, something sweet—jam, raisins … We’ll have to feed
them, whoever they are.”
“Sure,” she said. “You don’t know who they are?”
“Fanny says the young one is an officer,” Jamie said. “Beyond that—we’ll
see. Come along in, Sassenach,” he said, putting an arm about me to shepherd
me inside. “Ye need to get dry—”
“And clothed.”
“Aye, that, too.”
THE ROOT CELLAR wasn’t a long walk from the smoke shed, but it was on
the other side of the big clearing, and the wind, unobstructed by trees or
buildings, rushed them from behind, blowing their skirts out before them and
whipping Fanny’s cap off her head.
Brianna got a hand up and snatched the scrap of muslin as it whirled past.
Her own hair, unbound, was flailing round her face, and so was Fanny’s.
They looked at each other, half-blinded, and laughed. Then the first drops of
rain began to fall, and they ran, gasping and shrieking for the shelter of the
root cellar.
It was dug into the side of a hill, a rough wooden door framed in with
stacked stone on either side. The door stuck in its jamb, but Bree freed it with
a mighty jerk and they fell inside, damp-spotted but safe from the downpour
that now commenced outside.
“Here.” Still breathless, Brianna gave the cap to Fanny. “I don’t think it’ll
keep the rain out, though.”
Fanny shook her head, sneezed, giggled, and sneezed again.
“Where’s yours?” she asked, sniffing as she tucked her windblown curls
back under the cap.“I don’t like caps much,” Bree said, and smiled when Fanny blinked. “But
I might wear one for cooking or doing something splashy. I wear a slouch hat
for hunting, sometimes, but otherwise I just tie my hair back.”
“Oh,” Fanny said uncertainly. “I gueth—
guess
 that’s why Mrs. Fraser—
your mother, I mean—why she doesn’t wear them, either?”
“Well, it’s a little different with Mama,” Bree said, running her fingers
through her own long red hair to untangle it. “It’s part of her war with”—she
paused for a moment, wondering how much to say, but after all, if Fanny was
now part of the family, she’d learn such things sooner or later—“with people
who think they have a right to tell her how to do things.”
Fanny’s eyes went round.
“Don’t they?”
“I’d like to see anybody try,” Bree said dryly, and, having twisted her hair
into an untidy bun, turned to survey the contents of the cellar.
She felt a rush of relief and reassurance, seeing at once that a good three-
quarters of the shallow shelves were filled: potatoes, turnips, apples, yams,
and the bright-green ovoids of slowly ripening pawpaws. Two large, lumpy
burlap bags stood against the far wall, probably full of nuts of some kind
(though surely local nuts hadn’t ripened yet? Perhaps her parents had traded
for them …), and the cellar was filled with the sweet-wine scent of drying
muscats, hung in clusters from the low ceiling to crinkle into raisins.
“Mama’s been busy,” she said, automatically turning the potatoes on one
shelf as she selected a dozen to take. “I suppose you have, too,” she added,
smiling at Fanny. “You helped gather all of this, I’m sure.”
Fanny looked down modestly but glowed a little.
“I dug up the turnips and some of the potatoes,” she said. “There were a lot
growing in that place they call Old Garden. Under the weeds.”
“Old Garden,” Bree repeated. “Yes, I suppose so.” A shiver that had
nothing to do with the chill of the root cellar rose up her neck and contracted
her scalp. She’d heard about Malva Christie’s death in the garden. And the
death of her unborn child. Under the weeds, indeed.
She glanced sidelong at Fanny, who was twisting an onion off its braid, but
the girl showed no emotion about the garden; probably no one had told her
—
yet,
 Bree thought—about what had happened there, and why the garden
had been abandoned to the weeds.
“Should we take more potatoes?” Fanny asked, dropping two fat yellow
onions into the basket. “And maybe apples, for fritters? If it doesn’t stopraining, those men will stay the night. And we haven’t any eggs for
breakfast.”
“Good idea,” Bree said, quite impressed at Fanny’s housewifely
forethought. The remark turned her mind, though, to the mysterious visitors.
“What you said to Da—about one of the men being an officer. How did
you know that?” 
And how did Da know you
 would 
know something like that?
she added silently.
Fanny looked at her for a long moment, her face quite expressionless. Then
she seemed suddenly to have made up her mind about something, for she
nodded, as though to herself.
“I’ve seen them,” she said simply. “Lots of times. At the brothel.”
“At the—” Brianna nearly dropped the pawpaw she’d picked off the upper
shelf. Her mother had told her about Fanny’s past, but she hadn’t expected
Fanny to bring it up.
“Brothel,” Fanny repeated, the word clipped short. Bree had turned to look
at her; she was pale, but her eyes were steady under her cap. “In
Philadelphia.”
“I see.” Brianna hoped her own voice and eyes were as steady as Fanny’s,
and tried to speak calmly, in spite of the inner, appalled voice saying, 
Jesus
Lord, she’s only eleven or twelve now!
 “Did … um … Da—is that where he
found you?”
Fanny’s eyes welled quite suddenly with tears, and she turned hurriedly
away, fumbling with a shelf of apples.
“No,” she said in a muffled voice. “My—my sister … she … we … we
wan away togevver.”
“Your sister,” Bree said carefully. “Where—”
“She’th dead.”
“Oh, Fanny!” She’d dropped the pawpaw, but it didn’t matter. She grabbed
Fanny and held her tight, as though she could somehow smother the dreadful
sorrow that oozed between them, squeeze it out of existence. Fanny was
shaking, silently. “Oh, Fanny,” she said again, softly, and rubbed the girl’s
back as she would have done for Jem or Mandy, feeling the delicate bones
beneath her fingers.
It didn’t last long. After a moment, Fanny got hold of herself—Bree could
feel it happen, a stopping, a drawing-in of the flesh—and stepped back, out of
Bree’s embrace.“It’s all right,” she said, blinking fast to keep more tears from coming. “It’s
all right. She’s—she’s safe now.” She drew a deep breath and straightened
her back. “After—after it happened, William gave me to Mr. Fraser. Oh!” A
thought struck her and she looked uncertainly at Bree. “Do you—know about
William?”
For a moment, Bree’s mind was completely blank. 
William?
 But suddenly
the penny dropped, and she looked at Fanny, startled.
“William. You mean … Mr. Fraser’s … Da’s … son?” Saying the word
brought him to life; the tall young man, cat-eyed and long-nosed like her, but
dark where she was fair, speaking to her on the quay in Wilmington.
“Yes,” Fanny said, still a little wary. “I think—does that mean he’s your
brother?”
“Half brother, yes.” Brianna felt dazed, and bent to pick up the fallen fruit.
“You said he 
gave
 you to Da?”
“Yes.” Fanny took another breath and bent to pick up the last apple.
Standing, she looked Bree straight in the eye. “Do you mind?”
“No,” Bree said, softly, and touched Fanny’s tender cheek. “Oh, Fanny,
no. Not at all.”
JAMIE COULD SEE at once that the younger man was indeed a soldier. He
thought the older one was not. And while the younger man took care to defer
to Granger, Jamie thought that Partland had some ascendancy over the older
—and richer—man. 
Or at least he thinks he does,
 he thought, smiling
pleasantly as he poured wine for the visitors in his study. He didn’t much like
Partland and was inclined to think the feeling was mutual, though he didn’t
know why. Yet.
“Ye’ll stay ’til the morning, Mr. Granger?” he asked, with a wary glance at
the ceiling. “Night’s falling, and the storm has the feel of a settled rain about
it. Ye’ll not want to be feeling your way about the woods in the dreich dark.”
The rain had begun to patter above, and he felt the mingled pride of a man
with a sound ceiling built by himself, and the lingering fear that it might be
not quite as sound as he hoped.
“We will, General,” Partland answered, “and my uncle and I thank you for
your kind hospitality.” He lifted his cup in salute.
Granger looked somewhat taken back by this usurpation of his seniority,
but the men exchanged a look, and whatever intelligence passed betweenthem, it was effective. Granger relaxed, murmuring his own thanks.
“Ye’re very welcome, gentlemen,” Jamie said, sitting down behind his
desk with his own cup. He’d had to fetch a stool from the kitchen for
Partland, having only a single cane-bottomed chair for a guest in his study. At
least he’d got the room walled in, so there was a sense of snug privacy,
separated from the kitchen, where Claire—decently clad again—was
apparently beating a recalcitrant piece of tough venison into edibility with a
mallet.
“I must invite ye to call me Mr. Fraser, though,” he added, smiling to 
avoid
any sense of rebuke. “I resigned my commission following Monmouth, and
have no present association wi’ the Continental army.”
“Do you not, indeed?” Granger sat up a little, straightening his coat to hide
the tear. “That’s modest of you, sir. I have usually found that any man who’s
held a military post of any pretension clings to his title for life.”
Partland kept his face carefully blank; Jamie thought it was hiding a smirk,
and felt a flicker of annoyance, but dismissed it.
“I canna say but what many officers deserve to keep their titles, sir, as the
result of retirement following long and honorable service. I’m sure that’s the
case with your friend Captain Cunningham, is it not?”
“Well … yes.” Granger looked somewhat abashed. “I apologize, Mr.
Fraser, I meant no offense regarding your own choice in the matter of title.”
“None taken, sir. Have ye kent the captain for some time, then?”
“Why, yes, I have,” Granger said, relaxing a bit. “The captain greatly
obliged me some years ago, by rescuing one of my ships from a French
corsair, off Martinique. I called upon him with my thanks, and in the course
of conversation discovered that we held many opinions in common. We
became friends, and have kept up a correspondence for … gracious me, it
must be twenty years now, at least.”
“Ah. Ye’re a merchant, then?” That explained the yellow silk lining the
man’s coat, which had probably cost as much as the wardrobe for Jamie’s
entire household.
“Yes. In the rum trade, mostly. But the present war has caused
considerable difficulties, I’m afraid.”
Jamie made a noncommittal noise meant to indicate polite regret and a
disinclination to engage in political discourse. Mr. Granger appeared quite
willing to leave it at that, but Partland sat forward, putting his cup down on
the desk.“I trust you’ll pardon my impertinence … Mr. Fraser.” He smiled, without
showing his teeth. “It’s just my curiosity, to be sure. What was the cause of
your leaving Washington’s army, if I may ask?”
Jamie wanted to tell him he mightn’t, but he wanted to know things about
Partland, too, so answered equably.
“General Washington appointed me as an emergency measure, sir—
General Henry Taylor having died only a few days before the battle, and
Washington requiring someone with experience to lead General Taylor’s
militia companies. However, most of those companies were enlisted for only
three months, and their enlistment expired very shortly following Monmouth.
There was no longer any need for my services.”
“Ah.” Partland was regarding him quizzically, trying to decide whether to
say what he had in mind. He did say it, though, and Jamie was surprised to
find that he had been keeping a mental checklist, on which he now made a
mark next to the word “Reckless.” Right under “Greasy as Goose Fat.”
“But surely the Continental army could find continued use for a soldier of
your experience. From what I hear, they are scouring the armies of Europe
for officers, no matter what their experience or reputation.”
Jamie made the same noise, slightly louder. Granger made an English
version of the same thing, but Partland ignored them both.
“I had heard some talk—mere ill-natured gossip, I’m sure”—he waved a
hand dismissively—“to the effect that you had left the field of battle before
being relieved of your duty? And that this … contretemps? had somehow
resulted in your resignation.”
“Gossip is somewhat better informed in this case than it usually is,” Jamie
answered evenly. “My wife was badly wounded on the field—she is a
surgeon, and was caring for the casualties—and I resigned my commission in
order to save her life.”
And that’s all ye’re going to hear about it,
 a gobaire.
Granger cleared his throat again and looked reprovingly at his nephew,
who sat back and picked up his cup with a negligent air, though still with a
sidelong look. The muffled, regular blows of Claire’s mallet were audible
through the uninsulated wall, somewhat slower than Jamie’s heartbeat, which
had sped up noticeably.
Taking a deep breath to slow it down, he picked up the wine bottle,
weighing it. Half full; enough to keep them going ’til supper.“Would ye tell me something of the rum trade, sir?” he said, freshening
Granger’s cup. “I worked for a time in Paris, dealing mostly in wine, but with
a small trade in spirits as well. That was thirty-five years ago, though—I
imagine a few things have changed.”
The atmosphere in the study eased, and the mallet blows stopped.
Conversation became general and amiable. The roof wasn’t leaking. Jamie
relaxed for the moment, sipping wine. He was going to have to talk to Bobby
and Roger Mac about Captain Cunningham. Tomorrow.
BOBBY HIGGINS TURNED up on the doorstep just after noon the next day.
He was dressed in a clean shirt and breeches, with his good waistcoat and a
lace-trimmed neckcloth, which rather alarmed Jamie. This degree of
fastidiousness meant Bobby was worried about something and hoped to
placate the fury of the gods by means of plaited hair and starched cloth.
“Amy said Mrs. Goodwin told her that your sister said you wanted to
speak with me, sir,” he said at once. He bobbed his head anxiously, eyes
fixed on Jamie for any clue as to what might be coming.
“Och, that’s all right, Bobby,” Jamie said, stepping back and gesturing him
in. “I only wanted to ask what ye might know about Captain Cunningham. A
couple of fellows came by yesterday on their way to visit him.”
“Oh,” said Bobby, relaxing visibly. “The bad guys.”
“The what?”
“That’s what little Mandy called ’em,” Bobby said, holding his hand level
by his thigh and about the height of Mandy’s head. “She said they looked like
bad guys, and wanted me to go shoot them.”
Jamie smiled, not quite surprised at Mandy’s acute perceptions, but
appreciating them.
“What did ye think of them yourself, Bobby?”
Bobby shook his head. “I didn’t see ’em. The little’uns were playing up by
the springhouse and saw two strange men go by. They came home and told
me, and I wondered aloud who they were, and Germain told me they were
looking for Captain Cunningham. So that’ll be the same fellows, I expect.”
“I expect so. Will ye join me in a can of ale, Bobby?”
The ale was remarkably bad—Fanny and Brianna had made it—but it was
strongly alcoholic, and they drank it without complaint, talking over the
tenants and any concerns Bobby might have.“I’m thinkin’ it’s maybe time we raised a militia company, Bobby,” Jamie
said casually.
To his surprise, Bobby nodded soberly. “Past time, maybe, sir, if you’ll
forgive me saying so.”
“I will,” Jamie said, wary. “But what makes ye say so?”
“Josiah Beardsley was by, two days ago, and told me that he’d seen a
group of men in the forest between here and the Blowing Rock. Armed men
—and he was sure that he’d seen at least one redcoat among them.” Bobby
took a swig of beer and wiped his mouth, adding, “It’s not the first I’ve heard
of such a group, but these men were closer than any I’ve heard of.”
“Aye,” Jamie said softly. He remembered what he’d told Brianna, when
she’d told him about Rob Cameron, and the hairs prickled at the base of his
spine. 
Someone will come.
 He doubted that these men had anything to do
with the wicked buggers that had tried to kill his daughter in her own home
and her own time—but these days, 
someone
 could be a threat, regardless.
“The sooner the better, then. Make me a list, will ye, Bobby? What kind of
arms every man on the Ridge has to hand—whether it’s a musket or a scythe.
Even a skinning knife will do.”
IN THE EVENT, it was Rachel who told him all about Captain Cunningham.
He’d meant to lend Roger Mac and Richard MacNeill a hand with the
rooftree of the new church, and had come by Ian’s cabin to see if the lad
would come along. With four men, they could have half the roof on by
sunset; it wasn’t a large building.
He found Rachel alone, though, peacefully churning butter on the porch of
her cabin, aspen shadows fluttering over her like a cloud of transparent
butterflies.
“Ian’s gone hunting with one of the Beardsleys, Jamie,” she told him,
smiling, but not missing a stroke. “Thy sister has taken Oggy to visit Aggie
McElroy—I think for the purpose of exhibiting him as a terrible example, in
hopes of keeping Aggie’s youngest daughter from marrying the first young
man who asks her.”
“That would be Caitriona?” he asked, running through his mental map of
the Ridge. “She’s nay more than fourteen, surely?”
“Thirteen—but ripe, I believe. She’ll not wait long. No great sense in the
girl,” she said, shaking her head. She drew breath and went on, “Though infairness, it’s as much fear as lust or desire for novelty,” she added, gasping
slightly, though her shoulders kept moving evenly. “She 
is
 the youngest, and
… fears that she will be compelled … to remain unwed in order to care for
her parents … as they grow elderly, if she does not escape … before they
begin actually to dodder.”
Gordon McElroy was five years younger than himself, Jamie reflected, and
Aggie maybe forty-five. He wondered whether he would notice if he was
doddering or not.
“Ye’re a keen observer of human nature, lass,” he said, smiling.
“I am,” she said, smiling back. “Though I cannot claim much perception
with regard to Caitriona … as she told me of her feelings herself.” Rachel had
been working for some time; the day was warm, but sweat darkened the edge
of her fichu, and her skin, normally the color of cream with a spoonful of
coffee, had taken on a pink bloom.
On an impulse, he stepped up onto the porch beside her and, reaching out,
took the handle of the churn, nudging her aside without missing a stroke.
“Sit, lassie,” he said. “Rest for a bit, and tell me if ye ken anything about
Captain Cunningham.”
“Thee is much too tall for that churn,” she said, but sat down nonetheless
on the edge of the porch, stretching out her legs and shrugging her shoulders
with a sigh of relief.
“The butter will come soon,” he said. “Won’t it?” It had been a long time
since he’d churned butter himself—perhaps … fifty years? That thought
disturbed him, and he churned slightly faster.
“It will,” she said, turning her head to frown up at him. “But not unless
thee goes more slowly.”
“Oh, aye.” He obediently slowed to her previous rhythm, enjoying the
sense of the heavy liquid moving to and fro in the churn with a soft rhythmic
slosh. “Have ye seen the captain at all?”
“Oh, yes,” she said, slightly surprised. “I met his mother a few weeks ago,
soon after they came. In the forest, gathering comfrey. We talked for a bit,
and I helped her to carry her baskets to her house. Her son was very kind, and
offered me tea.” She raised an eyebrow to see whether he appreciated this bit
of intelligence, which he did.
“I dinna suppose anyone in the backcountry has even seen tea in the last
five years.”“No,” she said thoughtfully. “He said that he has friends from his naval
career who are so kind as to send him a small chest of tea and other dainties
now and then.”
“Ye said ‘soon after they came’—when did they come?”
“At the end of April. Bobby Higgins told me that the captain told him that,
like Odysseus, he had walked away from the sea with an oar on his shoulder
until he came to a place where no one knew what it was—and having found
such a place, proposed to stay, if he could.”
Jamie couldn’t help smiling at that.
“Does Bobby ken who Odysseus was?”
“He didn’t, but I told him a bit of the story and explained that the captain
had been speaking metaphorically. The captain made Bobby rather nervous, I
think,” she added delicately. “But there was no good reason to deny him—
and he paid five years’ rent in advance. In cash.”
Any figure of government authority would make Bobby nervous, with the
murderer’s brand on his face, this inflicted after a skirmish in Boston, where
he was a soldier, had left a citizen dead.
“Seems that people tell ye a great many things, Rachel,” he said. She
looked up at him, hazel-eyed and open-faced, and nodded.
“I listen,” she said simply.
She knew a number of small things regarding the Cunninghams, for she
stopped now and then at their cabin when she’d been foraging in their
vicinity—it was no more than a mile and a half—to share, if she had extra of
something. None of the things she knew seemed unusual, though, save that
Cunningham had confided to her a desire to preach.
“To preach?” Jamie nearly stopped churning, but a certain resistance
reminded him that the butter was coming, and he continued. “Did he say
why? Or how?”
“He did, evidently, when he was a sea captain. Preach to his men, I mean,
on Sundays aboard his ship. I gather that he found it gratifying, and had a
notion, when he retired, of becoming a lay preacher. He has no real idea of
how that might be accomplished, but his mother assured him that God would
find a way.”
The news of the captain’s desire to preach was surprising, but also
something of a comfort. Still, he reminded himself, there were a good many
preachers who would call down hellfire in the service of an army, and having
a vocation to preach didn’t limit a man’s beliefs in other directions. It wasn’tlikely that a retired sea captain of the British navy would have strong
tendencies toward independency for the American colonies. And he didn’t
think wee Frances’s observations regarding Mr. Partland were in any way
mistaken.
“Did ye ken that Roger and Brianna called on them, and were shown the
door for their trouble?” he asked. “I think the butter’s come.”
She rose, smoothing her dark hair back under her cap, and came to look.
She took the churn handle, worked it a few times, and nodded.
“Yes. Brianna told me. I think,” she added delicately, “that perhaps Roger
should try to speak with Friend Cunningham in the absence of his mother.”
“Perhaps he should.” He pulled off the top of the churn and they looked in,
to see the flakes and clumps of pale-gold butter swimming in the cream.19
Daylight Haunting
IT WAS A BEAUTIFUL day, and I had persuaded Jamie—with some
difficulty—that the world would not end if he didn’t hang the door for the
kitchen today. Instead, we collected the children and walked up through the
woods toward Ian’s cabin, bearing small presents for Rachel, Jenny, and
Oggy.
“What will ye wager me, Sassenach, that they’ve settled on a name for yon
wee man?”
“What odds?” I said, diverted. “And are you betting that they have, or that
they haven’t?”
“Five to two against. As to stakes …” He glanced round to see that our
companions weren’t within hearing distance and lowered his voice. “Your
drawers.”
My “drawers” were in fact the lower half of a planned pair of flannel
pajamas, made with an oncoming winter in mind.
“And what on earth would you do with my drawers?”
“Burn them.”
“No bet. Besides, I don’t think they’ve chosen a name yet, either. The last
suggestions I heard were Shadrach, Gilbert, and whatever the Mohawk might
be for ‘Farts Like a Goat.’”
“Let me guess. It was Jenny suggested that last one?”
“Who would know goats better?”
Bluebell snuffled energetically through the layers of crackling leaves, tail
moving to and fro like a metronome.
“Can you train that sort of dog to hunt for specific things?” I asked. “I
mean, I know it’s called a coonhound, but plainly she isn’t looking for
raccoons right now.”“She’s no a coonhound, though I suppose she wouldna pass one up. What
did ye want her to hunt for, Sassenach?” Jamie asked, smiling. “Truffles?”
“You need a pig for that, don’t you? And speaking of pigs … Jemmy!
Germain! Keep an eye out for pigs, and watch Mandy!” The boys were
squatting by a pine tree, picking bits of bark shaped like puzzle pieces off it,
but at my call they looked vaguely round.
“Where 
is
 Mandy?” I shouted.
“Up there!” Germain called, pointing upslope. “With Fanny.”
“Germain, Germain, look, I got a thousand-legger! A 
big
 one!”
At Jem’s call, Germain instantly lost interest in the girls and squatted
beside Jem, scrabbling dried leaves out of the way.
“Had I better go look, do you think?” I asked. “Millipedes aren’t
venomous, but the big centipedes can have a nasty bite.”
“The lad can count,” Jamie assured me. “If he says it’s got a thousand legs,
I’m sure it does—give or take a few.” He gave a short whistle and the dog
looked up, instantly alert.
“Go find Frances, 
a nighean.
” He flung out an arm, pointing uphill, and the
dog barked once, agreeably, and bounded up the rocky slope, yellow leaves
exploding under her eager feet.
“Do you think she—” I began, but before I could finish, I heard the girls’
voices above, mingled with Bluey’s excited yaps of greeting. “Oh. She 
does
know who Frances is, then.”
“Of course she does. She kens all of us now—but she likes Frances best.”
He smiled a little at the thought. It was true; Fanny adored the dog and spent
hours combing her fur, taking ticks out of her ears, or curled up by the fire
with a book, Bluebell comfortably snoring on her feet.
“Why do you always call her Frances?” I asked curiously. “Everybody else
calls her Fanny—she calls herself that, for that matter.”
“Fanny is a whore’s name,” he replied tersely. Seeing my look of
astonishment, 
though, his expression relaxed a bit. “Aye, I ken there are
respectable women wi’ that name. But Roger Mac tells me Cleland’s novel is
still in print in your time.”
“Cleland’s … oh, John Cleland, you mean—
Fanny Hill
?” My voice rose
slightly, less in surprise that the famously pornographic 
Memoirs of a Woman
of Pleasure
 was still going strong 250 years on—some things never go out of
style, after all—than at the fact that he’d been discussing it with Roger.“And he tells me the word is a … vulgarism … for a woman’s privates,”
he added, frowning.
“Well, it will be,” I admitted. “Or for someone’s bottom, depending
whether you come from Britain or America. But it hasn’t got that meaning
now,
 does it?”
“No,” he admitted reluctantly. “But still—Lord John told me once that
‘Fanny Laycock’ is a cant term for whore.” His brow furrowed. “I did
wonder—her sister gave her name as Jane Eleanora Pocock. I thought it
maybe wasna her real last name, but more a—a—”
“Nom de guerre?”
 I suggested dryly. “I shouldn’t wonder. Does ‘po’ mean
a chamber pot, these days?”
“Pot de chambre?”
 he asked in surprise. “Of course it does.”
“Of course it does,” I murmured. “Putting that aside—if Pocock 
wasn’t
 her
real last name, do you think Fanny—er, Frances—knows what the real one
is?”
He shook his head, looking slightly troubled.
“I dinna like to ask her,” he said. “She hasna spoken again about—
whatever it was that happened to her parents, has she?”
“Not to me. And if she’d told anyone else, I think they’d have mentioned it
to you or me.”
“D’ye think she’s forgotten?”
“I think she doesn’t want to remember—which may not be the same
thing.”
He nodded at that, and we walked in silence for a bit, letting the peace of
the wood settle with the slow rain of falling leaves. I could hear the children’s
voices under and over the rustle of the chestnut trees, like the calling of
distant birds.
“Besides,” Jamie said, “William called her Frances. When he gave her to
me.”
WE WALKED ON slowly, pausing now and then as I spotted something
edible, medicinal, or fascinating, which required a stop every few feet.
“Oo!” I said, heading for a slash of deep, bloody red at the foot of a tree.
“Look at that!”
“It looks like a slice of fresh deer’s liver,” Jamie said, peering over my
shoulder. “But it doesna smell like blood, so I’m guessing it’s one of thethings ye call shelf funguses?”
“Very astute of you. 
Fistulina hepatica,
” I said, whipping out my knife.
“Here, hold this, would you?”
He accepted my basket with no more than a slight roll of the eyes and
stood patiently while I cut the fleshy chunks—for there was a whole nest of
them hidden under the drifted leaves, like a set of crimson lily pads—free of
the tree. I left the smaller ones to grow, but still had at least two pounds of the
meaty mushroom. I packed them in layers of damp leaves, but broke off a
small piece and offered it to Jamie.
“One side makes you taller, and one side makes you small,” I said, smiling.
“What?”
“Alice in Wonderland—the Caterpillar. I’ll tell you later. It’s said to taste
rather like raw beef,” I said.
Muttering “Caterpillar” under his breath, he accepted the bit, turned it from
side to side, inspecting it critically to be sure it harbored no insidious legs,
then popped it in his mouth and chewed, eyes narrowed in concentration. He
swallowed, and I relaxed a little.
“Maybe like verra old beef that’s been hung a long time,” he allowed. “But
aye, a man could stomach it.”
“That’s actually a very good commendation for a raw mushroom,” I said,
pleased. “If I had a few anchovies to hand, I’d make you a nice 
tartare
 sauce
to go with it.”
“Anchovies,” he said thoughtfully. “I havena had an anchovy in years.” He
licked his lower lip in memory. “I might find some, next time I go to
Wilmington.”
I looked at him in surprise.
“Are you planning to go to Wilmington soon?”
“Aye, I thought I might,” he said casually. “D’ye want to come,
Sassenach? I thought ye’d maybe be busy wi’ the preserving.”
“Hmpf.” While it was perfectly true that I ought to be spending every
waking hour in picking, finding, catching, smoking, salting, or preserving
food (when not grinding, infusing, or decocting medicines) … it was equally
true that I ought to be replenishing our stocks of needles, pins, sugar—that
was a good point, I’d need more sugar to be making the fruit preserves—and
thread, to say nothing of other bits of household ironmongery and the
medicines I couldn’t find or make, like ether.And, if you came right down to it, wild horses couldn’t keep me from
going with him. Jamie knew it, too; I could see the side of his mouth curling.
Before I could either gracefully accept his offer or poke him in the ribs, an
unearthly yodel sounded through the trees, and Bluebell shot down the hill in
front of us, all four children in hot pursuit, likewise baying.
“What was that about raccoons, Sassenach?” Jamie squinted toward the
distant tree under which the hound had taken up residence, her front feet on
the trunk, pointing her muzzle up into the branches and letting out ear-
piercing howls.
Rather to my surprise, it 
was
 a raccoon, fat, gray, immense, and extremely
irascible at being roused before nightfall. It filled a jagged hollow, halfway
up a lightning-struck pine, and was peering out in a belligerent way. I 
thought
it was growling, but nothing could be heard over the wild cries of dog and
children.
Jamie hushed all of them—except the dog—and eyed the coon with a
hunter’s natural avidity. So, I noticed, did Jem. Germain and Fanny had
drawn close together, looking up wide-eyed at the raccoon, and Mandy was
wrapped tightly round my leg.
“I don’t want it to bite me!” she said, clutching my thigh. “Don’t let it bite
me, Grandda!”
“I won’t, 
a nighean.
 Dinna fash yourself.” Not taking his eyes off the treed
raccoon, Jamie unslung the rifle from his back and reached for the shot pouch
on his belt.
“Can I do it, Grandda? Please, can I shoot it?” Jem was itching to get his
hands on the rifle, rubbing them up and down his breeches. Jamie glanced at
him and smiled, but then his gaze shifted to Germain—or so I thought.
“Let Frances try, aye?” he said, and held out his hand to the startled girl. I
rather expected her to recoil in horror, but after a moment’s hesitation, a glow
rose in her cheeks and she stepped bravely forward.
“Show me how,” she said, sounding breathless. Her eyes flickered from
gun to coon and back, as though fearing one or both would disappear.
Jamie normally carried his rifle loaded, but not always primed. He
crouched on one knee and laid the gun along his thigh, handed her a half-
filled cartridge, and explained how to pour the powder into the pan. Jem and
Germain watched jealously, occasionally butting in with know-it-all remarks
like, “That’s the frizzen, Fanny,” or “You want to hold it up close to your
shoulder so it won’t break your face when it goes off.” Jamie and Fanny bothignored these helpful interjections, and I towed Mandy off to a safe distance
and sat down on a battered stump, putting her on my lap.
Bluebell and the raccoon had continued their vocal warfare, and the forest
rang with howling and a sort of high-pitched angry squealing. Mandy had put
her hands dramatically over her ears but removed them to inquire whether I
knew how to shoot a gun.
“Yes,” I said, avoiding any elaborations. I did technically know how, and
had in fact discharged a firearm several times in my life. I’d found it deeply
unnerving, though—the more so after I’d been shot myself at the Battle of
Monmouth and understood the effects on a truly visceral level. I preferred
stabbing, all things considered.
“Mam can shoot anything,” Mandy noted, frowning in disapproval at
Fanny, who was now holding the wobbling weapon to her shoulder, looking
simultaneously thrilled and terrified. Jamie crouched behind her, steadying
the gun, his hand on hers, adjusting her grip and her sights, his voice a low
rumble, barely audible under the racket.
“Go to your grannie,” he said to the boys, raising his voice. His eyes were
fixed on the coon, which had fluffed itself to twice the normal size and was
hurling insults at Bluebell, completely ignoring its audience. Jem and
Germain reluctantly but obediently came to stand beside me, a safe distance
away—or at least I hoped so. I repressed the urge to make them move farther
off.
The gun went off with a sharp 
bang!
 that made Mandy scream. I didn’t,
but it was a near thing. Bluey dropped to all fours and seized the raccoon,
which had been knocked out of the tree by the shot. I couldn’t tell whether it
was dead already, but she gave it a tremendous, neck-breaking shake,
dropped the bloody carcass, and let out a high, warbling 
oo-hooo!
 of triumph.
The boys scrambled forward, yelling and pounding Fanny excitedly on the
back. Fanny herself was openmouthed, stunned. Her face had gone pale, what
could be seen of it behind a mottling of black powder smoke, and she kept
looking from the gun in her hands to the dead raccoon, plainly unable to
believe it.
“Well done, Frances.” Jamie patted her gently on the head and took the
gun from her trembling hands. “Shall the lads gut and skin it for ye?”
“I … yeth. 
Yes.
 Please,” she added. She glanced at me, but instead of
coming to sit down walked unsteadily over to Bluey and fell to her knees in
the leaves beside the dog.“
Good
 dog,” she said, hugging the hound, who happily licked her face. I
saw Jamie glance carefully at the dog as he stooped to pick up the blood-
splotched carcass, but Bluey made no objection, merely woofling in her
throat.
After the noise of the hunt—if one could call it that, and I supposed one
could—the forest seemed abnormally silent, as though even the wind had
stopped blowing. The boys were still excited, but they settled down to the
absorbing business of skinning and gutting the raccoon, insisting that Fanny
come admire their skill. With the loud part over, Mandy joined in
enthusiastically, asking, “What’s 
that
?” as each new bit of internal anatomy
was revealed.
Jamie sat down by me, set the rifle at his feet, and relaxed, watching the
children with a benevolent eye. I was less relaxed. I could still feel the echo
of the rifle shot in my bone marrow, and was both surprised and disturbed at
the feeling.
I looked away and breathed deep, trying to replace the bright smell of fresh
blood with the mellower scents of the forest and the musk of fungi. That last
thought made me glance down at my basket, where the fleshy raw red of the
Fistulina hepatica
 showed in gashes through the layers of damp leaves. My
gorge rose suddenly, and so did I.
“Sassenach?” Jamie’s voice came from behind me, startled. “Are ye all
right?”
I was leaning against an aspen tree, gripping the paper-white trunk for
support, trying not to hear the noises of disembowelment going on a few
yards away.
“Fine,” I said, through numb lips. I closed my eyes briefly, opened them to
see a trickle of half-dried sap running from a crack in the aspen’s trunk—the
dark red of dried blood—let go, and sat down heavily in the leaves.
“Sassenach.” His voice was low, urgent, but pitched softly so as not to
alarm the children. I swallowed heavily, once, twice, then opened my eyes.
“I’m all right,” I said. “A little dizzy, that’s all.”
“Ye’re as white as that tree, 
a nighean.
 Here …” He reached into his
sporran and came out with a small flask. Whisky, and I gulped it gratefully,
letting it fill my mouth and sear away the taste of blood.
Cries and laughter from the children—I glanced over his shoulder and saw
that Bluey was rolling ecstatically in the discarded viscera, the white parts ofher coat now stained a dirty brown. I leaned over and threw up, whisky and
bile coming up the back of my nose.
“A Dhia,”
 Jamie muttered, dabbing at my face with his handkerchief. “Did
ye eat any mushrooms yourself, lass? Are ye poisoned?”
I waved the cloth away, taking deep breaths.
“No. I’m all right. Truly.” I swallowed again. “Can I—” I reached for the
flask, and he thrust it into my hand.
“Sip it,” he advised, and rising, went down to the children, whom he sorted
in quick order. The meat and skin were packed into my basket, the remnants
shoveled behind a tree out of my sight, and the children sent down to the
distant creek with firm instructions to wash themselves and the dog.
“Your grannie’s a bit tired from the walk, 
mo leannan
,” he said with a
quick glance at me. “We’ll just rest here for a bit ’til ye come back. Amanda,
stay by Frances and mind her, aye? And you lads keep a sharp eye out; it’s no
a good idea to prance through the woods smelling o’ blood. Ye see any pigs,
get the girls up a tree and sing out. Oh—ye’d best have this,” he said, picking
up the rifle and handing it to Jem. “Just in case.” He gave Germain the shot
pouch and watched as they made their way down the slope toward the sound
of water, more subdued now but still giggling and arguing as they went.
“So, then.” He sat down beside me, eyeing me closely.
“Really, I’m all right,” I said—and I did in fact feel much better physically,
though there was still a deep quiver in my bones.
“Aye, I can see ye are,” he said cynically. He didn’t push further, though,
just sat beside me, forearms resting on his knees, relaxed—but ready for
anything that might happen.
“Je suis prest,”
 I said, trying to smile despite the thin layer of cold sweat
that covered my face. “I don’t suppose you have any salt in your sporran, do
you?”
“Of course I do,” he said, surprised, and reaching in withdrew a small twist
of paper. “Is it good when ye’re peely-wally?”
“Maybe.” I touched a finger to the salt and put a few grains on my tongue.
The taste was cleansing, rather to my surprise. I followed it with a cautious
sip of whisky and felt remarkably better.
“I don’t know why I asked,” I said, handing him back the twist. “Salt is
supposed to lay ghosts, though, isn’t it?”
A faint smile touched his mouth as he looked at me.
“Aye,” he said. “So what’s haunting ye, Sassenach?”It would have been easy to brush it off, ignore it. But quite suddenly, I
couldn’t do that any longer.
“Why doesn’t the dog trouble you?” I said bluntly.
His face went blank for a moment, and he looked away, but only to think.
He blinked once or twice, sighed, and turned back to me, with the air of one
girding his loins for something unpleasant.
“She did,” he said quietly. “When I heard the howling that first night, I
thought—well, ye’ll maybe ken what I thought.”
“That—perhaps her master had come with her? Had—maybe put her on
your trail?” My own voice was little more than a whisper, but he heard me
and nodded slowly.
“Aye,” he said, just as softly. I saw his throat move as he swallowed. “To
think that I’d maybe brought something home …”
I swallowed, myself, but had to say it.
“You did.”
His eyes met mine and sharpened, a dark blue nearly black in the shade of
the chestnuts. His mouth tightened, but he didn’t say anything for a minute.
“When she came alone,” he said at last, “and came to me, looking for
shelter, for food … and then when the bairns took to her at once, and she to
them …” He looked away, as though embarrassed. “I thought she maybe was
sent, ken. As a—a sign of forgiveness. And maybe, by taking her in, I could
…” He made a small helpless gesture with his maimed hand.
“Make it go away?”
He took a deep breath, and his fists flexed briefly, then relaxed.
“No. Forgiveness doesna make things go away. Ye ken that as well as I
do.” He turned his head to look at me, in curiosity. “Don’t ye?”
There were no more than a few inches between us, but the aching distance
between our hearts reached miles. Jamie was silent for a long time. I could
hear my heart, beating in my ears …
“Listen,” he said at last.
“I’m listening.” He looked sideways at me, and the ghost of a smile
touched his mouth. He held out a broad, pitch-stained palm to me.
“Give me your hands while ye do it, aye?”
“Why?” But I put my hands into his without hesitation, and felt his grip
close on them. His fingers were cold, and I could see the hairs on his forearm
ruffled with chill where he’d rolled up his sleeves to help Fanny with the gun.
“What hurts you cleaves my heart,” he said softly. “Ye ken that, aye?”“I do,” I said, just as softly. “And you know it’s true for me, too. But—” I
swallowed and bit my lip. “It—it seems …”
“Claire,” he interrupted, and looked at me straight. “Are ye relieved that
he’s dead?”
“Well … yes,” I said unhappily. “I don’t 
want
 to feel that way, though; it
doesn’t seem right. I mean—” I struggled to find some clear way to put it.
“On the one hand—what he did to me wasn’t … mortal. I hated it, but it
didn’t physically hurt me; he wasn’t trying to hurt me or kill me. He just …”
“Ye mean, if it had been Harley Boble ye met at Beardsley’s, ye wouldna
have minded my killing 
him
 in cold blood?” he interrupted, with a tinge of
irony.
“I would have shot him myself, on sight.” I blew out a long, deep breath.
“But that’s the other thing. There’s what he—the man—do you know his
name, by the way?”
“Yes, and you’re not going to, so dinna ask me,” he said tersely.
I gave him a narrow look, and he gave it right back. I flapped my hand,
dismissing it for the moment.
“The other thing,” I repeated firmly, “is that if I’d shot Boble myself—you
wouldn’t have had to. I wouldn’t feel that you were … damaged by it.”
His face went blank for a moment, then his gaze sharpened again.
“Ye think it damaged me to kill the man who took ye?”
I reached for his hand and held it.
“I bloody know it did,” I said quietly. And added in a whisper, looking
down at the scarred, powerful hand in mine, “What hurts you cleaves 
my
heart, Jamie.”
His fingers curled tight over mine. He sat with his head bent for a long
moment, then lifted my hand and kissed it gently.
“It’s all right, 
mo chridhe,
” he said. “Dinna fash. There’s another side to it.
And one that’s nothing to do with you.”
“What’s that?” I asked, surprised. He squeezed my hand briefly and let it
go, sitting back to look at me.
“I couldna let him live,” he said simply. “Whether he’d forced ye or no. Ye
were there when Ian asked me what to do. I said, ‘Kill them all.’ Ye heard
me, aye?”
“I did.” My throat was suddenly tight, and there was a band of iron around
my chest, the taste of blood clotting my mouth and the fear of suffocation ablackness in my mind. The sense of that night seeped through me like cold
smoke.
“I might have done that in rage—I did do it in a black rage—but I would
have done the same was my blood as cold as ice.” He touched my face,
smoothing back an escaped curl. “Do ye not see? Those men were brigands,
and worse. To leave one of them alive would be to leave the root of a
poisonous plant in the ground, to grow again.”
It was a vivid image—but so was my memory of that large, shambling
man, wandering vaguely among the pigpens at Beardsley’s trading post
where I’d seen him, afterward. Seeming so unlike the man who’d come out of
the darkness, to smother me with the weight of his body …
“But he seemed so … feckless,” I said, with a helpless gesture. “How
could someone like that even begin to assemble a—a gang?”
He stood up suddenly, unable to sit any longer, and paced restlessly to and
fro in front of me.
“D’ye not see, Sassenach? Even was he a feckless dolt—he went places.
Ye saw him talk wi’ the folk at Beardsley’s, no?”
“Yes,” I said slowly, “but—”
He stopped, glaring down at me.
“And what if he began to talk, one day, about how he’d ridden wi’
Hodgepile and the Browns, the things they’d done? What if he lost himself in
drink, and boasted of how he’d—” He choked that off and took a deep breath.
“About what he’d done to you.”
I felt as though I’d swallowed something cold and slimy. And still faintly
alive. Jamie’s mouth compressed, looking at my face.
“I’m sorry, Sassenach,” he said quietly. “But it’s true. And I wouldna let
that happen. Because of you. Because of me. But more … because if it was
known that such a thing had happened—”
“It was known,” I said, my lips stiff. “It is known.” None of the men who
had rescued me that night could have been in much doubt that I’d been raped,
whether they knew which man—men—had done the act, or not. If they knew,
their wives knew. No one had ever spoken to me of it, nor ever would, but the
knowledge was there, and no way ever to make it go away.
“Because if it was known that such a thing had happened,” he repeated
evenly, “and that any man who took part in it had been allowed to live …
then anyone who lives under my protection would feel themselves helpless.
And rightly so.”He exhaled strongly through his nose, turning away.
“D’ye no remember that man—the one who called himself Wendigo?”
“Jesus.” Gooseflesh rippled over my shoulders and down my arms. I 
had
forgotten. Not the man himself—he was a time traveler named Wendigo
Donner—but his connection with the man we were discussing.
A member of Hodgepile’s gang, Donner had escaped into the darkness
when Jamie and his men had rescued me—and months later had come back
to the Ridge, with companions, to rob and kill, in search of the gemstones he
knew we had. It was his attack on the Big House that had—indirectly—
caused the conflagration that burned it to the ground, and his ashes were still
mingled with the remains of our lives in that clearing.
Jamie was right. Donner had escaped and come back to try to kill us. To
leave the lumpkin who’d raped me at large was to risk the same thing
happening again. The realization of it sickened me. I had managed to put
most of what had happened aside, dealing with the physical aspects as
necessary, firmly quashing or refusing to remember the rest. But it was still
there—all of it, turning like an evil prism to show things in a harsh new light.
The light, I now realized, that Jamie always saw by.
And seeing now clearly myself, I clenched my belly muscles and forced
my voice to be steady.
“What if he wasn’t the last of them?”
Jamie shook his head, not in negation, but resignation.
“It doesna matter, Sassenach. If there were others who escaped … most
would be wise enough to leave and stay gone. But it doesna matter—another
gang will spring up. It’s the way of things, aye?”
“Is it?” I thought he was right—I knew he was right, in terms of wars,
governments, human foolishness in general. I just didn’t want to believe it
was true of this place. This was home.
He nodded, watching my face, not without sympathy.
“Remember Scotland—the Watch?”
“Yes.” The Watches, he might have said, for there were many. Organized
gangs, who extorted money for protection—but sometimes gave that
protection. And if they didn’t get their money—black rent, it was called—
might burn your house or crops. Or do worse.
I thought of the cabin Jamie and Roger had found, a burnt shell, with the
owners hanged from a tree before the house—and a young girl alive in theashes, so badly burnt that she couldn’t live. We never discovered who had
done it.
Jamie could see the thoughts cross my face. I might as well have a neon
sign on my forehead, I thought crossly, and evidently he saw 
that
 one, too,
for he smiled.
“There’s no law now, Sassenach,” he said. “Not wi’ the government gone.”
There was neither fear nor passion in that statement—it was merely the truth
of the matter.
“There never 
has
 been, up here. None but you, I mean.” That made him
laugh, but I was just as right as he was.
“I didna come to rescue you alone, aye? That night?”
“No,” I said slowly. “You didn’t.” All the able-bodied men on the Ridge
had answered his call for help and come out to follow him. Very much as his
clansmen would have followed him to war, had we been in Scotland.
“So,” I said, taking a deep breath. “Those are the men you mean to … er
… gang oot with?”
He nodded, looking thoughtful.
“Some of them,” he said slowly, and then glanced at me. “It’s different
now, 
a nighean.
 There are men who were with me that night who willna
follow me now, because they’re King’s men—Tories and Loyalists. The men
who’ve kent me longest dinna mind so much that I was a rebel general—but
there are a good many new tenants who dinna ken me at all.”
“I’m not sure that ‘Rebel General’ is a title you can lose,” I said.
“No,” he said, and smiled, though not with much humor. “Not without
turning my coat. Aye, well.” He got to his feet and reached down a hand to
pull me up in a rustle of leaves. “I’ve been a traitor for a long time,
Sassenach, but I’d rather not be a traitor to both sides at once. If I can help
it.”
Shouts and barking rang out from the trail above; the children had reached
Ian’s house. We hurried after them and said no more of gangs, treason, or fat
men in the dark.20
I Bet You Think This Song Is about You …
NO ONE WENT TO the Old Garden, as the family called it. The people on
the Ridge called it the Witch-child’s Garden, though not often in my hearing.
I wasn’t sure whether “witch-child” was meant to refer to Malva Christie
herself or to her baby boy. Both of them had died in the garden, in the midst
of blood—and in my company. She had been no more than nineteen.
I never said the name aloud, but to me, it was Malva’s Garden.
For a time, I hadn’t been able to go up to it without a sense of waste and
terrible sorrow, but I did go there now and then. To remember. To pray,
sometimes. And frankly, if some of the more hidebound Presbyterians of the
Ridge had seen me on some of these occasions, talking aloud to the dead or
to God, they would have been quite sure they had the right name, but the
wrong witch.
But the woods had their own slow magic and the garden was returning to
them, healing under grass and moss, blood turning to the crimson bloom of
bee balm, and its sorrow fading into peace.
Despite the creeping transformation, though, some remnants of the garden
remained, and small treasures sprang up unexpectedly: there was a stubbornly
thriving patch of onions in one corner, a thick growth of comfrey and sorrel
fighting back against the grass, and—to my intense delight—several thriving
peanut bushes, sprung up from long-buried seeds.
I’d found them two weeks before, the leaves just beginning to yellow, and
dug them up. Hung them in the surgery to dry, plucked the dry peanuts from
the tangle of dirt and rootlets, and roasted them in the shell, filling the house
with memories of circuses and baseball games.
And tonight, I thought, tipping the cooled nuts into my tin shelling basin,
we’d have peanut butter and jelly sandwiches for supper.
THERE WAS A breeze on the porch, and I was grateful for it on my face
after the heat of sun and hearth. Also a little welcome solitude: Bree had gone
with Roger to call upon the tenants I still thought of as the fisher-folk—
emigrants from Thurso, a dour lot of rock-ribbed Presbyterians who were
deeply suspicious of Jamie as a Catholic, and much more of me. I was not
only a Catholic but a conjure-woman, and the combination unsettled them to
no little degree. They did like Roger, though, in a grudging sort of way, and
the liking seemed reciprocal. He understood them, he said.
The children had done their chores and were scattered to the four winds; I
heard their voices now and then, giggling and shrieking in the woods behind
the house, but God only knew what they were doing. I was just pleased that
they weren’t doing it right in front of me.
Jamie was in his study, enjoying his own solitude. I’d passed by, carrying
my big basin of peanuts outside, and seen him leaning back in his chair,
spectacles on his nose, deeply absorbed in 
Green Eggs and Ham.
I smiled at the thought, and pulled off the ribbon to loosen my hair so the
cool breeze could blow through it.
We’d lost nearly all of our books in the fire that consumed the Big House,
but were beginning to build up our tiny library again. Brianna’s contributions
had nearly doubled it. Aside from the books she’d brought—and thought of
my precious 
Merck Manual
 still gave me a small thrill of possession—we
had Jamie’s small green Bible, a Latin grammar, 
The Complete Adventures of
Robinson Crusoe
 (lacking a cover, but retaining most of its vivid
illustrations), and Jonathan Swift’s 
Travels into Several Remote Nations of
the World. In Four Parts. By Lemuel Gulliver, First a Surgeon, and then a
Captain of Several Ships,
 plus the odd novel in French or English.
The shells cracked easily, but the dry skins of the peanuts inside were light
and papery and clung to my fingers. I’d been brushing them off on my skirt,
which now looked as though I’d been attacked by a horde of pale-brown
moths. I wondered whether Bree might borrow something interesting to read
while she was house-visiting with Roger. Hiram Crombie, the headman of the
Thurso folk, was a reading man, though his taste ran to collections of
sermons and historical accounts; he thought novels depraved. He did have a
copy of 
The Aeneid,
 though—I’d seen it.
Jamie had sent a letter to his friend Andrew Bell, an Edinburgh printer and
publisher, asking him to send a selection of books, including copies of his
own 
A Grandfather’s Tales
 and my modest version of do-it-yourselfhousehold medicine, applying such monies as might have accrued to us in
sales during the last two years toward the purchase of the other books in the
order. I wondered when—and whether—those might arrive. So far as I knew,
the British still held Savannah, but Charles Town remained in American
hands; if Mr. Bell was prompt about it, there was hope of a late ship showing
up book-laden before the winter storms.
Footsteps behind me interrupted my literary thoughts and I turned to see
Jamie, barefoot and rumpled, tucking his spectacles back into his sporran.
“Enjoying your reading?” I asked, smiling.
“Aye.” He sat down beside me and picked a peanut out of the basin,
cracked it, and tossed the nuts into his mouth. “Brianna says Dr. Seuss made
a good many books. Have ye read them all, Sassenach?” He pronounced it
“Soyce,” in correct German, and I laughed.
“Oh, yes. Many times. Bree had the whole set—or at least as many as were
published then. I suppose she and Roger might have bought more for Jem and
Mandy, if Dr. Seuss—the Americans say his name ‘Soos,’ by the way—if he
went on writing. I don’t know how long he lived—will live,” I corrected. “He
was still at it in 1968.”
He nodded, a little wistful.
“I wish I could see them,” he said. “But maybe Brianna will remember
some o’ the rhymes, at least.”
“Ask Jem,” I suggested. “Bree says he’s read to Mandy since she was a
baby, and he has an excellent memory.” I laughed, thinking of some of the
Seuss illustrations. “Ask Bree if she can draw Horton the Elephant or Yertle
the Turtle for you, from memory.”
“Yertle?” His face lighted with humor. “That’s no a real name, is it?”
“No, but it rhymes with ‘turtle.’” I cracked another nut and tossed the bits
of shell into the grass.
“So does Myrtle,” he pointed out.
“Yes, but Yertle is a boy. No female turtle would have done what he did.”
Jamie was diverted; he paused with his hand in the basin.
“What did he do?”
“Made all of the turtles in Sala-ma-Sond build themselves into a tower so
he could be King of all that he saw by sitting on top of them. It’s an allegory
about arrogance and pride. Not that females aren’t capable of those emotions
—just that they wouldn’t do anything so easily illustrated.”Jamie picked up a handful of peanuts and crushed them absentmindedly,
nodding.
“Aye? And what sort of allegory is yon 
Green Eggs and Ham
?” he
demanded.
“I think it’s intended to urge children not to be fussy about what they eat,”
I said dubiously. “Or not to be afraid of trying new th— What are you
doing?” For he’d dropped his handful of crushed peanuts into the basin,
shells and all.
“Helping you,” he said, taking another handful. “You’ll be about that all
day, Sassenach, doing it one at a time.” He crushed the second handful and
dropped it, debris and all, into the basin.
“But picking all the shells out of there will—”
“We’ll winnow them,” he interrupted, turning and pointing with his chin
toward the distant flank of Roan Mountain. “See the wind walkin’ down
through the trees? There’s a storm a-boil.”
He was right: clouds were gathering behind the peak; the patches of pale
aspen on the slope flickered as the rising wind touched their leaves, and the
pines rippled in deep-green waves. I nodded and picked up several nuts to
crush between my palms.
“Frank,” Jamie said abruptly, and I stopped dead. “Speakin’ of books …”
“What?” I said, not at all sure I’d just heard him say 
“Frank.”
 He had,
though, and a small sense of unease coiled up at the base of my spine.
“I need ye to tell me something about him.” His attention was fixed on the
basin of peanuts, but he wasn’t being casual about it.
“What?” I said again, but in an entirely different tone. I brushed peanut
skins slowly off my skirts, my eyes on his face. He still wasn’t looking at me,
but his mouth compressed briefly as he crushed a fresh handful.
“The picture of him on his book—the photograph. I was only wondering,
how old was he when that likeness was made?”
I was surprised, but considered.
“Let me see … he was sixty when he died …” 
Younger than I am now …
My lower lip tucked in for a moment, quite involuntarily, and Jamie looked at
me sharply. I looked down and brushed away more peanut fragments.
“Fifty-nine. He had that photograph taken for that particular book cover; I
remember, because he’d used the same photograph—a different, older one, I
mean—for at least six books before that, and he joked that he didn’t want
people meeting him for the first time to be looking over his shoulder for aman half his age.” I smiled a little, remembering, but met Jamie’s eyes,
feeling slightly wary. “Why do you ask?”
“I used to wonder—sometimes—what he looked like.” He looked down
and reached into the basin, but with the air of a man looking for something
distracting to do. “When I’d pray for him.”
“You 
prayed
 for him?” I didn’t try to hide the amazement in my voice, and
he glanced at me, then away.
“Aye. I—well, what else could I do for anybody then, but pray?” There
was a tinge of bitterness to this; he heard it himself and cleared his throat.
“‘God bless you, ye bloody Englishman!’ is what I’d say. At night, ken, when
I thought of you and the bairn.” His mouth tightened for an instant, then
relaxed. “I’d wonder what the bairn looked like, too.”
I reached out and closed my hand on his wrist, big and bony, his skin cold
from the wind. He stopped crushing nuts and I squeezed his wrist, gently. He
let out his breath and his shoulders relaxed a little.
“Does Frank look like you thought he did?” I asked curiously. I took my
hand off his wrist and he picked up another handful of peanuts.
“No. Ye never told me what he looked like …” 
For bloody good reason.
And you never asked,
 I thought. 
Why now?
He shrugged, and the twitch returned to his mouth, but now with a hint of
humor.
“I liked thinkin’ of him as a short-arsed wee man, maybe losing his hair
and soft round the middle.” He glanced at me and shrugged. The twitch had
returned again. “I thought he was intelligent, though—ye wouldna have loved
a stupid man. And I got the spectacles right. Though I thought they’d have
gold rims, not black. Horn, are they? Or dark tortoiseshell?”
I gave a small, amused snort. Still, the sense of unease was back.
“Plastic. And no, he wasn’t stupid.” 
Not at all.
 And gooseflesh rippled
briefly across my shoulders.
“Was he an honest man?” A soft crunch, the patter of peanuts and broken
shells into the tin basin. The air was beginning to smell of oncoming rain and
the rich, oily sweetness of peanuts.
“In most ways,” I said slowly, watching Jamie. His head was bent over the
basin, intent on his work. “He kept secrets. But so did I.” 
Love has room for
secrets—you said that to me once.
 I didn’t think there was room between us
now for anything but the truth.He made a small Scottish sound in the back of his throat; I couldn’t tell
what he meant by it. He dropped the last handful of mangled shell into the
basin and looked up to meet my eyes.
“Can I trust him, do ye think?” The clouded sky was still bright, and he
was dark against it, wisps of hair flying free around his head. I shivered
briefly, and my stomach shrank with the absurd but absolute conviction that
someone was standing behind me.
“What do you mean?” I was on edge, and it showed in my voice. “You did
trust him, didn’t you? With—us. Me and Brianna.”
“I hadn’t a choice about that, aye? Now I do.” He straightened, rubbing his
palms together, and the last fragments of peanut skin whirled away in the
strengthening wind.
I drew a deep breath to keep my voice from shaking, and brushed bits of
shell off my bodice. “Now you do? You mean you’re wondering whether you
can believe what he wrote in that book?”
“I am.”
“He was an historian,” I said firmly, refusing to turn my head and look
behind me. “He wouldn’t—he 
couldn’t
—falsify anything, any more than
Roger could change what’s in the Bible. Or you tell me a deliberate lie.”
“And you of all people ken what history is,” he said bluntly, and stood up,
knees cracking. “As for lying … everyone does that, Sassenach, if not often.
I’ve certainly done it.”
“Not to me,” I said. It wasn’t a question and he didn’t answer it.
“Fetch a bowl, aye?”
He picked up the basin and moved out into the yard, where the wind
caught at his shirt and belled the cloth out behind him. The clouds were
boiling up behind the mountains, and the smell of rain was sharp on the wind.
It wouldn’t be long.
I stood, feeling very strange, and turned. The front door was standing open,
empty, its canvas covering pushed aside. I felt the wind whoosh past me,
moving in my skirts, and heard it go down the hall and into the rooms 
before
me, rattling the small glass jars in my surgery, flapping papers in Jamie’s
study.
On my way to the kitchen, I glimpsed Frank’s book, lying on the table in
Jamie’s study, and on impulse—glancing involuntarily over my shoulder,
though I was quite alone—I stepped in.The Soul of a Rebel: The Scottish Roots of the American Revolution.
 By
Franklin W. Randall, PhD.
Jamie had left the book open, facedown. He never treated books like that.
He would use anything for a bookmark—leaves, bird’s feathers, a hair ribbon
… once I had opened a book he was reading to find the small dried body of a
skink that someone had stepped on. But he always closed a book, careful of
the binding.
Frank stared up at me from the back cover, calm and inscrutable. I touched
his face, very gently, through the clear plastic cover, with a feeling of distant
grief, regret mingled with—why not be honest now? There was no need to
keep secrets from myself—relief. It was finished.
Oddly, the feeling of someone standing behind me had vanished when I
came into the house.
I picked the book up to close it, and glanced inside as I did so. 
Chapter 16,
said the title at the top of the page. 
Partisan Bands.
I fetched the big creamware bowl Jamie had brought me from Salem and
took it outside, not glancing at the book—now properly closed on the desk—
but well aware of it.
Jamie began the winnowing, taking a handful from the basin, pouring the
mix of peanuts and debris from one hand to the next and back again, letting
the bits of shell and skin fly away as the heavier peanuts dropped with a small
ting-ting-ting!
 into the bowl. The wind was strong enough—it would be too
strong in a bit, and start blowing away the nuts as well. I sat down on the
ground by the bowl and began to pick out any last fragments of shell that had
fallen with the cleaned nuts.
“You’ve read the book, then?” I asked after a moment, and he nodded, not
looking at me. “What do you think of it?”
He made another Scottish noise, shook the last of the peanuts clinking into
the bowl, and sat down on the grass beside me.
“I think the bastard wrote it for me, is what I think,” he said bluntly.
I was startled. “For you?”
“Aye. He’s talking to me.” He raised one shoulder, self-conscious. “Or at
least I think he is. Between the lines. I mean … it might only be as I’m losin’
my mind. That’s maybe more likely. But …”
“Talking to you … as in, the, um, text seems personally relevant?” I asked
carefully. “It couldn’t help but be, could it? Given where and when we are
just now, I mean.”He sighed and twitched his shoulders, as though his shirt was too tight—
which it wasn’t; it was billowing over his shoulders like a sail in the wind. I
hadn’t seen him do 
that
 in a long time, and a crawling anxiety tightened my
chest.
“He’s—it’s—” He shook his head, looking for words. “He’s talking to
me,” 
he repeated doggedly. “He kens who I am—who I 
am,
” he said with
emphasis and looked at me, his eyes dark blue. “He kens it’s the Scotsman
that took his wife from him and he’s talkin’ directly to me. I can feel him, as
if he stood behind me, whispering in my ear.” I flinched, violently, and he
blinked, startled.
“That sounds … unpleasant,” I said. The tiny hairs prickled along my jaw.
The corner of his mouth turned up. He stopped what he was doing and took
my hand, and I felt better.
“Well, it’s a mite unsettling, Sassenach. I dinna 
mind
 it, exactly—I mean,
surely to God he has the right to say things to me if he likes. It’s only …
why?”
“Well …” I said slowly. “Maybe … perhaps … for us?” I nodded toward
the distant creek, where Jem and Germain and Mandy and Fanny were
evidently catching leeches, with a good deal of shrieking. My lips felt dry,
and I licked them briefly.
“I mean—we think, don’t we, that he found out? About you not dying, I
mean. And maybe that he knew or guessed that Bree would come back
looking for you. Maybe he … found me, too. In history, I mean.” Speaking
the words made me feel quite hollow. The thought of Frank discovering
something—God knew what—about me in the maelstrom of scattered
documents. And making up his mind—while I was still 
right there
 with him,
dammit!—not to tell me—and to find out more.
“He hasn’t—mentioned me, has he? In the book?” I forced the words out,
just above the sound of the wind. A cold drop struck my cheek, and four large
dark spots appeared instantly on my apron.
“No,” Jamie said, and rose to his feet, reaching down a hand to me. “Come
inside, 
a nighean,
 it’s starting to rain.”
We barely made it into the house with the basin, the bowl, and our peanut
crop—followed in short order by Germain, Jemmy, Fanny, Mandy, Aidan
McCallum, and Aodh MacLennan, splattered with rain and with arms full of
wet vegetables from the garden.What with one thing and another—grinding the peanuts, putting the risen
bread to bake, washing dirt from the young turnips, saving the greens in a
bowl of cold water to keep them from wilting, handing fresh small knobby
carrots out to the children, who ate them like candy, then slicing the fresh
bread and assembling sandwiches, while roasting sweet potatoes in the ashes
and making a warm bacon dressing for the cooked greens—there was no
further conversation between me and Jamie about Frank’s book. And if
anyone stood behind me, he was considerate enough to give me elbow room.
IT WENT ON raining through supper, and after ascertaining that the
McCallums and the MacLennans wouldn’t be worrying where their boys
were, Jamie brought down the mattresses and all of the children bedded down
together in a damp, warm heap before the hearth.
Jamie had made a fire in our bedroom, and the scent of dried fir kindling
and hickory wood overlaid the lingering turpentine scent of the fresh timbers.
He was lying on the bed, clad in his nightshirt and smelling pleasantly 
of
warm animals, cold hay, and peanut butter, and thumbing idly through my
Merck Manual,
 which I’d left on the bedside table.
“Trying the 
Sortes Virgilianae,
 are you?” I asked, sitting down beside him
and shaking my hair loose from its knot. “Most people use the Bible for that,
but I suppose Merck might do just as well.”
“Hadna thought of that,” he said, smiling, and closing the book, handed it
to me. “Why not? You choose, then.”
“All right.” I weighed the book in my hands for a moment, enjoying the
tidy heft of it and the feel of the pebbled cover under my fingertips. I closed
my eyes, opened the book at random, and ran my finger down the page.
“What have we got?”
Jamie took his spectacles off and leaned over my arm, peering at the spot
I’d marked.
“The symptomology of this condition is both varied and obscure, requiring
extensive observation and repeated testing before a diagnosis can be made,”
he read. He glanced up at me. “Aye, well, that’s about the size of it, no?”
“Yes,” I said, and closed the book, feeling obscurely comforted. Jamie
gave a mild snort, but took the book from me and put it back on the table.
“Ye can take the extensive observations as given,” he said dryly.
“Repeated testing, though …” His expression changed, turning inward. “Aye,maybe. Just maybe. I’ll need to think on that.”
“Do,” I said, made slightly nervous by his look of interested
contemplation. I had no idea how one might go about testing a hypothesis
like his—or perhaps I did. I swallowed.
“Do you … want me to read it?” I asked. “Frank’s book?” The notion of
reading 
The Soul of a Rebel
—Frank’s final book—gave me a feeling that I
would have formally diagnosed with no tests whatsoever as the heebie-
jeebies. And that, without considering Jamie’s notion that Frank had
somehow intended the book as a personal message to 
him.
He looked at me, startled.
“You? No.”
An outburst of giggling and minor shrieking rose suddenly from below.
Jamie made a Scottish noise, got up, and pulled his boots on. Raising an
eyebrow at me, he stepped out into the hall and walked slowly toward the
head of the stairs, clumping loudly. As he reached the fourth stair, the noise
below ceased abruptly. I heard a faint snort of amusement, and he went down
quickly. I could hear his voice in the kitchen, and a meek chorus of assent
from the children, but made out only the odd word here and there. Another
minute, and he came briskly up the stairs again.
“Is the MacLennans’ little boy actually named ‘Oogh’?” I asked curiously,
as he sat down to take off his boots.
“Aodh, aye,” he said, pronouncing it with a slightly more guttural sound at
the end, but still identifiably “Oogh.” “Were we speakin’ English, I expect
his name would be Hugh. Here, Sassenach.” He handed me a linen towel
from the kitchen, wrapped around what proved to be a delectably fragrant
peanut butter sandwich on fresh-baked bread with blackberry jelly.
“Ye didna get your fair share at supper,” he said, smiling at me. “Ye were
too busy filling all the wee mouths. So I put one aside for ye, on top of your
herb cabinet. Recalled it just now.”
“Oh …” I closed my eyes and inhaled beatifically. “Oh, Jamie. This is
wonderful!”
He made a pleased sound in his throat, poured me a cup of water, and sat
back, hands clasped about his knees, watching me eat. I reveled in every
sweet bite, chunky bits of peanut, blackberry seeds, and chewy, grainy bread
included, and swallowed the last of it with a sigh of satisfaction and regret.
“Did I ever tell you that I brought a peanut butter and jelly sandwich with
me, when I came back through the stones?”“No, ye didn’t. Why that?”
Why, indeed?
“Well … I think it was because it reminded me of Brianna. I made her
peanut butter sandwiches so often, for her school lunches. She had a Zorro
lunch box, with a little thermos in it.”
Jamie’s eyebrows went up. “Zorro? A Spanish fox?”
I waved a hand dismissively. “I’ll tell you about him later. You would have
liked him. I didn’t take a lunch box, though; I just wrapped my sandwich in a
sheet of—of plastic.”
Jamie’s brows were still raised. “Like the stuff Mr. Randall’s spectacles
were made of?”
“No, no.” I flapped my hand, trying to think how to describe Saran Wrap.
“More like … like the transparent cover on his book—that’s plastic, too—but
lighter. Sort of like a very light, transparent handkerchief.” I felt a pang of
nostalgia, remembering that day.
“It was when I came to Edinburgh, looking for A. Malcolm, Printer. I was
feeling light-headed—with fright, mostly—so I sat down, unwrapped my
sandwich, and ate it. I thought then that it was the last peanut butter sandwich
I’d ever eat. It was the best thing I ever ate. And when I finished it, I let the
bit of plastic go; there was no point in keeping it.” In my mind’s eye, I could
see it now, the fragile clear plastic crumpling, unfolding, rising, and scudding
along the cobblestones, lost out of time.
“I rather felt the same way,” I said, and cleared my throat. “Lost, I mean. I
wondered, then, whether someone might find it, and what they might think of
it. Probably nothing beyond a moment’s curiosity.”
“I daresay,” he murmured, reaching with a corner of the towel to wipe a
smear of jelly off my mouth, then kissing me. “But then ye found me, and ye
weren’t lost anymore, I hope?”
“I wasn’t. I’m not.” I rested my head on his shoulder, and he kissed my
forehead.
“The bairns are settled, Sassenach. Come to bed wi’ me, aye?”
I did, and we made love slowly, by the light of the embers, with the sound
of the wind and the rain rushing past in the night outside.
Sometime later, on the edge of sleep, my hand on the warm round of
Jamie’s buttock, I thought of Frank’s face; his photograph, drifting through
my mind—those familiar hazel eyes behind the black-rimmed glasses.
Earnest, intelligent, scholarly … honest.21
Lighting a Fuse
THEY SMELLED IT FIRST. Brianna felt her nose twitch at the mingled
stench of urine and sulfur. Beside her on the wagon bench, reins in hand, her
father coughed. 
With a fine coating of charcoal dust …
“Mama says it’s got medicinal purposes—or at least some people used to
think it had.”
“What, gunpowder?” He spared her a sideways glance, but most of his
attention was focused on the small cluster of buildings that had just come into
view, charmingly situated at a bend in the river.
“Mm-hmm. 
A little Gun-powder tyed up in a rag, and held so in the mouth,
that it may touch the aking tooth, instantly easeth the pains of the teeth.
Nicholas Culpeper, 1647.”
Her father grunted.
“That likely works. Ye’d be too busy trying to decide whether to vomit or
cough to be worrit about your teeth.”
Someone heard the rattle of the wagon wheels. Two men who had been
smoking pipes near the river—a safe distance from the buildings, she noted—
turned to stare at them. One tilted his head, estimating, but evidently decided
they were worth talking to; he tapped the dottle from his pipe into the water
and, putting the long-stemmed clay pipe into his belt, strolled toward the
road, followed by his companion.
“Ho, there!” the first man called, waving. Jamie pulled the horses to a stop
and waved back.
“Good afternoon to ye, sir. I’m Jamie Fraser, and this is my daughter, Mrs.
MacKenzie. We’re seeking to buy powder.”
“I’d expect ye are,” the man said, rather dryly. “Nobody’d come here for
any other reason.” 
Irish,
 she thought, smiling at him.“Oh, that ain’t true, John.” His friend, a stocky man of thirty or so, nudged
him amiably in the ribs, grinning at Brianna. “Some of us come to drink your
wine and smoke your tobacco.”
“John Patton, sir,” the Irishman said, ignoring his friend. He offered Jamie
his hand, and having shaken it invited them to drive in beside the stone
building nearest the water.
“It’s the least likely to blow up,” the other man—who had introduced
himself as Isaac Shelby—said, laughing. Brianna noticed that John Patton
didn’t laugh.
The stone building was a mill. A constant dull rumble came through the
walls, beneath the plash of the waterwheel, and the smell was quite different
here: damp stone, waterweed, and a faint smell that reminded her of doused
campfires and rain on the ashes of a burnt place in the forest. It gave her an
odd quiver, low in her belly.
Her father got down and set about unhitching the horses; he gave her an
eye and tilted his head toward one of the ramshackle sheds higher up the
bank, where three people were standing in a group, evidently arguing about
something. One of them was a woman, and her posture—arms folded and
head bent, but in a way that suggested not submission, but a barely restrained
urge to butt her interlocutor in the nose—argued that here was The Boss.
Brianna nodded and set off toward the shed, aware from the sudden silence
behind her that either Mr. Patton, Mr. Shelby, or both were eyeing her rear
aspect. Not that they’d see much; she was wearing a hunting shirt that came
nearly to her knees, but the mere fact that she had on breeches under it …
She heard Shelby cough suddenly, and deduced that he’d just met her
father’s eye.
“Jamie Fraser,” she heard Shelby say, trying for nonchalance. “I know a
good many Frasers. Would you be from up around the Nolichucky?”
“No, we have a place near the Treaty Line in Rowan County,” her father
said. “It’s called Fraser’s Ridge.”
“Ah! Then I’ll know you, sir!” Shelby sounded relieved. “Benjamin
Cleveland told me of meeting you. He—”
The voices behind her faded as the group near the shed noticed her. All of
them looked startled, but the woman’s look changed almost immediately into
a dour amusement.
“Good day to ye, Missus,” she said, openly eyeing Brianna’s hunting
clothes. She was about Brianna’s age and wearing a canvas apron, muchworn and stained, with small blackened holes where sparks appeared to have
fallen. The dark-brown skirt and long-sleeved man’s shirt beneath were rough
homespun, though fairly clean. “What might I be doin’ for ye?”
“I’m Brianna MacKenzie,” Bree said, wondering whether she ought to
offer a hand to shake. Mrs. Patton—for surely she had to be—didn’t extend
one, so Brianna contented herself with a cordial nod. “My father and I are,
um, seeking to buy some gunpowder. Are you by chance Mrs. Patton?” she
added, as the woman made no move to introduce herself.
The lady in question glanced over her shoulder, then slowly gazed round
from side to side, as though looking for someone. One of the young men
she’d been arguing with giggled, but shut up sharp when Mrs. Patton’s eye
fell on him.
“I don’t know who else I’d be,” she said, but not unpleasantly. “What
make of powder are ye after, and how much?”
That stopped Brianna cold for a moment. She knew absolutely nothing
about makes of powder—or even how to refer to them. What she wanted to
know was how to make the stuff in quantity and with a reasonable degree of
safety.
“Powder for hunting,” she said, opting for simplicity. “And maybe
something for … blowing up stumps?”
Mary Patton blinked, then laughed. The two young men joined her.
“Stumps?”
“Well, ye could set one on fire, I suppose, if ye touched off a bit of powder
on top of it,” the elder of the young men said, smiling at her. The “on top”
triggered belated realization, and she smacked her head in annoyance.
“Bloody hell,” she said. “Of course—you’d have to shape the charge. So
… more something like a grenade, then.”
Mrs. Patton’s rather square face shifted instantly to surprise, and just as
swiftly to wary calculation.
“Grenadoes, is it?” she said, and looked Brianna over with more interest.
Then she glanced beyond Bree, and realization came into her eyes.
“Yer father, is it? That him?”
“Yes.” The woman was staring in a way that made Bree turn to look over
her own shoulder. Her father had taken the horses down the bank to drink and
was standing on the gravel there, talking to Mr. Shelby. He’d taken his hat off
in order to splash water on his face, and the sun was sparking off his hair,
which, while streaked with silver, was still overall a noticeable red.“Red Jamie Fraser?” Mrs. Patton looked back sharply at her. “He’s the one
they called Red Jamie, back in the old country?”
“I—suppose so.” Bree was flabbergasted. “How do you know that name?”
“Hmp.” Mrs. Patton nodded in a satisfied sort of way, her eyes still fixed
on Jamie. “My pap’s older brothers, two of ’em, fought on both sides of the
Jacobite Rising. One was transported to the Indies, but his brother went and
found him, bought his indenture, and the two of them came to settle here
where John and I had land. Those”—she gave a deprecating nod to the two
young men, who had retired to a respectful distance—“are their sons.”
“Quite the family concern, isn’t it?” Bree nodded round to the mill and
sheds, now noticing that there was a small cluster of cabins and a good-sized
house standing perhaps a quarter mile away, inside a copse of maple trees.
“’Tis,” Mrs. Patton agreed, now amiable. “One o’ my uncles spoke often
of your pa, fought with him at Prestonpans and Falkirk. He had some bits and
pieces kept by, mementos o’ the war. And one thing he had was a broadsheet
with a drawing of Red Jamie Fraser on it, offering a reward. A handsome
man, even on a broadsheet. Five hundred pounds the Crown offered for him!
Wonder what he’d be worth now?” she said, and laughed, with another look
at the man in question, this one longer.
Bree assumed this to be a joke, and gave a tight smile in return. Just in
case, she noted primly that her father had been pardoned after the Rising, and
then firmly returned the conversation to gunpowder.
Mrs. Patton appeared to feel that they were now on friendly terms, and
willingly showed her the two milling sheds, noting casually the crude
construction of the walls.
“Something blows up, the roof just flies off and the walls fall out. No great
matter to put it up again.”
“So these are milling sheds—but surely that’s the mill?” Bree nodded at
the stone building, quite evidently a mill, its waterwheel turning serenely in
the golden light of late afternoon.
“Aye. Ye grind the charcoal, then the saltpeter—know what that is, do
ye?”
“I do.”
“Aye, and the sulfur. Ye do that with water, aye? Melts the saltpeter and ye
grind it all together; while it’s wet, it’ll not burn, will it?”
“No.”
Mrs. Patton nodded, pleased at this evident understanding.“So then. Ye’ve got black powder, but it’s coarse stuff, with bits and
pieces of uncrushed charcoal in it, bits o’ wood, bits o’ stone, rat dung, all
manner o’ stuff. So ye dry that in cakes—we store those in the other shed—
and then at your leisure, so to speak, ye crush and grind it—and that ye do
out here in this shed, away from everything else, because it damn well 
will
explode if ye happen to strike a spark whilst ye’re doing that—and if ye’ve
made a cloud of it when the spark goes off, God help ye, ye’ll go up like a
torch.”
The prospect didn’t seem to concern her.
“Then ye corn it—which means putting it through screens, to divvy it into
different sizes. Finest corning is for pistols and rifles—that’s what ye’d want
for hunting, mostly. The coarser sizes are for cannon, grenadoes, bombs, that
class o’ thing.”
“I see.” It was a simple process, as explained—but judging from the state
of Mrs. Patton’s apron and the singe marks on some of the boards in the shed,
rather dangerous. She could probably manage to make enough powder for
hunting, if they really had to, but dismissed the idea of trying to do it in large
quantities.
“Well, then. What’s your price, for the sort of powder you’d use for
hunting?”
“Hunting, is it?” Mrs. Patton had pale-blue eyes and gave Brianna a
shrewd look out of them, then glanced at Mr. Shelby and her father, still
conversing by the river. 
Why?
 she wondered. 
Does she think I need his
permission?
“Well, my price is a dollar a pound. I sell for hard cash, and I don’t
bargain.”
“Don’t you,” Bree said dryly. She reached into the pouch at her waist and
came out with one of the thin gold slips that she’d sewn into her hems when
she and the kids had come to find Roger. And she said a silent, absentminded
prayer of thanks that they 
had
 found him, as she’d done a thousand times
since.
“It’s not exactly cash, but it’s maybe hard enough?” she said, handing it
over.
Mrs. Patton’s sandy eyebrows rose to the edge of her cap. She took the slip
gingerly, felt its weight, and glanced sharply at Bree. To Brianna’s delight,
she actually bit it, then looked critically at the tiny dent in the metal. It wasstamped, but beyond the 
14K
 and 
1 oz.,
 she didn’t think the markings would
mean anything to Mrs. Patton, and apparently they didn’t.
“Done,” said the gunpowder mistress. “How many?”
AFTER SCRUPULOUS WEIGHING of both powder and gold, they agreed
that one slip of gold was the fair equivalent of twenty dollars, and Brianna
shook hands with Mrs. Patton—who appeared bemused but not shocked at
the gesture—and made her way back to the wagon, carrying two 
ten-pound
kegs of powder, followed by the two cousins, each similarly burdened.
Her father was still talking with Mr. Shelby but, hearing footsteps, turned
round. His eyebrows rose higher than Mrs. Patton’s.
“How much—” He broke off and, pressing his lips together, took the kegs
from her and loaded them into the wagon, along with the bags of rice, beans,
oats, and salt that they’d traded for in Woolam’s Mill.
Finished, he reached for the sporran at his waist, but one of the cousins
shook his head.
“She’s paid already,” he said, and with a brief tilt of the head toward Bree,
turned and went back to the milling shed, followed by the other young man,
who spared a look over his shoulder, then hurried to catch up with his cousin,
saying something to him in a low voice that made the first man glance back
again, then shake his head.
Her father said nothing until they were well out on the road toward home.
“What did ye use for money, lass?” he asked mildly. “Did ye happen to
bring a bit when ye … came?”
“I had some coins—what I could get without too much fuss and expense
—”
He nodded approvingly at that, but stopped abruptly when she withdrew
another gold slip—it barely qualified to be called an ingot—from her pouch.
“And I got thirty of these, and sewed them into our clothes and the heels of
my shoes.”
Her father said something that she didn’t understand in Gaelic, but the look
on his face was enough.
“What’s wrong with that?” she asked sharply. “Gold works anywhere.”
He inhaled sharply through his nose, but the added oxygen seemed to be
enough to enable him to get a grip on himself, for his jaw relaxed and the
color in his face receded a little.“Aye, it does.” The fingers of his right hand twitched briefly, then stopped
as he shifted the reins a little.
“The trouble, lass,” he said, eyes fixed on the road ahead, “is just that.
Gold 
does
 work everywhere. That’s why everyone wants it. And in turn,
that’s why ye dinna want it to be widely known that ye have it—let alone in
any quantity.” He turned his head toward her for a fraction of a moment, one
eyebrow raised. “I would ha’ thought … I mean, from what ye told me about
yon Rob Cameron … I thought ye’d know that.”
The quiet admonition made a hot flush burn up from chest to scalp, and she
closed her fist around the slip of gold. She felt like an idiot, but also unfairly
accused.
“Well, just how 
would
 you go about spending gold, then?” she demanded.
“I don’t,” her father said bluntly. “I try never to touch what’s hidden. For
the one thing, I dinna feel it’s truly mine, and I’ll use it only in case of urgent
need, to defend my family or tenants. But even then, I dinna use it directly.”
He glanced over his shoulder, and perforce, so did she. They’d left Patton’s
well behind by now, and the road—a well-traveled one—lay empty.
“If I have to use it—and I will have to, if I’m to equip a militia—I shave
bits away and pound them into small nuggets, rubbed in dirt and wiped 
down.
Then I send Bobby Higgins, Tom MacLeod, and maybe one or two of the
other men I’d trust with my family’s lives, each with a bittie pouchful. Not at
the same time, not to the same place, and seldom to the same place twice.
And they’ll change it, bit by bit, into cash—buying something and getting
back the change in coin, maybe selling a nugget or two outright to a jeweler,
changing a bit more with a goldsmith … and the money they bring back,
that’s
 what I spend. Cautiously.”
That “trust with my family’s lives” made a hard nugget in her stomach. It
was all too easy to see, now, the risk to which she’d just exposed Jem and
Mandy and Roger and all the other inhabitants of the New House.
“Ach, dinna fash,” her father said, seeing her distress. “It’ll likely be fine.”
He gave her a half smile and a brief squeeze of the knee. The horses were
moving along at a much brisker pace now, and she realized that he was trying
to get as far as he could away from the Powder Branch before nightfall.
“Do you …” The words died in her throat, drowned by the wagon’s rattle,
and she tried again. “Do you think the men there”—she gestured behind them
—“would come after us?”
He shook his head and leaned forward, intent on his driving.“Not likely. The Pattons ken our business is worth more to them than what
we carry. But I’d bet money one or another of the young ones will say
something about the braw lassie in men’s clothes wi’ a purse of gold at her
belt. It’s just luck whether they say it to anyone who might be moved to come
and visit us—and we’ll pray they don’t.”
“Yes.” The first rush of shock and anger was passing, and she felt light-
headed. Then she remembered something else that felt like a punch in the
stomach.
“What?” Her father sounded alarmed; she’d made a noise as though she
really had been punched. He was slowing the horses, and she waved her
hands and shook her head.
“I’m—it’s just … they know who you are. Mrs. Patton recognized you.”
“Who I am? I told them who I am.” He’d slowed the horses further in
order to hear what she had to say, though.
“She knows you’re Red Jamie,” she blurted.
“That?” He looked surprised but not worried. Slightly amused, in fact.
“How the devil did she come to ken that? The lass is younger than you; she
wasna born the last time someone called me that.”
She told him about Mrs. Patton’s uncles, and the broadsheet.
“Evidently you still look like you might have done the sorts of things that
would get your picture on a 
Wanted
 poster,” she said, with a feeble attempt at
humor.
“Mmphm.”
He’d slowed the horses to a walk, and the respite from the shaking and
noise calmed her. She stole a glance at him; he didn’t look angry anymore—
not even upset. Just thoughtful, with an expression she thought might be
described as rueful.
“Mind,” he said at last, “it’s nay a good thing to have done the sorts of
things that earn ye a reputation as a madman that kills without thought or
mercy. But looked at from the other side—it’s nay altogether a bad thing to
have
 such a reputation.”
He clicked his tongue to the horses and they slowly moved into a trot and
then faster. The sense of urgency seemed to have left him, though. She
watched him, sidelong, relieved that he wasn’t worried about being known as
Red Jamie—and more relieved that the fact that he 
was
 known seemed to
have made him less anxious about the gold.They went on without speaking further, the silence between them easier.
But when they stopped to camp, just after moonrise, they ate without fire and
she slept lightly and woke often, always seeing him near her, in the black
shadow of a tree, his rifle by his right hand and a loaded pistol on his left.22
Ashes, Ashes …
I FOLLOWED ROGER THROUGH a growth of immense poplar trees, their
canopies so high above the trail we walked that it felt as though we had come
into a quiet church, its rafters twittering with birds, rather than bats. Very
suitable, I thought, given our mission.
My part, though, was more cloak-and-dagger than diplomacy. I reached
through the slit in my skirt to check my pocket for the third time: three good-
sized, knobbly ginger-roots at the bottom, and on top of them, a few packets
of dried herbs that one wouldn’t find locally.
My job—assuming that Roger managed to make the introductions before
we were both hurled out on our ears—was to engage Mrs. Cunningham in
prolonged conversation. First, with effusive thanks for the Jesuit bark
(accompanied with muted apologies for Mandy’s outburst), then by
presentation of my reciprocal gifts, one at a time, with detailed explanations
of their origin, uses, and preparation.
All of which should give Roger enough time to lure Captain Cunningham
outside, proper men naturally not wanting to hear two herbalists exchanging
thoughts on how to make a clyster that would clear the most stubborn case of
constipation. After that, it would be up to Roger. He was walking in front of
me, shoulders squared in resolution.
We’d passed out of the poplars and were climbing again, into a rocky zone
of fir and hemlock, richly resinous in the sun.
“It smells like Christmas,” Roger said, smiling over his shoulder as he held
back a large branch for me. “I suppose we’ll do a family Christmas, won’t
we? For Jem and Mandy, I mean; it’s what they’re used to, and they’re old
enough to remember.” Christmas, as a holiday, was purely religious among
the Scots—celebrating was done on Hogmanay.“That would be wonderful,” I said, a little wistful. The Christmases of my
childhood—the ones I remembered—had mostly taken place in non-Christian
countries, and had featured Christmas crackers from England, Christmas
pudding in a tin, and one year, a crèche festooned with camel bells and
inhabited by Mary, Joseph, Baby Jesus, and the attendant kings, shepherds,
and angels, all constructed from some sort of local seedpods wearing tiny
clothes.
Making a proper Christmas for Brianna every year had been wonderful; I’d
felt as though the festivity was for me, as well—the joy of doing things I’d
read or heard about, but never done or seen. Frank, the only one of us who
had truly experienced the traditional British Christmas, was the authority on
menus, gift wrapping, carol singing, and other arcane lore. From the
decorating of the tree until it came down after New Year’s, the house was full
of excited secrets, with an underlying sense of peace. To have that in our new
house, with everyone together …
“I tell you what, though,” I said, coming back to myself just in time to
duck beneath the overhang of a blue spruce. “Don’t mention Santa Claus
while you’re talking to Captain Cunningham.”
“I’ll add that to my list of things to avoid,” he assured me gravely.
“What’s number one on your list?”
“Well, normally, it would be you,” he said frankly. “But in the present
circumstances, it’s a tie between the Beardsleys and Jamie’s whisky. I mean,
the Cunninghams are bound to find out about both—if they don’t know
already—but no reason they should hear it from me.”
“Odds on, they know about the Beardsleys,” I said. “Mrs. Cunningham
gave me the Jesuit bark, I mean. Someone had to have told her I needed it—
and very likely, what for. And no one could resist telling her about Lizzie and
her two husbands, if they did.”
“True.” Roger glanced at me, a smile in the corner of his mouth. “I don’t
suppose you happen to know if … I mean …”
“Both of them at once?” I laughed. “God knows, but there are three small
children in that house, and at least two of them are still sleeping in their
parents’ bed. They must be very sound sleepers,” I added thoughtfully, “but
just the constraints of space …”
“Where there’s a will, there’s a way,” Roger assured me. “And the
weather’s still fine out of doors.”The trail had widened enough for us to walk side by side for a little.
“Anyway, I’m amazed that the old lady made such a gesture, after what she
said to Brianna and me about witches, but—”
“Well, she did assure all of us—including me and Mandy—that we were
going to Hell.”
That made him laugh.
“Have you seen Mandy imitating Mrs. Cunningham doing that?”
“I can’t wait. How much farther is this place?”
“Almost there. Am I still decent?” he asked, brushing maple leaves off the
skirt of his waistcoat.
He’d dressed carefully for the occasion, in good breeches, a clean shirt,
and a waistcoat with humble wooden buttons, these hastily substituted by
Bree for the bronze ones it normally sported. In addition, Brianna had plaited
his hair and Jamie—who had much more experience in such matters—had
clubbed it for him, neatly folding up the plait and tying it firmly at the nape
with Jamie’s own broad black grosgrain ribbon.
“Go with God, 
a charaid,
” he’d told Roger, grinning. Go with God,
forsooth …
“Perfect,” I assured him.
“Onward, then.”
I’d never been as far as the Cunninghams’ cabin. It was a new building,
and far toward the southern end of the Ridge. We’d been walking for more
than an hour, brushing off the leaves—and with them, gnats, wasps, and
spiders—that fell in a gentle green rain from the deciduous trees. The air was
very warm, though, and I was beginning to wish that I’d packed some form
of liquid refreshment when Roger stopped, just short of a clearing.
Brianna had already told me about the whitewashed stones and the shining
glass windows. There was also a large vegetable and herb garden laid out
behind the house, but it was evident that Mrs. Cunningham hadn’t yet
managed to contrive a fence that would keep deer and rabbits out of it. It
gave me distress to see the trampled ground, the broken stems, and the stubby
tops of turnips, gnawed and denuded of their greens—but on the bright side,
it might make the items in my pocket more desirable.
I took off my hat and hastily tidied my hair, insofar as such a thing was
possible after walking four miles on a hot day.
The door opened before I could put my hat back on.Captain Cunningham started visibly at sight of us. If he’d been expecting
anyone, it wasn’t us. My heart sped up a little as I rehearsed my opening lines
of gratitude.
“Good afternoon, Captain!” Roger called, smiling. “I’ve brought my
mother-in-law, Mrs. Fraser, to call on Mrs. Cunningham.”
The captain’s mouth opened slightly as his gaze shifted to me. He didn’t
have a poker face, and I could see him trying to reconcile whatever his
mother had been saying about me with my appearance—which was as
respectable as I could make it.
“I—she—” he began. Roger had taken my arm and was ushering me
quickly up the path, saying something cordial about the weather, but the
captain wasn’t attending.
“I mean … good afternoon, mum.” He gave me a jerky bob of the head as I
came to a stop and curtsied in front of him.
“I am afraid my mother’s not in,” he said, eyeing me warily. “I’m sorry.”
“Oh, has she gone visiting?” I asked. “I’m so sorry; I wanted to thank her
for her gift. And I’d brought a few things for her …” I gave Roger a sideways
glance that said, 
Now what?
“No, she’s just gone foraging by the creek,” the captain said, with a vague
wave of the hand toward the woods. “She, um …”
“Oh, in that case,” I said hastily, “I’ll just go and see if I can find her. Why
don’t you and the captain have a nice visit, Roger, while I look round for
her?”
Before he could say anything else, I picked up my skirts, stepped neatly
over the line of white stones, and made for the woods, leaving Roger to his
own devices.
“AH … 
PLEASE COME in.” Cunningham yielded to circumstance with
some grace, opening the door wide and beckoning Roger inside.
“Thank you, sir.” The cabin was as orderly as it had been on his first visit,
but it smelled different. He could swear the ghost of coffee hung invitingly in
the air. 
My God, it
 is 
coffee …
“Do sit down, Mr. MacKenzie.”
Cunningham had recovered his composure, though he was still giving
Roger sidelong glances. Roger had composed a few opening remarks, butthose had been designed to deflect Mrs. Cunningham until Claire could get
her oar in. 
Best just get it out, before either of them comes back …
“I recently had an interesting conversation with my cousin-by-marriage,
Rachel Murray,” he said. Cunningham, who had been bending to get a
coffeepot that was keeping warm in the hearth, shot up like a jack-in-the-box,
narrowly avoiding braining himself on the chimney breast, and turned round.
“What?”
“Mrs. Ian Murray,” Roger said. “Young Quaker woman? Tallish, dark,
very pretty? Baby with a loud voice?”
The captain’s face took on a somewhat flushed, congested appearance.
“I know whom you mean,” he said, rather coldly. “But I am surprised to
hear that she should have repeated our conversation to you.” There was a
slight emphasis on “you,” which Roger ignored.
“She didn’t,” he said easily. “But she told me that you had said something
she thought I should know, and recommended that I come and talk to you
about it.” He lifted a hand, acknowledging the surroundings.
“She told me that you preached on Sundays to your men in the navy—and
that you had found it … ‘gratifying’ was the word she used. Is that in fact the
case?”
The flush was receding a bit. Cunningham gave a short, unwilling nod.
“I cannot see that it’s any business of yours, sir, but yes, I did preach when
we rigged church, on those occasions when we sailed without a chaplain.”
“Well, then. I have a proposition to put to you, sir. Might we sit down?”
Curiosity won out; Cunningham nodded toward a large wheel-backed chair
that stood to one side of the hearth, and himself took a smaller one at the
other side.
“As you know,” Roger said, leaning forward, “I am a Presbyterian, and by
courtesy referred to as a minister. By that, I mean that I’m not yet ordained,
though I have completed all of the necessary studies and examinations, and I
have hopes of being ordained soon. You’ll also know that my father-in-law—
and my wife, mother-in-law, and children, for that matter—are Catholics.”
“I do.” Cunningham had relaxed enough to show disapproval. “How can
you possibly square such a situation with your conscience, sir?”
“One day at a time, for the most part,” Roger said, and shrugged,
dismissing this. “But the point is that I am on good terms with my father-in-
law, and when he had a cabin built to serve as a schoolhouse, he also invited
me to use it for church services on Sunday. We had a small Lodge ofFreemasons established at that time—this was more than three years ago—
and Mr. Fraser also 
permitted the Lodge to use this structure in the evenings
for their own purposes.”
To this point, he’d been looking earnestly into Cunningham’s face, but
now he glanced down into the smoldering hearth as he mentioned
Freemasons, to give the man a moment to make up his mind—if there was
anything to make it up about.
Possibly there was. The captain’s earlier discomposure and disapproval
had receded like a melting glacier—slowly, but surely. He didn’t speak, but
his silence had a different quality now; he was eyeing Roger in an assessing
sort of way.
Nothing to lose …
“We met on the level,” Roger said quietly.
Cunningham drew a visible breath and nodded, very slightly. “And we
parted on the square,” he said, just as quietly.
The atmosphere in the room shifted.
“Allow me to pour you some coffee.” Cunningham got up, fetched cups
from a sideboard that looked as though it had been abducted from its London
home, and handed one to Roger.
It was actually coffee. Freshly ground. Roger closed his eyes in momentary
ecstasy, and recalled what Rachel had said about being served tea. Evidently
the captain 
had
 kept his seagoing connections. Was that who the two
mysterious visitors had been? No more than smugglers?
They sipped in a guardedly companionable silence for a minute or two.
Roger took a last, luxurious mouthful and swallowed.
“Unfortunately,” he said, “the cabin was struck by lightning a year ago,
and burned to the ground.”
“So Mrs. Murray told me.” The captain drained his own cup, set it down,
and raised a brow at Roger, nodding at the coffeepot.
“If you please.” Roger handed over his cup. “Had Jamie Fraser been living
on the Ridge at the time, I’m sure he would have rebuilt it—but owing to the
… erm, fortunes of war … he and his family were unable to return
immediately. But I suppose you know that.”
“Yes. Robert Higgins informed me of that when I made application to
settle here.” The shadow of disapproval fell across his face once more. “Mr.
Fraser seems a gentleman of unusually flexible principles. Appointing a
convicted murderer as the factor of his property, I mean.”“Well, he thinks I’m a heretic, and he puts up with 
me.
 Or perhaps that’s
what you meant by ‘flexible principles’?” He smiled at Cunningham, who
had choked on his coffee at the word “heretic.” 
Better take it easy; Masonic
brotherhood might have limits …
Roger coughed, giving Cunningham time to finish doing so.
“Now, the proposition I mentioned to you. Mr. Fraser is willing that the
cabin be rebuilt on its original location, and used for all of its previous
purposes. He’s also willing to supply the raw timber for the building. As I’m
sure you know, though, he’s in the process of building his own house, and
can’t spare the time or money to complete the cabin until next year.
“So what I should like to propose, sir, is that we—you and I, and Mr.
Fraser—should pool our resources in order to accomplish the rebuilding as
soon as possible. And once the building is habitable, I propose that you and I
take it in turns to preach there, on alternate Sundays.”
Cunningham had frozen, cup in hand, but the outer crust of coldness and
reserve had melted. Thoughts were darting behind his eyes like minnows, too
fast to catch.
Roger put down his half-finished cup and got to his feet.
“Would you like to go and look at the site with me?”
THE CREEK WAS easy to find. There was no well near the house yet, so the
Cunninghams must be carrying water, and that being so … yes, there was a
trail going off into a scrim of dogwood bushes, and within moments the
sound of burbling water reached my ears.
Finding Mrs. Cunningham might be a little harder. Would she have gone
upstream, or down? I tossed a mental coin and turned downstream. A good
guess; there was a slight bend in the creek and a muddy spot on the near
shore, showing the marks of many feet—or rather, the marks of one or two
pairs of feet making frequent visits—and a series of circular marks and scuffs
showing where a bucket had been set down.
There had been rain lately and the creek was high; there was thick growth
right down to the water on the far side of the creek, and I thought she
wouldn’t have tried to cross here; there were stones in the creek bed that one
might use as stepping-stones, but most of them were submerged. I made my
way down beside the creek, walking slowly and listening carefully. I wasn’t
expecting Mrs. Cunningham to be singing hymns as she foraged, but shemight be making enough noise that the birds near her would either shriek or
fall silent.
In fact, I found her because she had attracted the notice of a kingfisher who
took issue with her presence. I followed the long, chittering calls of the bird
and saw it, a long-beaked blob of rust, white, and gray-blue riding the breeze
on a long branch that reached out over a small pool formed by an eddy. Then
I saw Mrs. Cunningham. 
In
 the pool. Naked.
Luckily she hadn’t seen me, and I squatted hastily behind a buttonbush,
snatching off my hat.
The kingfisher 
had
 seen me and was having a fit, its vivid little body
swelling with indignation as it shrilled at me, but Mrs. Cunningham ignored
it. She was washing in a relaxed, leisurely fashion, her eyes half closed with
pleasure and her long gray hair streaming wet down her back. A trickle of
sweat ran down my back and another dripped from my chin; I wiped it with
the back of my hand, envying her.
For an instant, I had the absurd impulse to disrobe and join her, but quelled
it instantly. I ought to have left instantly, too—but I didn’t.
Part of it was just the common interest that makes people look at other
people when they’re laughing, angry, naked, or engaged in sexual acts. The
rest was simple curiosity. There’s quite a thin line, sometimes, between a
scientist and a voyeur, and I was aware that I was walking it, but Mrs.
Cunningham was undeniably a mystery.
Her body was still powerful, broad-shouldered and erect, and while the
skin of arms and breasts had loosened, she still had visible musculature. The
skin of her belly sagged and the marks of multiple births showed plainly. So
the captain was not her only child.
Her eyes were closed in simple pleasure, and without the forbidding
expression, she was a handsome woman. Not beautiful, and deeply marked
by years, experience, and anger, but there was still a strong, symmetrical
appeal to her features. I wondered how old she might be—the captain had
seemed about forty-five, but I had no idea whether he might be her eldest
child or her youngest. Somewhere between sixty and seventy, then?
She squeezed water from her straggling hair and put it back behind her
ears. There was a half-submerged log at the far side of the pool, and she
leaned her back carefully against this, closed her eyes again, and reached a
hand down into the water between her legs. I blinked, and then duck-walkedbackward as quietly as I could, skirts kirtled up and hat in hand. The line had
definitely been crossed.
My heel caught against a protruding tree root and I nearly fell, but
managed to save myself, though dropping both skirts and hat in the process.
The heavy pocket thumped against my hip, reminding me of my original
intent.
I couldn’t very well hang about until she finished what she was doing,
came out of the water, and dressed. I’d just go back to the cabin, tell the
captain I hadn’t been able to find his mother, and leave the ginger and herbs,
with my thanks.
I was putting my own dress back in order when I realized that I’d made
very visible footmarks in the damp clay where I’d been lurking. Cursing
under my breath, I scrabbled under the bushes behind me, raking out handfuls
of dead leaves, twigs and pebbles, and scattered these hastily over my telltale
traces. I was rubbing a handful of damp leaves between my hands to clean
them when I realized that there was a pebble among the leaves.
I tossed it away, but caught a glimpse of vivid color as it flew through the
air, and grabbed it up again.
It was a raw emerald, a long rectangular crystal of cloudy green in a matrix
of rough rock.
I looked at it for several moments, rubbing my thumb gently over the
surface.
“You never know when it might come in handy, do you?” I said, under my
breath, and tucked it into my bag.
“HOW MANY PEOPLE could the original building accommodate?” the
captain asked, nodding at the fragile black skeleton of the door.
“About thirty, standing. We didn’t have benches to begin with. The Lodge
brothers would each bring a stool—and often a bottle—from home, when we
had meetings.” He smiled at the memory of Jamie, passing round one of the
earliest bottles of his own distilling, eyeing the drinkers closely in case any of
them should fall over or die suddenly.
“Oh,” he said. “That reminds me. You should know that Mr. Fraser is a
brother. In fact, he’s the Worshipful Master; he established the Lodge here.”
Cunningham dropped his charcoal fragment, truly shocked.“A Freemason? But surely Catholics are not allowed to take the oaths of
freemasonry. The Pope forbids it …” His lip curled slightly at the word.
“Mr. Fraser became a Freemason while in prison in Scotland, following the
Jacobite Rising. And as he would tell you himself, ‘The Pope wasna in
Ardsmuir Prison and I was.’” Roger had so far always used his Oxford accent
when speaking to the captain, but now he let Jamie’s Highland accent stand
behind the statement, and was amused to see Cunningham blink, though
whether it was the accent or the enormity of Jamie’s actions, he couldn’t tell.
“Perhaps that’s further illustration of the … flexibility … of Mr. Fraser’s
principles,” the captain observed dryly. “Has he any he will stand by, pray?”
“I think it’s a wise man who knows how to be flexible in times such as
these,” Roger countered, keeping his temper. “If he weren’t capable of
walking between two fires, he’d have been ashes long since—and so would
the people who depend on him.”
“You being one?” It wasn’t said with hostility, but the edge was there.
“Me being one.” He took a deep breath, sniffing, but the smell of lightning
and the reek of fire were long gone; with a little work, the clearing might
once more be ready for peace.
Roger went on, “As for whether there are principles Jamie Fraser will
stand by, yes, there are, and God help anyone who stands between him and
what he thinks he must do. Do you think we should expand the building?
There are a lot more families on the Ridge now.”
Cunningham nodded, looking at the back of his hand, where he’d scrawled
their paced-out measurements with a bit of charcoal.
“How many, do you know? And are you familiar with their religious
dispositions? Mr. Higgins told me that Mr. Fraser does not discourage
settlement by anyone, provided that they seem honest and willing to work.
Still, it seems that the great preponderance of the tenants are Scottish.” This
last was said with a rising inflection, and Roger nodded.
“They are. He began his settlement here with a number of Scots who were
with him during the Rising, and with people who are kin to others he knows
from the Piedmont; there are a lot of Scots there,” he added. “Most of the
original settlers are Catholic—naturally—but there were a few Protestants
among them, mostly Presbyterians—the Church of Scotland. A large party
emigrated later from Thurso, and they’re all Presbyterians.” 
Virulently so …
“I’ve only recently returned to the Ridge myself, though; I was told that wehave some Methodist families as well. Do you mind if I ask, sir—what
brought you to settle here?”
Cunningham gave a brief “hmp,” but one indicating pause for summation,
rather than hesitance.
“Like a good many others, I came here because I had acquaintances here.
Two of my seamen have settled in North Carolina, as has Lieutenant Ferrell,
who served with me through three commissions before being wounded
severely enough that he was obliged to leave the service with a naval
pension. His wife is here as well.”
Roger wondered whether—and how—the pension might continue to be
paid, but it luckily wasn’t his problem at the moment.
“So,” Cunningham continued, meeting Roger’s eye ironically, “that will
give me a congregation of at least six souls.”
Roger smiled obligingly, but told the truth when he assured Cunningham
that entertainment was sufficiently scarce as to ensure a full house for anyone
who was willing to get up in public and provide it.
“Entertainment,” Cunningham said, rather bleakly. “Quite.” He coughed.
“Might I ask just 
why
 you have proposed this arrangement, Mr. MacKenzie?
You seem entirely capable of entertaining any number of people, all by
yourself.”
Because Jamie wants to know whether you’re a Loyalist and what you
might be inclined to do about it if you are—and luring you out to preach and
talk to people in public will probably show him.
He wouldn’t lie to Cunningham, but didn’t mind offering him an
alternative truth.
“As I said, more than half the settlers here are Catholic, and while they’ll
come to listen to me if there’s nothing better on offer, I imagine they might
also listen to you. And given my own unorthodox family situation”—he
raised a deprecating shoulder—“I think people should be allowed to hear
different points of view.”
“Indeed they should,” said a soft, amused voice behind him. “Including the
voice of Christ that speaks within their own hearts.”
Cunningham dropped his charcoal again. “Mrs. Murray,” he said, and
bowed. “Your servant, mum!”
Looking at Rachel Murray always lightened Roger’s heart, and seeing her
here, now, made him want to laugh.
“Hallo, Rachel,” he said. “Where’s your wee man?”“With Brianna and Jenny,” she said. “Amanda is trying to make him say
‘poop,’ by which I gather she means excrement.”
“Well, she won’t get far, trying to make him say ‘excrement.’”
“Very true.” She smiled at him, then at Cunningham. “Brianna said thee
would be here with the captain, arranging matters for the new meetinghouse,
so I thought I should join thy discussion.” She was wearing pale-gray calico
with a dark-blue fichu, and the combination made her eyes go a deep,
mysterious green.
Cunningham, while gallant, looked somewhat confused. Roger wasn’t,
though he 
was
 surprised.
“You mean—you want to use the chapel, too? For … um … meeting?”
“Certainly.”
“Wait … do you mean a Quaker meeting?” The captain frowned. “How
many Quakers are presently living on the Ridge?”
“Just one, so far as I’m aware,” Rachel said. “Though I suppose I might
count Oggy; that’s two. But Friends have no notion of a quorum, and no
Friend would exclude visitors from an ordinary meeting. Jenny and Ian—my
husband and his mother, Captain—will surely join me, and Claire says she
and Jamie will come as well. Naturally, thee and Brianna are invited, Roger,
and thee, too, Friend Cunningham, with thy mother.”
She gave the captain one of her smiles, and he smiled back by reflex, then
coughed, mildly embarrassed. He was quite flushed. Roger thought the man
might be on the verge of ecumenical overdose, and stepped in.
“When would you like to have the place, Rachel?”
“On First Day—thee would call it Sunday,” she explained to Cunningham.
“We don’t use the pagan names. But the time of day doesn’t matter. We
would not discommode any arrangements you have come to.”
“Pagan?” Cunningham looked aghast. “You think ‘Sunday’ is a 
pagan
term?”
“Well, of course it is,” she said reasonably. “It means ‘day of the sun,’
meaning the ancient Roman festival of that name, 
dies solis,
 which became
Sunnendaeg in English. I grant you,” she said, dimpling slightly at Roger, “it
sounds slightly less pagan than ‘Tuesday,’ which is called after a Norse god.
But still.” She flipped a hand and turned to go. “Let me know what times you
both intend to preach, and I will arrange things accordingly. Oh—” she
added, over her shoulder. “Naturally we will help with the building.”
The men watched her disappear among the oaks in silence.Cunningham had picked up another fragment of charcoal and was rubbing
it absently between thumb and forefinger. It reminded Roger of going with
Brianna once to an Ash Wednesday service at St. Mary’s, in Inverness; the
priest with a small dish of ashes (Bree had told him they were the ashes of
palm fronds left over from the previous year’s Palm Sunday) rubbed a thumb
through the black and then made a rapid cross on the forehead of each person
in the congregation, swiftly murmuring to each, “Remember, Man, that thou
art dust, and unto dust thou shalt return.”
Roger had gone up for his turn, and could vividly recall both the strange
gritty feel of the ashes, and the odd sense of mingled disquiet and acceptance.
Something like now.23Trout-fishing in America, Part Two
A few days later …
THE FLY FLUTTERED DOWN, green and yellow as a falling leaf, to land
among the rings of the rising hatch. It floated for a second on the surface,
maybe two, then vanished in a tiny splash, yanked out of sight by voracious
jaws. Roger flicked the end of his rod sharply to set the hook, but there was
no need. The trout were hungry this evening, 
striking at everything, and his
fish had taken the hook so deep that bringing it in needed nothing but brute
force.
It came up fighting, though, flapping and silver in the last of the light. He
could feel its life through the rod, fierce and bright, so much bigger than the
fish itself, and his heart rose to meet it.
“Who taught ye to cast, Roger Mac?” His father-in-law took the trout as it
came ashore, still flapping, and clubbed it neatly on a stone. “That was as
pretty a touch as ever I’ve seen.”
Roger made a modest gesture of dismissal, but flushed a little with
pleasure at the compliment; Jamie didn’t say such things lightly.
“My father,” he said.
“Aye?” Jamie looked startled.
Roger hastened to correct himself. “The Reverend, I mean. He was really
my great-uncle, though—he adopted me.”
“Still your father,” Jamie said, but smiled. He glanced toward the far side
of the pool, where Germain and Jemmy were squabbling over who’d caught
the biggest fish. They had a respectable string but hadn’t thought to keep
their catches separate, so couldn’t tell who’d caught what.
“Ye dinna think it makes a difference, do ye? That Jem’s mine by blood
and Germain by love?”
“You know I don’t.” Roger smiled himself at sight of the two boys.
Germain was a little more than a year older than Jem, but slightly built, likeboth his parents. Jem had the long bones and wide shoulders of his
grandfather—
and
 his father, Roger thought, straightening his own shoulders.
The two boys were much of a height, and the hair of both glowed red at the
moment, the ruddy light of the sinking sun setting fire to Germain’s blond
mop. “Where’s Fanny, come to think? She’d settle them.”
Frances was twelve, but sometimes seemed much younger—and often
startlingly older. She’d been fast friends with Germain when Jem had arrived
on the Ridge, and rather standoffish, fearing that Jem would come between
her and her only friend. But Jem was an open, sweet-tempered lad, and
Germain knew a good deal more about how people worked than did the
average eleven-year-old ex-pickpocket, and shortly the three of them were to
be seen everywhere together, giggling as they slithered through the
shrubbery, intent on some mysterious errand, or turning up at the end of
churning, too late to help with the work but just in time for a glass of fresh
buttermilk.
“My sister’s showing her how to comb goats.”
“Aye?”
“For the hair. I want it to mix wi’ the plaster for the walls.”
“Oh, aye.”
Roger nodded, threading a stringer through the fish’s dark-red gill slit.
The sun came low through the trees, but the trout were still biting, the
water dappling with dozens of bright rings and the frequent splash of a
leaping fish. Roger’s fingers tightened for a moment on his rod, tempted—
but they had enough for supper and next morning’s breakfast, too. No point
in catching more; there were a dozen casks of smoked and salted fish already
put away in the cold cellar, and the light was going.
Jamie showed no signs of moving, though. He was sitting on a comfortable
stump, bare-legged and clad in nothing but his shirt, his old hunting plaid
puddled on the ground behind; it had been a warm day and the balm of it still
lingered in the air. He glanced at the boys, who had forgotten their argument
and were back at their lines, intent as a pair of kingfishers.
Jamie turned to Roger then, and said, in a quite ordinary tone of voice, “Do
Presbyterians have the sacrament of Confession, 
mac mo chinnidh
?”
Roger said nothing for a moment, taken aback both by the question and its
immediate implications and by Jamie’s addressing him as “son of my
house”—a thing he’d done exactly once, at the calling of the clans at Mount
Helicon some years before.The question itself was straightforward, though, and he answered it that
way.
“No. Catholics have seven sacraments but Presbyterians only recognize
two: Baptism and the Lord’s Supper.” He might have left it at that, but the
first implication of the question was plain before him.
“D’ye have a thing ye want to tell me, Jamie?” He thought it might be the
second time he’d called his father-in-law Jamie to his face. “I can’t give ye
absolution—but I can listen.”
He wouldn’t have said that Jamie’s face showed anything in the way of
strain. But now it relaxed and the difference was sufficiently visible that his
own heart opened to the man, ready for whatever he might say. Or so he
thought.
“Aye.” Jamie’s voice was husky and he cleared his throat, ducking his
head, a little shy. “Aye, that’ll do fine. D’ye remember the night we took
Claire back from the bandits?”
“I’m no likely to forget it,” Roger said, staring at him. He cut his eyes at
the boys, but they were still at it, and he looked back at Jamie. “Why?” he
asked, wary.
“Were ye there wi’ me, at the last, when I broke Hodgepile’s neck and Ian
asked me what to do with the rest? I said, ‘Kill them all.’”
“I was there.” He had been. And he didn’t want to go back. Three words
and it was all there, just below the surface of memory, still cold in his bones:
black night in the forest, a sear of fire across his eyes, chilling wind, and the
smell of blood. The drums—a 
bodhran
 thundering against his arm, two more
behind him. Screaming in the dark. The sudden shine of eyes and the
stomach-clenching feel of a skull caving in.
“I killed one of them,” Roger said abruptly. “Did you know that?”
Jamie hadn’t looked away and didn’t now; his mouth compressed for a
moment, and he nodded.
“I didna see ye do it,” he said. “But it was plain enough in your face, next
day.”
“I don’t wonder.” Roger’s throat was tight, and the words came out thick
and gruff. He was surprised that Jamie had noticed—had noticed anything at
all on that day other than Claire, once the fighting was over. The image of
her, kneeling by a creek, setting her own broken nose by her reflection in the
water, the blood streaking down over her bruised and naked body, came back
to him with the force of a punch in the solar plexus.“Ye never ken how it will be.” Jamie lifted one shoulder and let it fall; he’d
lost the lace that bound his hair, snagged by a tree branch, and the thick red
strands stirred in the evening breeze. “A fight like that, I mean. What ye
recall and what ye don’t. I remember everything about that night, though—
and the day beyond it.”
Roger nodded but didn’t speak. It was true that Presbyterians had no
sacrament of Confession—and he rather regretted that they didn’t; it was a
useful thing to have in your pocket. Particularly, he supposed, if you led the
sort of life Jamie had. But any minister knows the soul’s need to speak and be
understood, and that he could give.
“I expect ye do,” he said. “Do ye regret it, then? Telling the men to kill
them all, I mean.”
“Not for an instant.” Jamie gave him a brief, fierce glance. “Do ye regret
your part of it?”
“I—” Roger stopped abruptly. It wasn’t as though he hadn’t thought about
it, but … “I regret that I had to,” he said carefully. “Very much. But I’m sure
in my own mind that I did have to.”
Jamie’s breath came out in a sigh. “Ye’ll know Claire was raped, I expect.”
It wasn’t a question, but Roger nodded. Claire hadn’t spoken of it, even to
Brianna—but she hadn’t had to.
“The man who did it wasna killed, that night. She saw him alive two
months past, at Beardsley’s.”
The evening breeze had turned chilly, but that wasn’t what raised the hairs
on Roger’s forearms. Jamie was a man of precise speech—and he’d started
this conversation with the word “Confession.” Roger took his time about
replying.
“I’m thinking that ye’re not asking my opinion of what ye should do about
it.”
Jamie sat silent for a moment, dark against the blazing sky.
“No,” he said softly. “I’m not.”
“Grandda! Look!” Jem and Germain were scrambling over the rocks and
brush, each with a string of shimmering trout, dripping dark streaks of blood
and water down the boys’ breeks, the swaying fish gleaming bronze and
silver in the last of the evening light.
Roger turned back from the boys in time to see the flicker of Jamie’s eye
as he glanced round at the boys, the sudden light on his face catching atroubled, inward look that vanished in an instant as he smiled and raised a
hand to his grandsons, reaching out to admire their catch.
Jesus Christ,
 Roger thought. He felt as though an electric wire had run
through his chest for an instant, small and sizzling. 
He was wondering if they
were old enough yet. To know about things like this.
“We decided we got six each,” Jemmy was explaining, proudly holding up
his string and turning it so his father and grandfather could appreciate the size
and beauty of his catch.
“And these are Fanny’s,” Germain said, lifting a smaller string on which
three plump trout dangled. “We decided she’d ha’ caught some, if she was
here.”
“That was a kind thought, lads,” Jamie said, smiling. “I’m sure the lassie
will appreciate it.”
“Mmphm,” said Germain, though he frowned a little. “Will she still be able
to come fishin’ with us, 
Grand-père
? Mrs. Wilson said she won’t be able to,
once she’s a woman.”
Jemmy made a disgusted noise and elbowed Germain. “Dinna be daft,” he
said. “My mam’s a woman and she goes fishin’. She hunts, too, aye?”
Germain nodded but looked unconvinced.
“Aye, she does,” he admitted. “Mr. Crombie doesna like it, though, and
neither does Heron.”
“Heron?” Roger said, surprised. Hiram Crombie was under the impression
that women should cook, clean, spin, sew, mind children, feed stock, and
keep quiet save when praying. But Standing Heron Bradshaw was a
Cherokee who’d married one of the Moravian girls from Salem and settled on
the other side of the Ridge. “Why? The Cherokee women plant their own
crops and I’m sure I’ve seen them catching fish with nets and fish traps by
the fields.”
“Heron didna say about catching fish,” Jem explained. “He says women
canna hunt, though, because they stink o’ blood, and it drives the game
away.”
“Well, that’s true,” Jamie said, to Roger’s surprise. “But only when
they’ve got their courses. And even so, if she stays downwind …”
“Would a woman who smells o’ blood not draw bears or painters?”
Germain asked. He looked a little worried at the thought.
“Probably not,” Roger said dryly, hoping he was right. “And if I were you,
I wouldn’t suggest any such thing to your auntie. She might take it amiss.”Jamie made a small, amused sound and shooed the boys. “Get on wi’ ye,
lads. We’ve a few things yet to talk of. Tell your grannie we’ll be in time for
supper, aye?”
They waited, watching ’til the boys were safely out of hearing. The breeze
had died away now and the last slow rings on the water spread and flattened,
disappearing into the gathering shadows. Tiny flies began to fill the air,
survivors of the hatch.
“Ye did it, then?” Roger asked. He was wary of the answer; what if it
wasn’t done, and Jamie wished his help in the matter?
But Jamie nodded, his broad shoulders relaxing.
“Claire didna tell me about it, ken. I saw at once that something was
troubling her, o’ course …” A thread of rueful amusement tinged his voice;
Claire’s glass face was famous. “But when I told her so, she asked me to let it
bide, and give her time to think.”
“Did you?”
“No.” The amusement had gone. “I saw it was a serious thing. I asked my
sister; she told me. She was wi’ Claire at Beardsley’s, aye? She saw the
fellow, too, and wormed it out of Claire what the matter was.
“Claire said to me—when I made it clear I kent what was going on—that it
was all right; she was trying to forgive the bastard. And thought she was
makin’ progress with it. Mostly.” Jamie’s voice was matter-of-fact, but Roger
thought he heard an edge of regret in it.
“Do you … feel that you should have let her deal with it? It 
is
 a—a
process, to forgive. Not a single act, I mean.” He felt remarkably awkward,
and coughed to clear his throat.
“I ken that,” Jamie said in a voice dry as sand. “Few men ken it better.”
A hot flush of embarrassment burned its way up Roger’s chest and into his
neck. He could feel it take him by the throat, and couldn’t speak at all for a
moment.
“Aye,” Jamie said, after a moment. “Aye, it’s a point. But I think it’s
maybe easier to forgive a dead man than one who’s walkin’ about under your
nose. And come to that, I thought she’d have an easier time forgiving me than
him.” He lifted one shoulder and let it fall. “And … whether she could bear
the thought of the man living near us or not—I couldn’t.”
Roger made a small sound of acknowledgment; there seemed nothing else
useful to say.Jamie didn’t move or speak. He sat with his head slightly turned away,
looking out over the water, where a fugitive light glimmered over the breeze-
touched surface.
“It was maybe the worst thing I’ve ever done,” he said at last, very quietly.
“Morally, do you mean?” Roger asked, his own voice carefully neutral.
Jamie’s head turned toward him, and Roger caught a blue flash of surprise as
the last of the sun touched the side of his face.
“Och, no,” his father-in-law said at once. “Only hard to do.”
“Aye.” Roger let the silence settle again, waiting. He could 
feel
 Jamie
thinking, though the man didn’t move. Did he need to tell it to someone,
relive it and thus ease his soul by full confession? He felt in himself a terrible
curiosity, and at the same time a desperate wish not to hear. He drew breath
and spoke abruptly.
“I told Brianna. That I’d killed Boble, and—and how. Maybe I shouldn’t
have.”
Jamie’s face was completely in shadow, but Roger could feel those blue
eyes on his own face, fully lit by the setting sun. With an effort, he didn’t
look down.
“Aye?” Jamie said, his voice calm, but definitely curious. “What did she
say to ye? If ye dinna mind telling me, I mean.”
“I—well. To tell the truth, the only thing I remember for sure is that she
said, ‘I love you.’” That was the only thing he’d heard, through the echo of
drums and the drumming of his own pulse in his ears. He’d told her kneeling,
his head in her lap. She’d kept on saying it then: “I love you,” her arms
wrapping his shoulders, sheltering him with the fall of her hair, absolving
him with her tears.
For a moment, he was back inside that memory, and he came to himself
with a start, realizing that Jamie had said something.
“What did you say?”
“I said—and how is it Presbyterians dinna think marriage is a sacrament?”
Jamie moved on his rock, facing Roger directly. The sun was all but down,
no more than a nimbus of bronze in his hair; his features were dark.
“You’re a priest, Roger Mac,” he said, in the same tone he might have used
to describe any natural phenomenon, such as a piebald horse or a flight of
mallard ducks. “It’s plain to me—and to you, I reckon—that God’s called ye
so, and He’s brought ye to this place and this time to do it.”“Well, the being a minister part is clear,” Roger said dryly. “As for the rest
… your guess is possibly no better than mine. And a guess is the best 
I’ve
got.”
“That would put ye well ahead of the rest of us, man,” Jamie said, the
smile evident in his voice. He rose to his feet, a black shadow with rod in
hand, stooping for the rush-woven creel. “We’d best start back, aye?”
There was no real passage between the shore of the trout pond and the deer
trail that led along the lower slopes of the Ridge, and the effort of scrambling
up through boulders and heavy brush in the fading light kept them from
speaking much.
“How old were you, the first time you saw a man killed?” Roger said
abruptly to Jamie’s back.
“Eight,” Jamie replied without hesitation. “In a fight during my first cattle
raid. I wasna much troubled about it.”
A stone rolled under his foot and he slid, snatching at a fir branch in time
to save himself. Getting his feet back under him, he crossed himself and
muttered something under his breath.
The smell of bruised fir needles was strong in the air as they moved more
slowly, watching the ground. Roger wondered whether things really did smell
stronger at dusk, or whether it was that with your sight fading, you just paid
more attention to your other senses.
“In Scotland,” Jamie said, quite abruptly, “in the Rising, I watched my
uncle Dougal kill one of his own men. That was a terrible thing, though it
was done for mercy.”
Roger drew breath, meaning to say … what, he wasn’t sure, but it didn’t
matter.
“And then I killed Dougal, just before the battle.” Jamie didn’t turn round;
just kept climbing, slow and dogged, gravel sliding now and then beneath his
feet.
“I know,” Roger said. “And I know why. Claire told us. When she came
back,” he added, seeing Jamie’s shoulders stiffen. “When she thought 
you
were dead.”
There was a long silence, broken only by the sound of heavy breathing and
the high, thin 
zeek!
 of hunting swallows.
“I dinna ken,” Jamie said, obviously taking care with his words, “if I could
bring myself to die for an idea. No that it isn’t a fine thing,” he added
hurriedly. “But … I asked Brianna whether any o’ those men—the ones whothought of the notions and the words ye’d need to make them real—whether
any of them actually did the fighting.”
“In the Revolution, ye mean? I don’t think they did,” Roger said dubiously.
“Will, I mean. Unless you count George Washington, and I don’t believe he
does so much talking.”
“He talks to his troops, believe me,” Jamie said, a wry humor in his voice.
“But maybe not to the King, or the newspapers.”
“No. Mind,” Roger added in fairness, pushing aside a pine branch, thick
with a pungent sap that left his palm sticky, “John Adams, Ben Franklin, all
the thinkers and talkers—they’re risking their necks as much as you—as we
—are.”
“Aye.” The ground was rising steeply now, and nothing more was said as
they climbed, feeling their way over the broken ground of a gravel fall.
“I’m thinking that maybe I canna die—or lead men to their own deaths—
only for the notion of freedom. Not now.”
“Not now?” Roger echoed, surprised. “You could have—earlier?”
“Aye. When you and the lass and your weans were … there.” Roger caught
the brief movement of a hand, flung out toward the distant future. “Because
what I did here then would be—it would 
matter,
 aye? To all of you—and I
can fight for you.” His voice grew softer. “It’s what I’m made to do, aye?”
“I understand,” Roger said quietly. “But ye’ve always known that, haven’t
you? What ye’re made to do.”
Jamie made a sound in his throat, half surprised.
“Dinna ken when I knew it,” he said, a smile in his voice. “Maybe at
Leoch, when I found I could get the other lads into mischief—and did.
Perhaps I should be confessing that?”
Roger brushed that aside.
“It will matter to Jem and Mandy—and to those of our blood who come
after them,” he said. 
Provided Jem and Mandy survive to have children of
their own,
 he added mentally, and felt a cold qualm in the pit of his stomach
at the thought.
Jamie stopped quite suddenly, and Roger had to step to the side to avoid
running into him.
“Look,” Jamie said, and he did. They were standing at the top of a small
rise, where the trees fell away for a moment, and the Ridge and the north side
of the cove below it spread before them, a massive chunk of solid blackagainst the indigo of the faded sky. Tiny lights pricked the blackness, though:
the windows and sparking chimneys of a dozen cabins.
“It’s not only our wives and our weans, ken?” Jamie said, and nodded
toward the lights. “It’s them, as well. All of them.” His voice held an odd
note; a sort of pride—but rue and resignation, too.
All of them.
Seventy-three households in all, Roger knew. He’d seen the ledgers Jamie
kept, written with painful care, noting the economy and welfare of each
family who occupied his land—and his mind.
“Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the
Lord of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, to be
ruler over my people, over Israel.”
 The quote sprang to mind, and he’d
spoken it aloud before he could think.
Jamie drew a deep, audible breath.
“Aye,” he said. “Sheep would be easier.” Then, abruptly, “Frank Randall
—his book, it says the war is coming through the South, not that I needed
him to tell me that.
“But Claire, Brianna, and the children—and them—I canna shield them,
should it come close.” He nodded toward the distant sparks, and it was clear
to Roger that by “them” he meant his tenants—his people. He didn’t pause
for a reply, but resettled the creel on his shoulder and started down.
The trail narrowed. Roger’s shoulder brushed Jamie’s, close, and he fell
back a step, following his father-in-law. The moon was late in rising tonight,
and sliver-thin. It was dark and the air had a bite in it now.
“I’ll help you protect them,” he said to Jamie’s back. His voice was gruff.
“I ken that,” Jamie said, softly. There was a short pause, as though Jamie
was waiting for him to speak further, and he realized that he should.
“With my body,” Roger said quietly, into the night. “And with my soul, if
that should be necessary.”
He saw Jamie in brief silhouette, saw him a draw a deep breath and his
shoulders relax as he let it out. They walked more briskly now; the trail was
dark, and they strayed now and then, the brush catching at their bare legs.
At the edge of their own clearing, Jamie paused to let Roger come up with
him, and laid a hand on his arm.
“The things that happen in a war—the things that ye do … they mark ye,”
he said quietly. “I dinna think bein’ a priest will spare you, is what I’m
sayin’, and I’m sorry for it.”They mark ye. And I’m sorry for it.
 But he said nothing; only touched
Jamie’s hand lightly where it lay upon his arm. Then Jamie took his hand
away and they walked home together, silent.24
Alarms by Night
ADSO, DRAPED LANGUIDLY AS a scarf over the table, opened his eyes
and gave a small inquisitive “mowp” at the scraping noise.
“Not edible,” I said to him, tapping the last glob of gentian ointment off
the spoon. The big celadon eyes went back to slits. Not all the way closed,
though—and the tip of his tail began to stir. He was watching something, and
I swung around to find Jemmy in the doorway, swathed in his father’s ratty
old blue calico shirt. It nearly touched his feet and was falling off one bony
little shoulder, but that clearly didn’t matter; he was wide-awake and urgent.
“Grannie! Fanny’s took bad!”
“Taken,” I said automatically, corking the jar of grease to keep Adso out.
“What’s the matter?”
“She’s rolled up like a sow bug and grunting like she’s got the bellyache—
but, Grannie, there’s blood on her night rail!”
“Oh,” I said, taking my hand off the jar of peppermint leaves I’d been
reaching for and reaching instead for a small gauze package on the highest
shelf. I’d had it made up for the last two months, in readiness. “I think she’s
fine, sweetheart. Or will be. Where’s Mandy?” The children all shared a
room—and often enough, a single bed; it was common to come in late at
night and find a mattress ticking on the floor, and all four of them sprawled in
a sweetly moist tangle of limbs and clothes on top of it. Germain had gone
hunting with Bobby Higgins and Aidan—Jemmy being prevented because
he’d cut his foot yesterday—but Mandy was here, and I didn’t think her
insistent curiosity and voluble opinions would be of help in the present
situation.
“Asleep,” Jem answered, watching me drop the gauze packet of herbs into
a clay teapot and pour boiling water over it. “What’s that potion for,
Grannie?”“It’s just a tea made with ginger-root and rosemary,” I said. “And a bit of
yarrow. It’s an emmenagogue.” I spelled that for him, adding, “It’s to help
with a woman’s courses. You’ve heard about courses?”
Jemmy’s eyes went quite round.
“You mean Fanny’s on heat?” he blurted. “Who’s going to breed her?”
“Well, it doesn’t work 
quite
 that way with people,” I said, adding craftily,
“Ask your mother to explain it all to you in the morning. Right now, why
don’t you go and crawl in with Grandpa, and I’ll take this up to Fanny.”
Before leaving the surgery, though, I pulled the box of river stones out
from under the table and picked out my favorite: a weathered chunk of gray
calcite the size of Jamie’s fist, with a thin, vivid green line of embedded
emerald showing on one side, reminding me of the emerald I’d picked up by
the creek. I’d added that one to my medicine bag—my amulet. I laid the
stone in the hearth and shoveled hot embers on top of it, just in case heat
should be required.
The candle was lit in the children’s room and Fanny was on her own
narrow bed, uncovered and curled up tight as a hedgehog, her back to the
door. She didn’t look round at the sound of my footsteps, but her shoulders
rose up higher round her ears.
“Fanny?” I said softly. “Are you all right, sweetheart?” From Jemmy’s
obvious concern about the blood, I’d been a bit worried—but I could see only
a single small streak of blood and one or two spots on the muslin of her night
rail, the rusty brown of first menstruation.
“I’m fine,” said a small, cold voice. “It’s juth—
just
—blood.”
“That’s quite true,” I said equably, though the tone in which she’d said it
rather alarmed me. I sat down beside her and put a hand on her shoulder. It
was hard as wood, and her skin was cold. How long had she been lying there
uncovered?
“I’m all right,” she said. “I got the rags. I’ll wath—
wash
—my rail in the
morning.”
“Don’t trouble about it,” I said, and stroked the back of her head very
lightly, as though she was a cat of uncertain temper. I wouldn’t have thought
she could become any more tense, but she did. I took my hand away.
“Are you in pain?” I asked, in the business-like voice I used when taking a
physical history from someone who’d come to my surgery. She’d heard it
before, and the slender shoulders relaxed, just a hair.“Not weal—I mean, not 
ree
-lee,” she said, pronouncing it very distinctly.
It had taken no little practice for her to be able to pronounce words correctly,
after I had done the frenectomy that had freed her from being tongue-tied,
and I could tell that it annoyed her to be slipping back into the lisp of her
bondage.
“It jusst feels 
tight,
” she said. “Like a fist squeezing me right there.” She
pushed her own fists into her lower abdomen in illustration.
“That sounds quite normal,” I assured her. “It’s just your uterus waking up,
so to speak. It hasn’t moved noticeably before, so you wouldn’t have been
aware of it.” I’d explained the internal structure of the female reproductive
system to her, with drawings, and while she’d seemed mildly repulsed at the
word “uterus,” she 
had
 paid attention.
To my surprise, the back of her neck went pale at this, her shoulders
hunching up again. I glanced over my shoulder, but Mandy was snoring in
the quilts, dead to the world.
“Fanny?” I said, and ventured to touch her again, stroking her arm.
“You’ve seen girls come into their courses before, haven’t you?” So far as we
could estimate, she’d lived in a Philadelphia brothel since the age of five or
so; I would have been astounded if she hadn’t seen almost everything the
female reproductive system could do. And then it struck me, and I scolded
myself for a fool. Of course. She 
had
 seen everything.
“Yess,” she said, in that cold, remote way. “It means two things. You can
be got with child, and you can start to earn money.”
I took a deep breath.
“Fanny,” I said, “sit up and look at me.”
She stayed frozen for a moment, but she was used to obedience, and after a
moment she turned over and sat up. She didn’t look at me, but kept her eyes
fixed on her knees, small and sharp under the muslin.
“Sweetheart,” I said, more gently, and put a hand under her chin to lift her
face. Her eyes met mine like a blow, their soft brown nearly black with fear.
Her chin was rigid, her jaw set tight, and I took my hand away.
“You don’t really think that we intend you to be a whore, Fanny?” She
heard the incredulousness in my voice, and blinked. Once. Then looked down
again.
“I’m … not good for anything else,” she said, in a small voice. “But I’m
worth a lot of money—for … 
that.
” She waved a hand over her lap, in a
quick, almost resentful gesture.I felt as though I’d been punched in my own belly. Did she really think—
but she clearly did. Must have thought so, all the time she had been living
with us. She’d seemed to thrive at first, safe from danger and well fed, with
the boys as companions. But the last month or so, she’d seemed withdrawn
and thoughtful, eating much less. I’d seen the physical signs and reckoned
them as due to her sensing the imminent change; had prepared the
emmenagogue herbs, to be ready. That was apparently the case, but
obviously I hadn’t guessed the half of it.
“That isn’t true, Fanny,” I said, and took her hand. She let me, but it lay in
mine like a dead bird. “That’s 
not
 your only worth.” Oh, God, did it sound as
though she had another, and that’s why we had—
“I mean—we didn’t take you in because we thought you … you’d be
profitable to us in some way. Not at all.” She turned her face away, with an
almost inaudible sniffing noise. This was getting worse by the moment. I had
a sudden memory of Brianna as a young teenager, and spending hours in her
bedroom, mired in futile reassurances—
no, you aren’t ugly; of course you’ll
have a boyfriend when it’s time; no, everybody doesn’t hate you
. I hadn’t
been good at it then, and clearly those particular maternal skills hadn’t
improved with age.
“We took you because we wanted you, sweetheart,” I said, stroking the
unresponsive hand. “Wanted to take care of you.” She pulled it away and
curled up again, face in her pillow.
“Do, you didn.” Her voice came thick, and she cleared her throat, hard.
“William made Mr. Fraser take me.”
I laughed out loud, and she turned her head from the pillow to look at me,
surprised.
“Really, Fanny,” I said. “Speaking as one who knows both of them rather
well, I can assure you that no one in the world could make either one of those
men do anything whatever against his will. Mr. Fraser is stubborn as a rock,
and his son is just like him. How long have you known William?”
“Not … long,” she said, uncertain. “But—but he tried to save J-Jane. She
liked him.” Sudden tears welled in her eyes, and she turned her face back into
the pillow.
“Oh,” I said, much more softly. “I see. You’re thinking of her. Of Jane.”
Of course.
She nodded, her small shoulders hunched and shaking. Her plait had
unraveled and the soft brown curls fell away, exposing the white skin of herneck, slender as a stalk of blanched asparagus.
“It’th the only t-time I ever thaw her cry,” she said, the words only half
audible between emotion and muffling.
“Jane? What was it?”
“Her firtht—
first
—time. Wif—with—a man. When she came back and
gave the bloody towel to Mrs. Abbott. She did that, and then she crawled into
bed with me and cried. I held huh and—and petted huh—bu—I couldn’t
make her thtop.” She pulled her arms under her and shook with silent sobs.
“Sassenach?” Jamie’s voice came from the doorway, husky with sleep.
“What’s amiss? I rolled over and found Jem in my bed, instead of you.” He
spoke calmly, but his eyes were fixed on Fanny’s shivering back. He glanced
at me, one eyebrow raised, and moved his head slightly toward the doorjamb.
Did I want him to leave?
I glanced down at Fanny and up at him with a helpless twitch of my
shoulder, and he moved at once into the room, pulling up a stool beside
Fanny’s bed. He noticed the blood streaks at once and looked up at me again
—surely this was women’s business?—but I shook my head, keeping a hand
on Fanny’s back.
“Fanny’s missing her sister,” I said, addressing the only aspect of things I
thought might be dealt with effectively at the moment.
“Ah,” Jamie said softly, and before I could stop him, he had bent down and
gathered her gently up into his arms. I stiffened for an instant, afraid of
having a man touch her just now—but she turned in to him at once, flinging
her arms about his neck and sobbing into his chest.
He sat down, holding her on his knee, and I felt the unhappy tension in my
own shoulders ease, seeing him smooth her hair and murmur things to her in
a 
Gàidhlig
 she didn’t speak but clearly understood as well as a horse or dog
might.
Fanny went on sobbing for a bit but slowly calmed under his touch, only
hiccuping now and then.
“I saw your sister just the once,” he said softly. “Jane was her name, aye?
Jane Eleanora. She was a bonnie lass. And she loved ye dear, Frances. I ken
that.”
Fanny nodded, tears streaming down her cheeks, and I looked at the corner
where Mandy lay on the trundle. She was still out, thumb plugged securely
into her mouth. Fanny got herself under control within a few seconds, though,and I wondered whether she had been beaten at the brothel for weeping or
displaying violent emotion.
“She did it fuh me,” she said, in tones of absolute desolation. “Killed
Captain Harkness. And now she’th dead. It’th all my fault.” And despite the
whiteness of her clenched knuckles, more tears welled in her eyes. Jamie
looked at me over her head, then swallowed to get his own voice under
control.
“Ye would have done anything for your sister, aye?” he said, gently
rubbing her back between the bony little shoulder blades.
“Yes,” she said, voice muffled in his shoulder.
“Aye, of course. And she would ha’ done the same for you—and did. Ye
wouldna have hesitated for a moment to lay down your life for her, and nor
did she. It wasna your fault, 
a nighean.
”
“It 
was
! I shouldn’t have made a fuss, I should have—oh, Janie!”
She clung to him, abandoning herself to grief. Jamie patted her and let her
cry, but he looked at me over the disheveled crown of her head and raised his
brows.
I got up and came to stand behind him, a hand on his shoulder, and in
murmured French acquainted him in a few words with the other source of
Fanny’s distress. He pursed his lips for an instant, but then nodded, never
ceasing to pet her and make soothing noises. The tea had gone cold, particles
of rosemary and ground ginger floating on the murky surface. I took up the
pot and cup and went quietly out to make it fresh.
Jemmy was standing in the dark just outside the door and I nearly crashed
into him.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” I said, only just managing to say it in a
whisper. “What are you doing here? Why aren’t you asleep?”
He ignored this, looking into the dim light of the bedroom and the humped
shadow on the wall, a deeply troubled look on his face.
“What happened to Fanny’s sister, Grannie?”
I hesitated, looking down at him. He was only nine. And surely it was his
parents’ place to tell him what they thought he should know. But Fanny was
his friend—and God knew, she needed a friend she could trust.
“Come down with me,” I said, turning him toward the stair with a hand 
on
his shoulder. “I’ll tell you while I make more tea. And 
don’t
 bloody tell your
mother I did.”I told him, as simply as I could, and omitting the things Fanny had told me
about the late Captain Harkness’s habits.
“Do you know the word ‘whore’—er … ‘hoor,’ I mean?” I amended, and
the frown of incomprehension relaxed.
“Sure. Germain told me. Hoors are ladies that go to bed with men they
aren’t married to. Fanny’s not a hoor, though—was her sister?” He looked
troubled at the thought.
“Well, yes,” I said. “Not to put too fine a point on it. But women—or girls
—who become whores do it because they have no other way to earn a living.
Not because they want to, I mean.”
He looked confused. “How do they earn money?”
“Oh. The men pay them to—er—go to bed with them. Take my word for
it,” I assured him, seeing his eyes widen in astonishment.
“I go to bed with Mandy and Fanny all the time,” he protested. “And
Germain, too. I wouldn’t pay them money for being girls!”
“Jeremiah,” I said, pouring fresh hot water into the pot. “‘Go to bed’ is a
euphemism—do you know that word? It means saying something that sounds
better than what you’re really talking about—for sexual intercourse.”
“Oh, 
that,
” he said, his face clearing. “Like the pigs? Or the chickens?”
“Rather like that, yes. Find me a clean cloth, will you? There should be
some in the lower cupboard.” I knelt, knees creaking slightly, and scooped
the hot stone out of the ashes with the poker. It made a small hissing sound as
the cold air of the surgery hit the hot surface.
“So,” I said, reaching for the cloth he’d fetched me, and trying for as
matter-of-fact a voice as could be managed, “Jane and Fanny’s parents had
died, and they had no way to feed themselves, so Jane became a whore. But
some men are very wicked—I expect you know that already, don’t you?” I
added, glancing up at him, and he nodded soberly.
“Yes. Well, a wicked man came to the place where Jane and Fanny lived
and wanted to make Fanny go to bed with him, even though she was much
too young to do such a thing. And … er … Jane killed him.”
“Wow.”
I blinked at him, but it had been said with the deepest respect. I coughed
and began folding the cloth.
“It was very heroic of her, yes. But she—”
“How did she kill him?”“With a knife,” I said, a little tersely, hoping he wouldn’t ask for details. I
knew them and wished I didn’t. “But the man was a soldier, and when the
British army found out, they arrested Jane.”
“Oh, Jesus,” Jem said, in tones of awed horror. “Did they hang her, like
they tried to hang Dad?”
I tried to think whether I should tell him not to take the Lord’s name in
vain, but on the one hand, he clearly hadn’t meant it that way—and for
another, I was a blackened pot in that particular regard.
“They meant to. She was alone, and very much afraid—and she … well,
she killed herself, darling.”
He looked at me for a long moment, face blank, then swallowed, hard.
“Did Jane go to Hell, Grannie?” he asked in a small voice. “Is that why
Fanny’s so sad?”
I’d wrapped the stone thickly in cloth; the heat of it glowed in the palms of
my hands.
“No, sweetheart,” I said, with as much conviction as I could muster. “I’m
quite sure she didn’t. God would certainly understand the circumstances. No,
Fanny’s just missing her sister.”
He nodded, very sober.
“I’d miss Mandy, if she killed somebody and got—” He gulped at the
thought. I was somewhat concerned to note that the notion of Mandy killing
someone apparently seemed reasonable to him, but then …
“I’m quite sure nothing like that would ever happen to Mandy. Here.” I
gave him the wrapped stone. “Be careful with it.”
We made our way slowly upstairs, trailing warm ginger steam, and found
Jamie sitting beside Fanny on the bed, a small collection of things laid out on
the quilt between them. He looked up at me, flicked an eyebrow at Jem, and
then nodded at the quilt.
“Frances was just showing me a picture of her sister. Would ye let Mrs.
Fraser and Jem have a look, 
a nighean
?”
Fanny’s face was still blotched from crying, but she had herself more or
less back in hand, and she nodded soberly, moving aside a little.
The small bundle of possessions she had brought with her was unrolled,
revealing a pathetic little pile of items: a nit comb, the cork from a wine
bottle, two neatly folded hanks of thread, one with a needle stuck through it, a
paper of pins, and a few small bits of tawdry jewelry. On the quilt was a sheetof paper, much folded and worn in the creases, with a pencil drawing of a
girl.
“One of the men dwew—
drew
—it, one night in the salon,” Fanny said,
moving aside a little, so we could look.
It was no more than a sketch, but the artist had caught a spark of life. Jane
had been lovely in outline, straight-nosed and with a delicate, ripe mouth, but
there was neither flirtation nor demureness in her expression. She was
looking half over her shoulder, half smiling, but with an air of mild scorn in
her look.
“She’s pretty, Fanny,” Jemmy said, and came to stand by her. He patted
her arm as he would have patted a dog, and with as little self-consciousness.
Jamie had given Fanny a handkerchief, I saw; she sniffed and blew her
nose, nodding.
“This is all I have,” she said, her voice hoarse as a young toad’s. “Just this
and her wock—locket.”
“This?” Jamie stirred the little pile gently with a big forefinger and
withdrew a small brass oval, dangling on a chain. “Is it a miniature of Jane,
then, or maybe a lock of her hair?”
Fanny shook her head, taking the locket from him.
“No,” she said. “It’s a picture of our muv—mother.” She slid a thumbnail
into the side of the locket and flicked it open. I bent forward to look, but the
miniature inside was hard to see, shadowed as it was by Jamie’s body.
“May I?”
Fanny handed me the locket and I turned to hold it close to the candle. The
woman inside had dark, softly curly hair like Fanny’s—and I thought I could
make out a resemblance to Jane in the nose and set of the chin, though it
wasn’t a particularly skillful rendering.
Behind me, I heard Jamie say, quite casually, “Frances, no man will ever
take ye against your will, while I live.”
There was a startled silence, and I turned round to see Fanny staring up at
him. He touched her hand, very gently.
“D’ye believe me, Frances?” he said quietly.
“Yes,” she whispered, after a long moment, and all the tension left her
body in a sigh like the east wind.
Jemmy leaned against me, head pressing my elbow, and I realized that I
was just standing there, my eyes full of tears. I blotted them hastily on mysleeve and pressed the locket closed. Or tried to; it slipped in my fingers and I
saw that there was a name inscribed inside it, opposite the miniature.
Faith,
 it said.
I COULDN’T GO to sleep. I’d given Fanny her tea, provided her with
suitable cloths—not at all to my surprise, she already knew how to use them
—and talked gently to her, careful not to raise any more of her personal
ghosts.
When Fanny had come to us, Jamie and I had agreed that we wouldn’t try
to question her about any of the bits of memory she dropped aloud—like the
bad men on the ship and what had happened to Spotty the dog—unless she
seemed to want to talk about them. I thought she would, sooner or later. Bree
and Roger had agreed as well, though I could see how curious Brianna was.
Fanny had mentioned Jane now and then, offhandedly, but in a way
designed—I thought—to keep a sense of her sister alive. Seeing her distress
tonight, though … Jane was much closer to her than I’d thought. And now
that I’d seen Jane’s face … I couldn’t forget it.
Knowing only what I 
did
 know about the girls’ lives in the brothel in
Philadelphia was upsetting; I really hadn’t wanted to find out how they’d
come there. I still didn’t … but I couldn’t keep the worm of speculation at
bay; it had burrowed into my brain and was squirming busily through my
thoughts, killing sleep.
Bad men on a ship. A dog thrown into the sea. A pet dog? A family—if
Fanny and Jane had been with their parents on a ship that encountered pirates
… or even a wicked captain, like Stephen Bonnet … I felt the hairs rise on
my forearms at thought of him, but with remembered anger, not fear.
Someone like him could easily have taken a look at the two lovely young
girls and decided that their parents could be dispensed with.
Faith. 
Our mother,
 Fanny had said. I’d looked more than once at the
miniature in the locket—but it was too small to show anything more than a
young woman with dark hair, maybe naturally curly, maybe curled and
dressed in the fashion of the times.
No. It can’t be. I rolled over for the dozenth time, settling on my stomach
and burying my face in the pillow, in hopes of losing myself in the scent of
clean linen and goose down.“It can’t be what, Sassenach?” Jamie’s voice spoke in my ear, sleepily
resigned. “And if it can’t, can it not wait ’til dawn?”
I rolled onto my side in a rustle of bedding, facing him.
“I’m sorry,” I said, and touched him apologetically. His hand took mine
automatically, warm and firm. “I didn’t realize I’d said it out loud. I was …
just thinking about Fanny’s locket.”
Faith.
“Ach,” he said, and stretched himself a little, groaning. “Ye mean the
name. Faith?”
“Well … yes. I mean—it can’t possibly … have anything to do with …”
“It’s no an uncommon name, Sassenach.” His thumb rubbed gently over
my knuckles. “Of course ye’d … feel it. I did, too.”
“Did you?” I said softly. I cleared my throat a little. “I—I don’t really do it
anymore, but for a time, just—just every now and then—I’d think of her, of
our Faith—out of nowhere. I’d imagine I could feel her near me.”
“Imagine what she might look like—grown?” His voice was soft, too. “I
did that, sometimes. In prison, mostly; too much time to think, in the nights.
Alone.”
I made a small sound and hitched closer, laying my head in the curve of his
shoulder, and his arm came round me. We lay still, silent, listening to the
night and the house around us. Full of our family—but with one small angel
hovering in the calm sweet air, peaceful as rising smoke.
“The locket,” I said at last. “It can’t possibly have anything whatever to do
with—”
“No, it can’t,” he said, a cautious note in his voice. “But what are ye
thinking, Sassenach? Because ye’re no thinking what ye just said, and I ken
that fine.”
That was true, and a spasm of guilt at being found out tightened my body.
“It 
can’t
 be,” I said, and swallowed. “It’s only …” My words died away
and his hand rubbed between my shoulder blades.
“Well, ye’d best tell me, Sassenach,” he said. “Nay matter how foolish it
is, neither one of us will sleep until ye do.”
“Well … you know what Roger told me, about the doctor he met in the
Highlands, and the blue light?”
“I do. What—”
“Roger asked me if I’d ever seen blue light like that—when I was healing
people.”The hand on my back stilled.
“Have ye?” He sounded guarded, though I didn’t know whether he was
afraid of finding out something he didn’t want to know, or just finding out
that I was losing my mind.
“No,” I said. “Or not—well, no. But … I have 
seen
 it. Felt it. Twice. Just a
flash, when Malva’s baby died.” 
Died in my hands, covered with his mother’s
blood.
 “But when Faith was born, when I was so ill. I was dying—really
dying, I felt it—and Master Raymond came.”
“Ye told me that much,” he said. “Is there more?”
“I don’t know,” I said honestly. “But this is what I 
thought
 happened.”
And I told him, about seeing my bones glow blue through the flesh of my
arms, the feeling of the light spreading through my body and the infection
dying, leaving me limp, but whole and healing.
“So … um … I 
know
 this is nothing but pure fantasy, the sort of thing you
think in the middle of the night when you can’t sleep …”
He made a low noise, indicating that I should stop apologizing and get on
with it. So I took a deep breath and did, whispering the words into his chest.
“Master Raymond was there. What if—if he found … Faith … and was
able to … somehow bring her … back?”
Dead silence. I swallowed and went on.
“People … aren’t always dead, even though it looks like it. Look at old
Mrs. Wilson! Every doctor knows—or has heard—about people who’ve been
declared dead and wake up later in the morgue.”
“Or in a coffin.” He sounded grim, and a shudder went over me. “Aye, I’ve
heard stories like that. But—a wee babe and one born too soon—how—”
“I don’t 
know
 how!” I burst out. “I 
said
 it’s complete fantasy, it can’t be
true! But—but—” My throat thickened and my voice squeaked.
“But ye wish it were?” His hand cupped the back of my head and his voice
was quiet again. “Aye. But … if it was, 
mo chridhe,
 why would he not have
told ye? Ye saw him again, no? After he’d healed ye, I mean.”
“Yes.” I shuddered, momentarily feeling the King of France’s Star
Chamber close around me, the smell of the King’s perfume, of dragon’s
blood and wine in the air—and two men before me, awaiting my sentence of
death.
“Yes, I know. But—when the Comte died, Raymond was banished, and
they took him away. He couldn’t have told me then, and he might not have
been able to come back before we left Paris.”It sounded insane, even to me. But I could—just—see it: Master Raymond,
stealing out of L’Hôpital des Anges after leaving me, perhaps ducking aside
to avoid notice, hiding in the place where the nuns had, perhaps, laid Faith on
a shelf, wrapped in her swaddling clothes. He would have known her, as he’d
known me …
Everyone has a color about them,
 he said simply. 
All around them, like a
cloud. Yours is blue, madonna. Like the Virgin’s cloak. Like my own.
One of his. The thought came out of nowhere, and I stiffened.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.” What if—all right, I 
was
 insane, but too late
for that to make a difference.
“What if he—if I, we—what if Master Raymond is—was—somehow
related to me?”
Jamie said nothing, but I felt his hand move, under my hair. His middle
finger folded down and the outer ones stood up straight, making the sign of
the horns, against evil.
“And what if he’s not?” he said dryly. He rolled me off him and turned
toward me so we were face-to-face. The darkness was slowly fading and I
could see his face, drawn with tiredness, touched with sorrow and tenderness,
but still determined.
“Even if 
everything
 ye’ve made yourself think was somehow true—and
it’s not, Sassenach; ye ken it’s not—but 
if
 it were somehow true, it wouldna
make any difference. The woman in Frances’s locket is dead now, and so is
our Faith.”
His words touched the raw place in my heart, and I nodded, tears welling.
“I know,” I whispered.
“I know, too,” he whispered, and held me while I wept.25
Voulez-vous Coucher Avec Moi
THE WEATHER WAS STILL fine in the daytime, but the smoke shed stood
in the shade of a rocky cliff. No fire had been lit in here for over a month, and
the air smelled of bitter ash and the tang of old blood.
“How much do you think this thing weighs?” Brianna put both hands on
the shoulder of the enormous black-and-white hog lying on the crude table by
the back wall and leaned her own weight experimentally against it. The
shoulder moved slightly—rigor had long since passed—but the hog itself
didn’t budge an inch.
“At a guess, it originally weighed somewhat more than your father. Maybe
four hundred pounds on the hoof?” Jamie had bled and gralloched the hog
when he killed it; that had probably lightened his load by a hundred pounds
or so, but it was still a lot of meat. A pleasant thought for the winter’s food,
but a daunting prospect at the moment.
I unrolled the pocketed cloth in which I kept my larger surgical tools; this
was no job for an ordinary kitchen knife.
“What do you think about the intestines?” I asked. “Usable, do you think?”
She wrinkled her nose, considering. Jamie hadn’t been able to carry much
beyond the carcass itself—and in fact had dragged that—but had thoughtfully
salvaged twenty or thirty pounds of intestine. He’d roughly stripped the
contents, but two days in a canvas pack hadn’t improved the condition of the
uncleaned entrails, not savory to start with. I’d looked at them dubiously, but
put them to soak overnight in a tub of salt water, on the off chance that the
tissue hadn’t broken down too far to prevent their use as sausage casing.
“I don’t know, Mama,” Bree said reluctantly. “I think they’re pretty far
gone. But we might save some of it.”
“If we can’t, we can’t.” I pulled out the largest of my amputation saws and
checked the teeth. “We can make square sausage, after all.” Cased sausageswere much easier to preserve; once properly smoked, they’d last indefinitely.
Sausage patties were fine, but took more careful handling, and had to be
packed into wooden casks or boxes in layers of lard for keeping … we hadn’t
any casks, but—
“Lard!” I exclaimed, looking up. “Bloody hell—I’d forgotten all about
that. We don’t have a big kettle, bar the kitchen cauldron, and we can’t use
that.” Rendering lard took several days, and the kitchen cauldron supplied at
least half our cooked food, to say nothing of hot water.
“Can we borrow one?” Bree glanced toward the door, where a flicker of
movement showed. “Jem, is that you?”
“No, it’s me, Auntie.” Germain stuck his head in, sniffing cautiously.
“Mandy wanted to visit Rachel’s 
petit bonbon,
 and 
Grand-père
 said she
could go if Jem or me would take her. We threw bones and he lost.”
“Oh. Fine, then. Will you go up to the kitchen and fetch the bag of salt
from Grannie’s surgery?”
“There isn’t any,” I said, grasping the pig by one ear and setting the saw in
the crease of the neck. “There wasn’t much, and we used all but a handful
soaking the intestines. We’ll need to borrow that, too.”
I dragged the saw through the first cut, and was pleased to find that while
the fascia between skin and muscle had begun to give way—the skin slipped
a little with rough handling—the underlying flesh was still firm.
“I tell you what, Bree,” I said, bearing down on the saw as I felt the teeth
bite between the neck bones, “it’s going to take a bit of time before I’ve got
this skinned and jointed. Why don’t you call round and see which lady might
lend us her rendering kettle for a couple of days, and a half pound of salt to
be going on with?”
“Right,” Bree said, seizing the opportunity with obvious relief. “What
should I offer her? One of the hams?”
“Oh, no, Auntie,” said Germain, quite shocked. “That’s much too much for
the lend of a kettle! And ye shouldna offer anyway,” he added, small fair
brows drawing together in a frown. “Ye dinna bargain a favor. She’ll ken
ye’ll give her what’s right.”
She gave him a look, half questioning, half amused, then glanced at me. I
nodded.
“I see I’ve been gone too long,” she said lightly, and giving Germain a pat
on the head vanished on her errand.It took a bit of force, but I’d been lucky—well, skilled, let us say in all
modesty—in placing the saw, and it took only a few minutes to haggle the
head off. The last strands of muscle fiber parted and the massive head
dropped the few inches to the tabletop with a 
thunk,
 limp ears quivering from
the impact. I picked it up, estimating the weight at something like thirty
pounds—but of course that included the tongue and jowls … I’d take those
before setting the head to seethe for brawn … that could be done overnight,
though, in the kitchen kettle … I must set the oatmeal to soak the night
before, then I could warm the porridge in the ashes … or perhaps fry it with
some dried apples?
I was sweating lightly from the work, a welcome relief from the chill. I got
the feet off, tossed them into a small bucket to be pickled, then set aside the
saw and chose the large knife with the serrated blade; even untanned, pig
hide was tough. I was breathing heavily by the time I’d got the carcass half
flayed, and, pausing to wipe my face on my apron, I lowered it to discover
that Germain was still there, sitting on a cask of salt fish Jamie had got in
trade from Georg Feinbeck, one of the Moravians from Salem.
“This isn’t a spectator sport, you know,” I said, and motioned to him to
come and help. “Here, take this”—I gave him one of the smaller knives
—“and pull back on the skin. You don’t really need to cut much, just use the
blade to push the skin away from the body.”
“I ken how, Grannie,” he said patiently, taking the knife. “It’s the same as
skinning a squirrel, only bigger.”
“To a point, yes,” I said, taking his wrist to readjust his aim. “But a
squirrel, you’re skinning all of a piece, for the pelt. We need to take the hog’s
hide off in pieces, but make sure the pieces are big enough to be useful—you
can make a pair of shoes from the leather off one haunch.” I traced the line of
the cuts, round the haunch, down the inside of the leg, and left him to it
whilst I negotiated the forequarters.
We worked in silence for a few minutes—silence being rather
uncharacteristic of Germain, but I thought him absorbed in his task—and
then he stopped.
“Grannie …” he began, and something in his voice made me stop, too. I
actually looked at him, for the first time since he’d come in, and I set down
my knife.
“D’ye ken what 
voulez-vous coucher avec moi
 means?” he blurted. His
face had been white and strained but flooded with color at this, making itfairly evident that 
he
 knew.
“Yes,” I said, as calmly as possible. “Did someone say that to you,
sweetheart?” Who, I wondered. I hadn’t heard of a French-speaker anywhere
in miles of the Ridge. And one who might—
“Well … Fanny,” he blurted again, and went purple. He was still holding
his skinning knife, and his small knuckles were white from gripping it.
Fanny?
 I thought, stunned.
“Really,” I said carefully. Reaching out slowly, I took the knife from his
hand and set it down next to the half-flayed hog. “It’s a bit close in here.
Let’s go outside for a breath of air, shall we?”
I didn’t realize just how oppressive the atmosphere in the smoke shed was
until we stepped out into a whirl of wind, fresh and full of yellow leaves. I
heard Germain take a deep, gasping breath, and breathed deep, too. In spite of
what he’d just told me, I felt a bit better. So did he; his face had gone back to
something near its normal color, though still pink in the ears. I smiled at him,
and he smiled uncertainly back.
“Let’s go up to the springhouse,” I said, turning toward the path. “I fancy a
cup of cold milk, and I daresay Grandda would like some cheese with his
supper.
“So,” I went on casually, leading the way up the path. “Where were you
and Fanny when she happened to say that to you?”
“Down by the creek, Grannie,” he said readily enough. “She got leeches on
her legs and I was pullin’ ’em off for her.”
Well, that’s quite the romantic setting,
 I thought but didn’t say, envisioning
Fanny sitting on a rock with her skirts hiked up, long coltish legs white and
leech-spattered.
“See,” he went on, and came up beside me, now anxious to explain, “I was
teachin’ her 
le Français,
 she wants to learn it, so I was telling her the words
for leech, and waterweed, and how to say things like, ‘Give me food, please,’
and ‘Go away, ye wicked sod.’”
“How 
do
 you say, ‘Go away, you wicked sod’?” I asked, diverted.
“Va t’en, espèce de méchant,”
 he said, shrugging.
“I’ll remember that,” I said. “Never know when it might come in handy.”
He didn’t respond; plainly the matter occupying his mind was too serious
for diversion. He’d been badly shocked, I saw.
“How did you happen to know what 
voulez-vous coucher
 means,
Germain?” I asked curiously. “Did Fanny tell you?”He hunched his shoulders and blew out his cheeks like a bullfrog, then
shook his head, letting his breath go.
“No. Papa said it to 
Maman
 one night, whilst she was cooking supper, and
she laughed and said … something I didna quite hear …” He looked away.
“So I asked Papa next day, and he told me.”
“I see.” He probably had, and very directly. Fergus had been born and
grown up in a Paris brothel, to the age of nine, when Jamie had inadvertently
collected him. He dealt with his past by being honest about it, and I didn’t
suppose it would have occurred to him to evade his children’s questions, no
matter what they asked.
We’d reached the new springhouse, a squat little stone-built structure
straddling a likewise stone-lined ditch through which the water from the
House Spring flowed. Buckets of milk and crocks of butter were sunk in the
water, keeping cold, and wrapped cheeses sat quietly hardening on a shelf
above, out of the reach of occasional muskrats. It was dim inside, and very
cold; our breath wisped out when we stepped inside.
I took down the gourd dipper from its nail, squatted, and took the lid off
the bucket that held the morning’s milk. I stirred it to mix the risen cream
back in, drew a dipperful, and drank. It was cold enough to feel it sliding
down my gullet, and delicious. I took a last swallow and handed Germain the
dipper.
“Do you think Fanny knew what she was saying?” I asked, watching him
as he squatted to draw his own milk. He didn’t look up, but he nodded, the
top of his fair head bobbing over the dipper.
“Aye,” he said at last, and stood up, turning away from me as he reached
up to hang the dipper on its nail. “Aye, she kent what it meant. She—she …
touched me. When she said it.” Dim as it was, I could see the back of his
neck darken.
“And what did you say?” I asked, hoping I sounded entirely calm.
He swung round and glared at me, as though it were somehow my fault.
He had a mustache of cream, absurdly touching.
“I said awa’ and bile your heid! What else?”
“What indeed?” I said lightly. “I’ll talk to 
Grand-père
 about it.”
“You’re no going to tell him what Fanny said to me, are ye? I didna mean
to get her in bother!”
“She’s not in trouble,” I assured him. Not the sort he meant, at least. “I just
want your grandfather’s opinion about something. Now cut along”—I 
made ashooing gesture at him—“I have a hog to deal with.”
By contrast with what he’d just told me, three hundred pounds of pork
chops, lard, and rotting intestines seemed trivial.26
In the Scuppernongs
BRIANNA PULLED A HANDFUL of grapes off their stems and rolled them
with one finger, flicking away any that were split, withered, or badly gnawed
by insects. Speaking of insects—she hastily blew several ants that had
crawled out of her grapes off the palm of her hand. They were tiny, but fierce
biters.
“Ow!” She’d missed one of the little buggers, and it had just bitten her in
the web between her middle and ring fingers. She tossed the grapes into her
bucket and rubbed her hand hard on her breeches, momentarily easing the
burn.
“Gu sealladh sealbh orm!”
 Amy said at the same moment, dropping a
handful of grapes and shaking her hand. “There’s hundreds o’ the wee 
a
phlàigh bhalgair
 in these scuppernongs!”
“They weren’t nearly as bad yesterday,” Bree said, trying to rasp the ant
bite between her fingers with her front teeth. The itch was maddening.
“What’s brought them out, I wonder?”
“Och, it’s the rain,” Amy said. “It always brings them up from the—Jesus,
Mary, and Bride!” She backed away from the vine, shaking her skirts and
stamping her feet. “Get off me, ye wicked wee blatherskites!”
“Let’s move,” Brianna suggested. “There are a ton of grapes out here; the
ants can’t be in all of them.”
“I dinna ken so much about that,” Amy muttered darkly, but she picked up
her bucket and followed Brianna a little farther into the small gorge. Bree
hadn’t been exaggerating: the rocky wall was thick with muscular vines that
clung and writhed up into the sun, heavy with pearly-bronze fruit that
gleamed under the dark leaves and perfumed the air with the scent of new
wine.
“Jem!” she shouted. “We’re moving! Keep track of Mandy!”A faint “Okay!” came from above; the kids were playing at the top of the
rocky cleft where a stream had split the stones and left small outcrops
studded with vines and saplings that made fine castles and forts.
“Watch for snakes!” she shouted. “Don’t get under the vines up there!”
“I 
know
!” A redheaded form appeared briefly above, brandished a stick at
her, and disappeared. She smiled and bent to pick up her buckets, one
satisfyingly heavy, the other half filled.
Amy made a sudden 
hoof!
 of startlement, and Brianna turned.
Amy wasn’t there. The grapevines swayed against the cliff face and she
saw a dark splash on the rock.
“What …” she said, registering the sharp smell of blood and reaching
blindly for the first thing to hand, the half-filled bucket.
A flash of white, Amy’s petticoat. She lay on the ground ten feet away;
there was blood on her clothes and a bear had her head in its mouth, making a
low gargling noise as it worried at her.
Brianna flung the bucket in reflex. It hit the cliff face and fell, scattering
bronze grapes over Amy and the ground. The bear looked up, blood on its
teeth, and growled, and Brianna was scrambling up through the vines,
shrieking at the children to get back, get away, 
run,
 branches cracking
beneath her weight, giving way, one broke and she slipped and fell, hit the
ground on her knees, scrabbled back, away, away … God, God … staggered
to her feet and leapt for the vines again, sheer terror for the kids driving her
up the rock in a shower of leaves and crushed grapes and bits of earth and
rock and ants.
“Mam! Mam!” Jem and Germain were leaning far out from the edge,
trying to catch hold of her, to help.
“Get back!” she gasped, clinging to the rock. She risked a glance below
and wished she hadn’t. “Jem, get 
back
! Get Mandy, get the others back!
Now!
”
Too late to stop them seeing; there was a chorus of screams and a crowd of
small, horror-stricken faces at the top of the cliff face.
“Mama! MAMA!”
It was that word that got her the rest of the way, torn and bleeding. At the
top of the cliff, she crawled, grabbing wailing children, pulling them back,
gathering them into her arms. Counting. How many, how many should there
be? Jem, Mandy, Germain, Orrie, little Rob …“Aidan,” she gasped. “Where’s Aidan?” Jem looked at her, white-faced
and wordless, turned his head to look. Aidan was at the top of the cliff,
starting to let himself down into the vines, to get to his mother.
“Aidan!” Germain shouted. “Don’t!”
Bree shoved the other children at Jem.
“Keep them,” she said, breathless, and lunged after Aidan, catching him by
the arm just as he vanished over the edge. She hauled him up by main force
and clutched him hard against her, struggling and weeping.
“I got to go, I gotta get Mam, let go, let me 
go
 …!” His tears were hot on
her skin and his skinny body writhed like a snake, like the rusty grapevines,
like the biting ants.
“No,” she said, hearing her own voice only faintly through the roaring in
her ears. “No.” And held him tight.
I WAS SHOWING Fanny how to use the microscope, reveling in her
shocked delight at the worlds within—though in some instances, it was plain
shock, as when she discovered what was swimming in our drinking water.
“Don’t worry,” I assured her. “Most of them are quite harmless, and your
stomach acid will dissolve them. Mind, there 
are
 nasty things in water
sometimes, particularly if it’s had excrement in it—shit, I mean,” I added,
seeing her lips silently frame “excrement.” Then the rest of what I’d said
struck her 
and her eyes went round.
“Acid?” she said, and looked down, clutching her midsection. “In my
stomach
?”
“Well, yes,” I said, careful not to laugh. She had a sense of humor but was
still very tentative in this new life, and feared being laughed at or made fun
of. “It’s how you digest your food.”
“But it’s …” She stopped, frowning. “It’s … thr—
strong.
 Acid. It eats
right through … things.” She’d gone pale under the light tan the mountain
sun had given her.
“Yes,” I said, eyeing her. “Your stomach has very thick walls, though, and
they’re covered in mucus, so—”
“My stomach is full of 
snot
?” She sounded so horrified that I had to bite
my tongue and turn away for a moment, under the pretext of fetching a clean
slide.“Well, you find mucus pretty much all over the insides of your body,” I
said, having got control of my face. “You have what are called mucous
membranes and serous membranes; those secrete mucus wherever you need a
bit of slipperiness.”
“Oh.” Her face went blank, and then she looked down below her clutching
hands. “Is it—is that what you have between your legs? To make you …
slippery when …”
“Yes,” I said hastily. “And when you’re pregnant, the slipperiness helps
the baby come out. Here, let me show you …”
I’d told Jamie what she’d said to Germain. He’d raised his eyebrows
briefly, then shaken his head.
“Little wonder, given where she’s been,” he said. “Let it bide. She’s a
canny wee lass; she’ll find her way.”
I was drawing pictures of goblet cells on the back pages of my black book
when I heard rapid footsteps on the porch and an instant later Jem skidded
into the surgery, wild-eyed and white-faced.
“Mrs. Higgins,” he gasped. “She got kilt by a bear. Mam’s bringing her.”
“Killed,” I said automatically, and then, 
“What!”
Fanny uttered a tiny, wordless scream and threw her apron over her head.
Jem’s knees gave way and he sat down on the floor with a thump, panting.
I heard voices outside in the distance, urgent, and grabbing my emergency
kit I ran to see what was happening.
Brianna had evidently met Jamie on her way; he had Amy Higgins in his
arms, bringing her down the hill as fast as he could manage, Bree stumbling
behind him, moving like a drunk. All three of them were covered in blood.
“Oh, Jesus,” I said, and ran up the hill to meet them. There was a lot of
noise—children were everywhere, crying and wailing, and Bree was trying to
explain, chest heaving for air, and Jamie was asking sharp questions. He saw
me, and at my frantic gesture squatted and laid Amy on the ground.
I fell to my knees beside her, seeing the tiny, rhythmic spurt of blood from
a severed vessel in her temple.
“She’s not dead,” I said, and pulled rolls of bandage and handfuls of lint
out of my pack. “Yet.”
“I’ll fetch Bobby,” Jamie said quietly in my ear. “Brianna—see to the
weans, aye?”
FIRST, STOP THE BLEEDING.
 
And the best of British luck to you,
 I added
grimly—and silently—to myself. A good portion of the left side of her face
had simply been torn away. The scalp was lacerated, one eye had been
gouged from its socket, the orbit and cheekbone splintered, and the white
bone of the broken jaw exposed, seeping blood welling up around the
remaining scarlet-stained teeth and dribbling down the side of her neck.
She lay oddly, crookedly, and I realized that her left shoulder had been
crushed; her dark-green bodice and sleeve were black, sodden with blood. I
whipped a tourniquet around the upper arm, feeling the broken ends of bone
grate as I moved it. Pressed a towel as gently as I could to the shattered side
of her face and saw the cloth darken at once, soaked through. And with a
sense of utter futility, I pressed my thumb against the tiny spurting artery in
her temple. It stopped.
I looked up and saw Mandy, dead white and shocked into silence, clinging
fiercely to little Rob, who was whimpering and struggling, trying to get to his
mother.
She was still alive; I could feel the tremor of her flesh under my hands. But
so much was lost—so much blood, so much trauma, so much shock—that I
knew she’d lose her grip soon. And with that realization, I made the shift. I
couldn’t heal her. All I could do now was stay with her and try to ease her.
She was making a soft coughing noise, and bubbles of blood appeared at
the visible corner of her mouth. One hand rose in the air, searching vainly for
something to hold on to. Roger ran across the grass, fell to his knees on the
other side of her body, and grasped the drifting hand.
“Amy,” he said, short of breath. “Amy. Bobby’s coming; I hear him, he’s
almost here.”
Her eyelid lifted, shivered shut against the light, opened cautiously, just a
crack.
“Mammaidh!” “Mama! Mam!”
 The shrieks of her children came thin and
piercing and her ruined mouth twitched and fell open, struggling to answer
them.
“Stay with me, Orrie. Aidan—Aidan, no!” Bree was kneeling on the grass,
clutching Aidan by the wrist as he fought to go to his mother, little Orrie
terrified, clinging to Bree’s hunting shirt.
The blood wasn’t spurting anymore; it was spreading, fast and silent,
soaking the ground. My hands were red to the wrist.
“Amy! 
Amy!
”Bobby, wild-eyed, charging up the slope, Jamie behind him. He stumbled
and half-fell to his knees, chest heaving for air. Roger grabbed his hand and
put Amy’s in it.
“No,” Bobby said, fighting for breath. “No. Amy, don’t, please don’t go,
please!” I saw her fingers twitch, move, tighten on his for an instant, no
more.
“Jesus,” Roger said. “Oh, God.” He looked at me for a moment and read
everything in my face. He lifted his head and looked across to Bree and the
children, and I saw his face change in sudden decision.
“Bring them,” he said, raising his voice enough to be heard over the crying
and shouting. “Quick.”
Brianna shook her head briefly, her eyes fixed on the ruin of Amy’s face.
Should the boys remember their mother like 
that
?
“Bring them,” Roger said, louder. “Now.”
She gave a small jerky nod and let go of Aidan, who dashed to his mother
and fell on the ground beside Bobby, clinging to him and sobbing. Bree came
after him, holding Orrie and Rob by their hands, tears sheeting all their faces.
Roger took the little boys, held them in his arms, close to their mother.
“Amy,” he said, through the sobbing. “Your sons are with you. And
Bobby.” He hesitated, looking at me, but at my nod let go of Orrie and laid
his hand gently on her chest. “Lord God, be merciful unto us,” he whispered.
“Be merciful. Hold her in the palm of Thy hand. Keep her always in the
hearts of her children.”
Amy moved. Her head turned a little, toward the boys, and she opened her
one eye, slowly, so slowly, as though it was an effort equal to lifting the
world. Her mouth twitched once and then she died.27
Cover Her Face
THERE WAS NO TIME for delicacy. The men had brought Amy’s body
down to the house and at my direction laid her on the table in my surgery.
The day was hot and she was still very warm to the touch, but her body had a
disconcerting inert heaviness, like a burlap bag filled with wet sand. Rigor
would soon be separating her from the soft elasticity of life; I’d have to
undress her before she got too stiff.
But first, I covered her face with a linen towel. There was time for that
much delicacy, I thought. I was glad I’d taken the time, too, when I turned at
the sound of a step on the threshold and saw Bree, still in her bloodstained
hunting shirt, her face much whiter than the old sheet folded over her arm. I
nodded at the counter behind me.
“Put that down and go sit with the children outside in the sun,” I said
firmly. “They need someone to hold them. Where’s Roger?” She shook her
head, unable to take her eyes off the table. Amy’s fichu had been pulled
halfway out of her bodice and was hanging down, soaked with rapidly drying
blood that left faint smears on the table. I pulled the cloth loose and dropped
it into the bucket of cold water at my feet.
“Roger’s with Bobby,” she said, her voice colorless. “Fanny’s minding
Mandy and the little boys for a minute. You—you’ll need help, won’t you?
With—” She broke off and swallowed audibly, looking away.
“Someone will be here soon,” I said, and took a little comfort in the
thought. I was familiar with death, but that didn’t mean I’d got used to it.
“Your father sent Germain running for Young Ian; Rachel and Jenny will
come down, too. And Jem’s gone for Gilly MacMillan. His wife will gather
up the women who live along the creek.”
She nodded, seeming a little calmer, though her hands were still trembling,
the folded sheet bunched between them.“Why is Da sending for Mr. MacMillan?” she asked.
“He has two good hunting dogs,” I said evenly. “And a boar spear.”
“Holy Lord. He—they—they’re going to hunt the bear? 
Now?
”
“Well, yes,” I said mildly. “Before it gets too far away. Where’s Aidan?” I
added, realizing that she’d said “the little boys.” Aidan was twelve, but still
qualified, in my book. “Did he go with Jem?”
“No,” she said, her voice sounding odd. “He’s with Da.”
AIDAN WAS WHITE as milk and he kept blinking his swollen red eyes,
though he’d stopped greeting. He hadn’t stopped shaking. Jamie put a hand
on the lad’s shoulder and could feel the tremble coming up from the earth
through Aidan’s flesh.
“I-I-I’m c-c-coming,” Aidan said, though his chin wobbled so much you
could scarce understand him. “T-to hunt the b-bear.”
“Of course ye are.” Jamie squeezed the fragile shoulder and, after a
moment’s hesitation, let go and turned toward the house. “Come with me, 
a
bhalaich,
” he said. “We’ll need to fettle ourselves before we go out.”
Every instinct he had was for avoiding the house, where Claire and the
women would be laying Amy out. But he’d been younger than Aidan was
now when his own mother died, and he remembered the desolation of being
shut out, sent away from the house while the women opened the windows
and doors, covered the mirror, and went purposefully about with bowls of
water and herbs, completing the secret rituals of taking his mother away from
him.
Besides, he thought bleakly, glancing down at the blanched wee lad
stumbling along beside him, the boy had seen his mother dying in her blood
little more than an hour ago, her face torn half away. Nothing he might see or
hear now would be worse.
They stopped at the well and Jamie made Aidan drink cold water and wash
his face and hands, and Jamie did likewise and said the beginning of the
Consecration of the Chase for him:
“In name of the Holy Threefold as one,
In word, in deed, and in thought,
I am bathing my own hands,
In the light and in the elements of the sky.“Vowing that I shall never return in my life,
Without fishing, without fowling either,
Without game, without venison down from the hill,
Without fat, without blubber from out the copse.”
Aidan was breathing hard from the shock of the cold water, but he could
talk again.
“Bears have fat,” he said.
“Aye. And we will take it from him.” Jamie scooped water in his hand and,
dipping three fingers into the puddle in his palm, made the Sign of the Cross
on Aidan’s forehead, breast, and shoulders.
“Life be in my speech,
Sense in what I say,
The bloom of cherries on my lips,
’Til I come back again.
“Traversing corries, traversing forests,
Traversing valleys long and wild.
The fair white Mary still uphold me,
The Shepherd Jesu be my shield.
“Say that last bit wi’ me, lad.”
Aidan drew himself up a little and piped along,
“The fair white Mary still uphold me,
The Shepherd Jesu be my shield.”
“Well, then.” Jamie pulled out his shirttail and wiped Aidan’s face and his
own. “Will ye have heard that prayer before?”
Aidan shook his head. Jamie hadn’t thought he would; Aidan’s real father,
Orem McCallum, might have taught him, but Bobby Higgins was an
Englishman, and while a good man in himself, he wouldn’t know the auld
ways.
As though the thought had conjured him, Aidan asked seriously, “Will
Daddy Bobby come with us to hunt the bear?”
Jamie sincerely hoped not; Bobby had been a soldier, but was no hunter,
and in his grief and distraction might easily get himself or someone elsekilled. And there were the little lads to think of. But he said, “If he feels he
must, then he shall. But I hope he will not.” Roger had taken Bobby, looking
completely destroyed, back to the Higgins cabin.
He set the bucket on the well coping and laid a hand on Aidan’s shoulder
again; it was firmer now, and the bairn’s chin had stopped quivering.
“Come on, then,” he said. “We’ll fetch my rifle and set things in order. Ian
Òg and Mr. MacMillan will be here soon.”
“GO,” I SAID to Bree, but more gently. I came and took the sheet that she
was still clutching, set it down, and put my arms around her.
“I understand,” I said quietly. “She’s your friend, and you want to do what
you still 
can
 do for her. And you don’t know why it’s her lying there and you
standing here, still alive, and everything’s come apart at the seams.”
She made a small sound of assent and caught her breath in a sob. She clung
tight to me for a moment, then let go. Tears were trembling on her lashes, but
she was holding on to herself now, not me.
“Tell me what to do,” she said, straightening up. “I have to 
do
 something.”
“Take care of Amy’s children,” I said. “That’s what she’d want you to do,
above all things.”
She nodded, pressing her lips together in determination—but then glanced
at the still figure on the table, smelling of urine, feces, and the thick reek of
torn flesh. Flies were beginning to come through the window; they flew in
lazy circles, scenting opportunity, seeking a place to lay their eggs. On the
body. It wasn’t Amy anymore, and the flies had come to lay claim to her.
Brianna was nearly as good as Jamie at hiding her feelings when she had
to, but she wasn’t hiding anything now, and I saw the fear and anguish
underneath the shock. She couldn’t bear to deal with Amy’s shattered body—
and so had come to do so. 
Fraser,
 I thought, moved by her bravery as much
as by her grief.
I picked up the other towel and slapped it on the counter, killing two flies
that had been unwary enough to land near me.
“Someone will come,” I repeated. “Go. Take Fanny with you.”28
Math-ghamhainn
IAN, NOT SURPRISINGLY, APPEARED first, walking in through the open
front door. Jamie heard the soft tread of his moccasins a moment before Ian
spoke to Claire in the surgery. There was a brief exclamation of shock—
Germain would have told him what was to do, but not even a Mohawk would
be unmoved by the sight of Amy Higgins’s body—and then his voice
dropped in a murmur of respect before the soft tread came on toward the
kitchen.
“That’ll be Ian,” Jamie said to Aidan, who was very slowly and
painstakingly filling cartridges on the kitchen table, tongue sticking out of the
side of his mouth as he poured gunpowder from Jamie’s flask. He stopped at
Jamie’s words, looking toward the door.
Ian didn’t disappoint the lad. He was carrying his own long rifle, with shot
pouch and cartridge box, but had also brought a very large and wicked-
looking knife, thrust through his belt unsheathed, and had a strung bow and a
birch-bark quiver over his shoulder. He was shirtless, in buckskin leggings
and loincloth, but had taken a moment to say his own prayers and apply his
hunting paint: his forehead was red above the eyebrows and a thick white
stripe ran down the bridge of his nose, with another on each side, running
from cheekbone to jaw. White, he’d told Jamie, was for vengeance, or to
commemorate the dead.
Aidan—who knew Ian quite well in his Scottish person—had never seen
him in purely Mohawk form before. He made a small 
whoof
 noise, awed.
Jamie hid a smile, picking up his own dirk and the oilstone on which to
sharpen it.
“Ach, Ian,” he said, suddenly noting his nephew’s bare chest. “D’ye maybe
ken where my claw’s gone? The bear claw the Tuscarora gave me, I mean.”
He hadn’t thought of the thing in years. He’d lent it to Ian some time back, towear on a hunting trip. But it maybe wouldn’t be a bad thing to have with
him just now, if it was handy.
“Aye, I do.” Ian had sat down to fold up Aidan’s cartridges, quick and
neat, and didn’t look up. “I gave it to my cousin William.”
“Your cou— Oh.” He considered Ian, who still didn’t look up. “And when
was this?”
“Ach. Some time ago,” Ian said airily. “When I got him out o’ the swamp,
ken. I told him ye wanted him to have it.” He did glance up then, one thin
eyebrow raised, just like his father. “I wasna wrong, was I?”
“No,” Jamie said, feeling a sudden warmth, though the hairs prickled on
his neck. “No, ye weren’t.”
Bluebell, who’d been nosing round the back door, suddenly turned and
shot toward the front of the house, barking. A chorus of deep-voiced baying
answered her from the bottom of the slope before the house.
“That’ll be Gillebride, then,” Jamie said, and sheathed his dirk. “Are we
fettled, lads?”
I’D GOT AMY’S stays off, and her skirt. The skirt wasn’t torn; it would do,
with washing. Amy had no daughter who might use it, but there was always
need of clothes and cloth. Someone on the Ridge would welcome it. I put it
aside to wash later. The stays were badly torn at the shoulder and stiff with
blood. I put them to the other side; I’d salvage the tin ribs, then put the fabric
in the fire. The shift … that was torn, too, though it might be mended, or used
for patching or quilting. I couldn’t see her buried in it, though; it was bloody
and befouled. She had on only one light petticoat and her stockings—wash
those, then, and …
I heard the baying of Gillebride’s dogs in the near distance, and the
thunder of Bluebell’s feet as she raced down the hall to meet them. They
should be all right together; the MacMillan dogs were both male. Bluey was a
female and not in heat, and as Jamie had told me in a wry moment, dogs
don’t bite bitches.
“Doesna always work the other way round, mind,” he’d said, and I didn’t
quite smile at the memory, but felt the air press less heavily on me for a
moment.
Then I heard a step in the hallway and looked up, thinking it was
Gillebride. 
It wasn’t, and the air suddenly thickened in my chest.“Mrs. Fraser.” It was the tall black figure of Mrs. Cunningham, bony and
stern as the Grim Reaper, with a folded cloth over one arm. She hovered
awkwardly on the threshold, and I just as awkwardly motioned her in.
“Mrs. Cunningham,” I said, and stopped, not knowing what the hell else to
say to her. She cleared her throat, glanced at Amy’s half-clad corpse, then
quickly away. Even though the head was covered, the mangled arm and
shoulder were in plain sight, cracked and shattered bones showing sharp
through the still flesh.
“I was by the creek. Your grandson passed me on his way to MacMillan’s
and told me what was a-do. So I went along to Mr. Higgins and asked for his
wife’s shroud.” She lifted the cloth slightly in illustration, and I saw the
embroidered edges, done in greens, blues, and pinks.
“Oh.” That Amy would have her shroud already prepared hadn’t occurred
to me at all—though it should have. “Er … thank you, Mrs. Cunningham.
That was very thoughtful of you.”
She lifted one shoulder in a faint shrug and, taking a visibly deep breath,
walked up to the table. She looked the situation over deliberately for a
moment, exhaled through her nose, then reached to untie the ribbon of Amy’s
shift.
“If ye’ll hold her steady, I’ll roll it down.”
I opened my mouth to protest that I didn’t need help, but then shut it again.
I did, and plainly she’d had some experience of laying out the dead; any
woman of her age would. We rolled the shift off Amy’s shoulders and I got
one hand solidly into the bare right oxter, the damp hair there feeling
disconcertingly warm and alive, and then, with an uncontrollable sense of
squirm, threaded my fingers under the wet mess of the left shoulder, finding
enough to grip.
So close, the odor of the bear on her was strong enough that I felt an
atavistic shiver down my spine. Mrs. Cunningham did, too; she was breathing
audibly through her mouth. She got the petticoat untied, though, and pulled
shift and stockings off with steady hands.
“Well, then,” she said, and looking round saw that I’d put the skirt aside to
wash, and added the rest of the clothes to the pile. “When the other women
come, we’ll have them launder those at once,” she said, in the tone of one
accustomed to give orders and have them obeyed. “We’ll not want the smell
of …”“Yes,” I said, with a perceptible edge that made her glance sharply at me.
“Right now, we’ll need to clean her. Will you go into the kitchen and fetch a
bucket of hot water? I’ll tear that up”—nodding at the worn-thin sheet
Brianna had brought—“for binding strips.”
She compressed her lips, but in a way that suggested grim amusement at
my feeble attempt to exert authority rather than offense, and left without a
word.
There was a good bit of barking out front, and I heard Gillebride—his
name meant “Oystercatcher,” he’d told me—calling to the dogs. I ripped the
worn sheet into wide bands; we’d fasten her legs together, and her arms at her
sides—insofar as was possible; I eyed the left shoulder dubiously—cloth
binding her body into seemliness before we braided her hair and put her into
her 
shroud.
Mrs. Cunningham reappeared with her sleeves rolled up, a bucket of
steaming water from the cauldron in one hand and a hammer in the other, a
quilt from my bed over her arm.
“There’ll be men coming to and fro in a moment’s time,” she said, with a
jerk of her head toward the hallway.
“Ah,” I said. I would have closed the surgery door, save that there wasn’t
one yet. She nodded, set down the bucket, took a handful of tenpenny nails
from her pocket, and hung the quilt over the open doorway with a few sharp
raps of the hammer.
There was plenty of light coming in at the big window, but the quilt
seemed somehow to muffle both light and sound, casting the room into
something like a state of reverence, despite the growing noises outside. I took
a handful of dried lavender and rubbed it into the hot water, then tore sweet
basil leaves and mint and tossed them in as well. To my slight surprise, Mrs.
Cunningham looked over the jars on my shelves, took down the salt, and
threw a small handful into the water.
“To wash away sin,” she informed me crisply, seeing my look. “And keep
her ghost from walking.”
I nodded mechanically at this, feeling as though she’d dropped a pebble
into the small pool of calmness I was hoarding, sending ripples of uneasiness
through me.
We managed the cleansing and binding of the body in silence. She moved
with a sure touch, and we worked surprisingly well together, each consciousof the other’s movements, reaching to do what was needed without being
asked. Then we reached the head.
I took a breath through my mouth and lifted the towel away; there were
blood spots on it, and it stuck a bit. Mrs. Cunningham jerked a little.
“I was thinking that we might just keep her head covered,” I said
apologetically. “With a clean cloth, I mean.”
Mrs. Cunningham was frowning at Amy’s face, the wrinkles in her upper
lip drawn in like an accordion.
“Can ye not do a bit to tidy her?”
“Well, I can stitch what’s left of the scalp back in place and we could pull
some of her hair over the missing ear, but there’s nothing I can do about the
… er … the …” The dislodged eyeball hung grotesquely on the crushed
cheek, its surface filmed over but still very much a staring eye. “That’s why I
thought … cover her face.”
Mrs. Cunningham’s head moved slowly, side to side.
“Nay,” she said softly, her own eyes fixed on Amy. “I’ve buried three
husbands and four bairns myself. Ye always want to look upon their faces,
one last time. Nay matter what’s happened to them.”
Frank.
 I’d looked at him, and said my last goodbye. And was glad that I’d
had the chance.
I nodded and reached for my surgical scissors.
“GERMAIN TOLD ME where the bear came upon them,” Ian said. “I 
went
along there, quick, on my way down, and I could see where it had gone
through the vines, out the end o’ the wee gorge. We’ll start there, aye?”
Jamie and MacMillan nodded, and MacMillan turned to say something
reproving to his dogs, who were sniffing industriously from one end of the
kitchen to the other, thrusting their broad heads into the hearth and nosing the
lidded slop bucket.
“Speaking of Germain,” Jamie said, suddenly aware that his grandson was
missing, “where the devil is he?” It was completely unlike Germain to be
absent from any interesting situation. He was much more often right in the
middle of—
“Did he go with ye to look for the bear’s track?” Jamie asked sharply,
interrupting Gillebride’s recriminations. Ian looked blank for a moment,
recollecting, but then nodded.“Aye, he did. But … I was sure he was just behind me as I came down …”
He turned involuntarily and glanced behind him now, as though expecting
Germain to spring up through the floorboards. With a deep foreboding in his
heart, Jamie swung round to face Gillebride.
“Did Jem come back with ye, Gilly?”
MacMillan, a tall, soft-spoken man, took off his hat and scratched his bald
pate.
“Aye,” he said slowly. “I suppose so. He ran ahead, though, whilst I was
gathering the dogs. Didna see him again.”
“Crìosd eadar sinn agus olc.”
 Jamie made the horns against the Devil and
crossed himself hurriedly. “Christ between us and evil. Let’s go.”
HOW OLD WAS Mrs. Cunningham? I wondered. She looked older with her
clothes on. Three husbands, four children—but death was a casual and
frequent visitor in these days. Her hands were old, with thick blue veins and
knobbed joints, but still agile; she blotted the blood away with a damp cloth,
brushed the soft brown hair from the intact side of Amy’s skull, and,
arranging it carefully to hide as much damage as she could, braided it into a
single thick plait that she laid gently on Amy’s breast.
I’d taken care of the eye—it was sitting on the counter behind me; I’d wrap
it discreetly and tuck it into the shroud—and inserted a small wad of lint into
the crushed socket, stitching the lid shut over it. There was no concealing that
Amy had died by violence, but at least her family would still be able to look
at her.
“Mrs …. do you mind if I call you by your Christian name?” I asked
abruptly.
She glanced up from her contemplation of the corpse, slightly startled.
“Elspeth,” she said.
“Claire,” I said, and smiled at her. I thought a smile touched her own lips,
but before I could be sure, the quilt hanging over the doorway twitched
violently and one of Gillebride’s big bear dogs shouldered his way in,
sniffing eagerly along the floor.
“And what do you think 
you’re
 doing?” I asked. The dog ignored me and
made a beeline for the counter, where he rose gracefully onto his hind legs,
gulped the eye, and then dropped and ran out in answer to his master’s
annoyed call from the hallway.Elspeth and I stood in frozen silence as the hunting party departed noisily
through the front door, the dogs yelping in happy excitement.
As the house fell quiet, Elspeth blinked. She looked down at Amy,
peaceful and composed in the embroidered shroud she had woven while
expecting her first child. It was edged with a trailing vine, with pink and blue
flowers and yellow bees.
“Aye, well,” she said at last. “I dinna suppose it matters so much whether a
person’s eaten by worms or by dogs.” She sounded dubious, though, and I
suppressed a sudden insane urge to laugh.
“Being eaten by dogs is in the Bible,” I said, instead. “Jezebel.” She raised
one sparse gray brow in surprise, evidently at the unexpected revelation that
I’d actually read the Bible, but then nodded.
“Well, then,” she said.
JAMIE’S SENSE OF grim urgency was growing more urgent—it was
midafternoon already—but there was the one more thing that had to be done.
He had to tell Bobby Higgins what they were about and hope that the man
was either too shattered to insist on coming, or wise enough not to—and
convince him that it was right for Aidan to go. He should have paused to
scoop up the wee boys; they were the best reason for Bobby to stay put—but
he hadn’t thought of it in time.
His anxiety was eased a good bit by the sight of Jem, loitering outside the
Higgins cabin. His relief at finding the lad, though, was immediately
tempered by Jem’s impassioned desire to join the hunting party.
“If Aidan can go—” Jem said, for roughly the fourth time, chin jutting out.
Jamie bent down and grabbed him by the arm, speaking low so as not to
upset Aidan.
“
Your
 mother wasna eaten by a bear, and she’ll no be pleased if you are.
Ye’re stayin’.”
“Then Aidan shouldn’t go! His da won’t like it if he gets eaten, will he?”
That was a thought that had been gnawing at Jamie, but he didn’t repent
allowing the boy to come.
“His mother 
was
 eaten by a bear, and he’s the right to come and see her
avenged,” he said to Jem. He let go of the lad’s arm, took him by the
shoulder, and turned him toward the cabin. “Go get your da; I want to talk to
him.”The other members of the hunting party were restive, and he told Ian to go
on ahead with Gillebride and the dogs, see if they could get upon Germain’s
track. Aidan looked wild, still white-faced, his black hair stood on end, and
Jamie took hold of him again to quiet him.
“Stay by me, Aidan. We willna be more than a minute, but we must tell
your da what’s ado.”
It was much less than a minute before Roger came out of the cabin,
blinking in the sunlight, with Jem behind him, looking excited but solemn.
Roger Mac bore the same traces of shock that they all did, though he had
himself 
well in hand, and his face relaxed a little, seeing Jamie. Then it
tightened again as he saw the rifle.
“You’re—”
“We are.” He motioned the boys firmly away and dropped his voice. “I
need to tell Bobby, but I dinna want him to come. Will ye help me talk him
round?”
“Of course. But—” He glanced toward Aidan and Jemmy, slouched at the
side of the cabin. “Ye’re not taking 
them
?”
“I willna take Jem if ye say no—that’s yours to say. But I think Aidan
must come.”
Roger gave him a look of intense skepticism, and Jamie shrugged.
“He must,” he repeated stubbornly. All the reasons why 
not
 were
clustering like flies round his head, but the remembered sense of an orphaned
boy’s helpless despair was an iron splinter in his heart—and that weighed
heavier than the rest.
THE FIRE HAD gone out. In the cabin, and in Bobby, too. He sat hunched
and sagging in the corner of the settle by his cold hearth, head bent over his
open hands as though he sought some meaning in the lines on his palms. He
didn’t look up when they came in.
Jamie sank down on one knee and laid his hand over Bobby’s; it was cold
and flaccid, but the fingers twitched a little.
“Robert, 
a charaid,
” he said quietly. “I am going now to hunt the bear.
With God’s help, we will find it and kill it. Aidan wishes to come with us,
and I think it is right that he should.”
Bobby’s head rose with a jerk.
“Aidan? You want to take Aidan after the bear that—that—”“I do.” Jamie took hold of Bobby’s other hand and squeezed them. “I
swear on my own grandson’s head that I willna let any harm come to him.”
“Your—you mean Jem? You’re taking him as well?” Confusion showed
briefly through the deadness in Bobby’s eyes, and he looked over Jamie’s
shoulder at Roger Mac. “He is?”
“Aye.” Roger’s Mac’s voice broke on the word, but he said it, bless him.
Inspiration blossomed in Jamie’s mind, and with an inward prayer, he rolled
his dice.
“Roger Mac will come as well,” he said, hoping he sounded completely
sure of it. “He’ll mind both lads and see them safe.” He could feel Roger
Mac’s eyes burning a hole in the back of his head, but he was sure it was the
right thing. 
Blessed Michael, guide my tongue …
“My nephew Ian and Gillebride MacMillan will be with me, with dogs.
The three of us—and three dogs—will have the upper hand of a bear, no
matter how fierce. Roger Mac and the lads will be there only to bear witness
for your wife. At a safe distance,” he added.
Bobby sat up, pulling his hands free, and looked to and fro, agitated.
“But—but I should go with you, then. Shouldn’t I?”
Roger, recognizing his cue, cleared his throat.
“Your wee lads need ye, Bobby,” he said gently. “Ye’ve got to mind them,
aye? Ye’re all they’ve got left.”
Jamie felt those words strike suddenly and without warning, deep in his
own wame. Felt again a bundle of cloth clutched hard against his breast,
feeling the tiny pushings of the hours-old babe inside, himself shaking with
terror at what he’d just done to save the boy—his son.
That’s what he’d thought. The only thought that came through the haze of
fear and shock: 
His mother’s dead. I’m all he has.
And he saw it happen for Bobby, as it had for him. Saw the life fight its
way back into his eyes, the bones of his body, melted with grief, begin to
stiffen and form again. Bobby nodded, lips pressed tight together. Tears still
ran down his face, but he rose from the settle, slow as an auld man but
moving.
“Where are they?” he asked hoarsely. “Orrie and Rob?”
“With my daughter,” Jamie said. “At the house.” He lifted a brow at Roger
Mac, who gave him an old-fashioned look but nodded.
“I’ll go up with ye, Bobby,” Roger Mac said, and to Jamie, “I’ll catch ye
up. You and the lads.”THE WOMEN WERE coming. I could hear their voices, faint in the distance,
coming up from the creek. That would be Gillebride’s wife, with her eldest
daughter, Kirsty, and Peggy Chisholm, who lived nearby, with her two eldest,
Mairi and Agnes, and Peggy’s ancient mother-in-law, Auld Mam, who was
Not Right in the Head and therefore couldn’t be left alone. Then there were
nearer female voices and steps in the hall, and Fanny came in, solemn-faced,
with Rachel and Jenny. She glanced at the quilt-hung doorway and then
averted her eyes.
I let out my breath at sight of them, and with it, the sense of being keyed
up to meet something dreadful that had been with me since Jem had stumbled
breathless into the surgery to tell me what had happened.
Jenny put down her basket, hugged me, quick and hard, then ducked
without a word beneath the hanging quilt into the surgery. Rachel had a
basket, too, and Oggy in her other arm. She detached the baby and handed
him to Fanny, who looked relieved to be given something to do.
“Is thee all right, Claire?” she asked softly, then glanced at Mrs.
Cunningham, who had taken up a station beside the covered surgery door,
hands folded at her waist. “And thee, Friend Cunningham?”
“Yes,” I said. The odd sense of being in an intimate bubble with Elspeth
Cunningham had burst at once with the advent of friends and family, but the
experience had left me feeling oddly moist and exposed, like a half-opened
clam. Elspeth herself had closed her shell tightly but nodded to the new
arrivals. Her own near neighbors would be coming down as soon as the news
reached them, but it would take some time; the Crombies’ and Wilsons’
several cabins were at least two miles from us.
Jenny was praying softly in Gaelic. I couldn’t catch the words clearly
enough to know what she said, but the distinctive lilt of mourning was in it.
“Come aside,” Rachel said softly to me, and drew back the quilt a little,
beckoning me with a sober nod of the head that simultaneously summoned
me and indicated that no one else need follow.
Jenny had just finished her prayer. She put out a hand and rested it very
gently for a moment on Amy’s white-capped head. 
“Biodh sith na Màthair
Beannaichte agus a mac Iosa ort, a nighean.”
 she said quietly. May the
peace of the Blessed Mother and of her son, Jesus, be on you, daughter.
Rachel looked at Amy’s body and swallowed, but didn’t flinch or look
away.“Germain said it was a bear,” she said, and I saw her eyes slide toward the
pitiful pile of tattered, bloodstained garments. “Was thee … present, Claire?”
“No. Brianna was with her when it happened, picking grapes. Some of the
children were there, too. Jemmy, Germain, and Aidan. The little boys. And
Mandy.”
“Dear God. Did they 
see
 it?” Rachel asked, shocked.
I shook my head.
“They were up above, playing. Bree and Amy were picking muscats in that
little gorge beyond the creek. She—Brianna—got the children away and then
ran for Jamie. She—Amy—was just barely alive when I got to her.” My
throat tightened, seeing the small pale hand, limp in Roger’s, the twitch at the
corner of her mouth as she’d tried to bid her children farewell. Despite my
determination, a small hot tear slid down my cheek.
Rachel made a small sound of distress and smoothed my hair away from
my cheek. Jenny cleared her throat, reached into her pocket, and handed me a
clean handkerchief.
“Well, the front door was open when we came in,” Jenny said, ticking off a
mental checklist. She glanced at the huge, glassless surgery window, open to
the day. “And ye’ll not need to open the windows.”
This tinge of dry humor, small though it was, relieved the tension and I felt
a small 
crack
 between my shoulder blades as my spine relaxed, for what
seemed the first time in days, not hours.
“No,” I said. I blotted the tears and sniffed. “What else—mirrors? There’s
only the hand glass in my bedroom and it’s already lying facedown.”
“No birds in the house? I see ye’ve got salt …” A few grains had spilled on
the counter when Elspeth had thrown salt into the water. “… and bread willna
be a worry.” She cocked a still-black eyebrow in the direction of the kitchen.
I could hear the voices of women as they greeted new arrivals, unpacked
baskets, made things ready. I wondered if I should go and organize things,
tell them where to place the coffin … Ought it to be in the front room, or in
the much bigger kitchen? Oh, God, a coffin; I hadn’t even thought of that.
“Och,” said Jenny, in a different voice. “Here’s Bobby a-coming up the hill
wi’ Roger Mac.” As one, we all glanced at Amy’s body, then looked at one
another, questioning. We had made her as seemly as we could, but could we
leave Bobby alone with her? That didn’t seem right, but neither did a crowd
of women, likely to set each other off if one burst into tears—“I’ll stay with him,” Rachel said, swallowing. Jenny glanced at me,
eyebrow raised, then nodded. Rachel had a gift for stillness.
“I’ll mind our wee man,” Jenny said, and, kissing Rachel affectionately on
the forehead, went out. Elspeth Cunningham had already vanished,
presumably to help the women now murmuring in the kitchen, busy but
subdued, the sound of them like termites working in the walls of the house.
I waited with Rachel to receive Bobby, mentally compiling a list. There
was a full cask of whisky and a half-empty one in the pantry, but no beer.
Caitlin Breuer might bring some; I should send Jem and Germain up to ask
… And perhaps Roger would go speak to Tom MacLeod about the coffin.
Footsteps in the hall, and the sound of choked breathing. Bobby appeared
in the doorway, but to my surprise, it was Brianna, not Roger, supporting
him. She looked nearly as destroyed as Bobby did, but had her arm firmly
round his shoulders. She was four inches taller than he was, and despite her
obvious distress stood solid as a rock.
“Amy,” he said, seeing the white shroud, and her name was no more than
an anguished breath. “Oh, my God … Amy …” He looked at me, in red-eyed
appeal and silent despair. How could I have let her die?
Nothing could have saved her and we both knew it, but I felt the sting of
helplessness and guilt, nonetheless.
Bobby began to cry, in the awful, wrenching way that men do. Brianna had
been pale and blotchy with grief and shock; now she flushed, her own eyes
welling.
Rachel moved near my shoulder, and next thing I knew, she’d taken Bobby
from Bree as easily as she might have accepted a fresh egg in her hand,
careful of him, but calm.
“Let us sit with thy wife for a bit,” she said softly, and guided him to a
stool. She cast a quick look over her shoulder at Brianna, and nodded to me
before sitting down beside Bobby.
I walked Bree out of the surgery and straight out of the house, thinking that
she wouldn’t want the other women to see her so distraught. I must give her
something for the shock, I thought, but before I could suggest anything, she’d
turned and gripped me by the elbow, wet eyes blazing through her tears.
“Da’s gone,” she said. “And he’s taken Roger and Jem and Aidan 
with
him! To hunt that bloody bear!”
“Oh, aye,” Jenny said behind me, before I could speak. She laid a hand on
Brianna’s arm and squeezed. “Dinna fash, lass. Jamie’s a hard man to kill,and Ian’s painted his face. And I said the blessing for them both—the one for
a warrior goin’ out. They’ll be fine.”
ROGER CAUGHT UP with Jamie and the two boys—he was glad to see that
they’d met Germain along the way—just short of the opening to the small
gorge where the grapevines grew in abundance. They’d heard him crashing
along and had paused to wait for him.
He stopped, breathing heavily, and nodded toward the rocky wall where
the vines rippled and quivered in the light breeze. “This is where it
happened?” 
The smell of ripe muscats was strong and sweet above the rough,
bitter smell of the leaves, and his stomach growled in response; he hadn’t
eaten since breakfast. Jamie reached into his sporran and handed him half a
crumbling bannock, without comment.
“Farther on, Dad,” Jemmy said. “We were over there, up on top of the
cliff. Mam and Mrs. Higgins were down below—see where that big shadow
is, that’s where—” He broke off abruptly, stared, then shrieked. “The bear!
The bear! There it is!”
Roger dropped the bannock and his staff and seized Jemmy by one arm
and Aidan by the collar, dragging them back. Jamie and Ian didn’t move.
They looked down the length of the gorge, looked at each other, then shook
their heads.
“Dinna fash, 
a bhalaich,
” Jamie said to Aidan, kindly. “It’s no the bear.”
“Ye’re … sure of that, are ye?” Roger felt as though the breath had been
knocked out of him. He could see what Jemmy’d seen: a small growth of
hemlocks on the left rim of the gorge cast deep shadow over the vines on the
right, and something was moving in that shadow.
“Foxes,” Ian said, with a one-shouldered shrug. “Come to—ah—” He
broke off, noticing Aidan, who was breathing like a steam engine.
“Sanguinem culum lingere,”
 Jamie said tersely. “Bluebell! Come to me, 
a
nighean.
”
All the dogs were interested in the foxes, tugging at their leashes and
whining, but not barking.
To lick the blood.
 Roger’s mind made the Latin translation and rapidly
readjusted itself to events, presenting him with a stomach-dropping sense of
what had happened here, only a few hours ago.Jamie was talking to Ian and Gillebride in Gaelic now, gesturing along the
ridge. Jem and Aidan clustered close to Roger, silent and big-eyed. The
breeze had changed direction, and he heard the squealing and barks of the
foxes.
“Did you see what happened to Mrs. Higgins?” Roger asked Jem, low-
voiced.
Jem shook his head. “Mandy did,” he said. “Mam came up the grapevines
and got us. Like Tarzan,” he added.
“Like what?” Ian had picked that up and turned to look down at Jem,
puzzled. Roger made a dismissive gesture, and Ian turned back to the
discussion. This lasted no more than a few moments, and they set off along
the edge of the gorge, the dogs sniffing eagerly to and fro.29
Remember, Man …
“GO,” HER MOTHER HAD said firmly. “You need to move, and someone
needs to go and tell Tom MacLeod that we’ll be needing a coffin. As soon as
possible.” Her mother cast a quick, haunted glance back into the house. “If
we can have it by tonight, for the wake …”
“So soon?” Brianna had thought she was numbed by the shocks of the day,
but this was a fresh one. “She’s—she—it was only a few hours ago!”
Her mother sighed, nodding.
“I know. But it’s still warm out.”
“Flies,” Mrs. Cunningham added baldly. She had come to the door,
presumably looking for Claire. She nodded bleakly at Brianna. “I’ve been to
wakes in hot weather where there were maggots dropping from the shroud
and wriggling across the floor. At least if there’s a coffin, they—”
“We’ll put her body in the springhouse for now,” her mother said hastily,
with a reproachful look at Elspeth Cunningham. “It will be all right. Go,
darling.”
She went.
TOM MACLEOD BOASTED that he was the only coffin maker between the
Cherokee Line and Salem. Whether this was true, Brianna didn’t know, but
as he told her, he did usually have at least one coffin a-building, in case of
sudden need.
“This one’s near finished,” he said, leading Brianna into an open-sided
shed smelling of the fresh wood shavings that covered the floor. “Higgins,
you say … not sure I know which lady that might be. How big would you say
…?”Brianna mutely held a hand at the level of her chest, and Mr. MacLeod
nodded. He was old, leathery, and mostly bald, with a half-sprouted gray
beard and shoulders stooped by constant bending over his work, but he
exuded a sense of calm competence.
“This’ll do, then. Now, as to when …” He squinted at the half-finished
coffin, balanced on wooden sawhorses. Pine planks in different stages of
preparation leaned against the walls. She could hear the rustle of what were
probably mice in the shadows, and found it oddly soothing, almost domestic.
“I could help you,” she blurted, and he looked up at her, startled.
“I’m a good builder,” she said. There were tools hanging on one wall, and
she stepped across and took down a plane, holding it with the confidence of
one who knows what to do with it. He saw that, and blinked slowly,
considering. 
Then his eyes passed slowly up her body, taking in her height—
and her bloodstained clothes.
“You’re Himself’s lass, are ye not?” he said, and nodded, as though to
himself. “Aye, well … if ye can drive a nail straight, fine. Otherwise, ye can
sand wood.”
ROGER SAID A silent prayer as they passed through the gorge. One for the
soul of Amy Higgins, and on its heels another for the safety of the hunting
party. The boys walked soberly, keeping near him as they’d been told to,
glancing to and fro as though expecting the bear to leap out of the grapevines.
Perhaps a half hour later, the walls of the gorge spread apart and flattened
into forest, and they walked into the shadow of tall pines and poplars, the
dogs shuffling shoulder-deep in the fallen leaves and dry needles, forging the
way. Ian was in the lead; he stopped at the bottom of a steep slope and
nodded to the other men, pointing upward.
“Is the bear up there?” Aidan whispered to Roger.
“I don’t know.” Roger took a firmer grip on his staff. He had a knife on his
belt, but it wouldn’t begin to penetrate the hide and fat of a bear.
“The dogs do,” Germain observed.
They did. One of the bear hounds threw up his head and made a deep,
eager 
arrooo, arrooo
 sound, and lunged forward. Gillebride loosed him at
once and he shot up the slope into the trees, followed by Bluebell and the
other hound, the three of them swift as water, calling as they went.And they were all running then, the dogs and the men after them, as fast as
they could through the crunching leaves. Roger’s chest began to burn and he
could hear the boys gulping air and panting, but they kept up.
All the dogs had the scent and were baying with excitement, long tails
waving stiff behind them.
Ian and Jamie were swarming up the slope, long-legged, hurdling fallen
logs and dodging trees. Gillebride was laboring alongside Roger, now and
then finding enough breath to shout encouragement to the dogs.
“Sin e! An sin e!”
Roger didn’t know which man had shouted; Jamie and Ian were well out of
sight, but the Gaelic words rang faintly through the trees. 
There! There it is!
Aidan made a high choking noise, put his head down, and began to run as
though his life depended on it, plowing his way up the slope. Roger grabbed
Jemmy’s hand and followed with Germain, jabbing his staff hard into the
ground to help them along.
They crested the slope, lost their balance, and slid and tumbled down into a
small dell, where the dogs were leaping like flames around a tall tree,
yammering and howling at a large—a very large—dark shape thirty feet off
the ground, wedged in the crotch between two trunks.
Roger scrambled to his feet, shedding dry leaves and looking for the boys.
Aidan was nearby; he’d got halfway up and was frozen on his hands and
knees, looking up. His mouth moved, but he wasn’t talking. Roger looked
round wildly for Jemmy.
“Jem! Where are you?”
“Right here, Da,” Jem said from behind him, through the noise of the dogs.
“Is Aidan okay?”
He felt a thump of relief at sight of Jem’s red head; his plait had come
undone and his hair was full of pine needles. There was a scrape on his
cheek, but he clearly wasn’t hurt. Roger patted him briefly and turned to
Aidan, crouching down beside the boy.
“Aidan? Are ye all right?”
“Aye.” He seemed dazed, and no wonder. He’d not taken his eyes off the
bear. “Will it come down and eat us?”
Roger gave the bear in the tree a wary look. It bloody well might, for all he
knew.
“Himself and the others ken what to do,” he assured Aidan, rubbing the
boy’s small, bony back in reassurance. He hoped he was right.“If it comes for ye, hit it across the snout as hard as ye can,”
 Jamie had
told him. 
“If it makes to bite, drive your stick down his throat …”
He’d lost his staff, tumbling down. Where—there. He scrambled down the
slope, keeping an eye on the bear, a solid black blob against the blue sky. It
didn’t seem disposed to move, but he felt much better with the stick in his
hand.
The hunters had gathered together a little way off and were regarding the
bear, narrow-eyed. The dogs were ecstatic, leaping, clawing the tree, barking
and yelping and plainly willing to keep doing it for as long as it took.
“Come on.” Roger gathered the boys and led them up the slope, behind
Jamie and the others. Now that he’d got them safely in hand, he had a
moment to actually look at the bear. It was moving its head restively from
side to side, peering down at the dogs and clearly thinking, 
What the hell …?
He was surprised to feel a sense of sympathy for the treed animal. Then he
remembered Amy and sympathy died.
“… canna get a decent shot,” Jamie was saying, sighting along his rifle. He
lowered it and glanced at Ian. “Can ye move him for me?”
“Oh, aye.” Ian unslung his bow, unhurried, and with no fuss at all, nocked
an arrow and shot it straight into the bear’s backside. The bear squealed with
rage and backed rapidly halfway down the trunk, gave the dogs a quick
glance, and then with an amazing grace jumped to another tree ten feet away,
grabbing the trunk.
The men all shouted and the dogs instantly swarmed the new tree, just as
the bear started down. The bear, the arrow sticking absurdly out behind it,
went back up, looked to and fro for a better idea, and not finding one, jumped
back to its original tree. Jamie shot it, and it thumped to the ground like a
huge sack of flour.
“Crap,” said Jemmy, awed. Germain grabbed his hand. Aidan gave a howl
of rage and lunged toward the fallen bear. Roger lunged, too, and grabbed
Aidan’s collar, but the worn shirt ripped and Aidan ran, leaving a handful of
cloth in Roger’s grasp.
“Fucking stay there!” Roger shouted at Jem, who was staring
openmouthed, and went after Aidan, crashing through fallen branches and
twisting his ankles and scraping his shins on stumps and deadfalls.
The other men were all shouting and running, too. But Aidan had got the
knife from his belt and was roaring in a high treble as he stumbled the lastfew feet toward the bear. The dogs had already reached it and were snapping
and tearing at the carcass—if it was a carcass.
Gillebride was belting down the slope, spear in both hands and bellowing
at the dogs. The bear rose suddenly, swaying, and swatted Bluebell away.
She crashed against a tree with a yelp and fell and Aidan stabbed his little
knife into the bear’s side, screaming and screaming, and then Roger had him,
grabbed him round the middle and flung himself away with Aidan beneath
him and heard behind him the 
thunk!
 of the spear and a long, long sigh from
the bear. Leaves flew up as the bear hit the ground. They touched Roger’s
face and one of the dogs galloped across him, its nails digging into his back
as it launched itself at the dead bear.
“Dad! Dad! Are you okay?” Jemmy was pulling at him, yelling. He dimly
heard Gillebride and Ian beating the dogs away from the carcass and felt a
big, hard hand under his elbow, pulling him upright, and the forest spun.
“The dog’s all right,” Jamie was saying, and Roger wondered whether he
must have asked without realizing it, or whether Jamie was just making
conversation. “She’s maybe cracked a rib, nay more. The wee lad’s fine,
too,” he added. “Here.” He took a small flask from his sporran and wrapped
Roger’s hands around it.
“Daddy?” Jem was kneeling by him, anxious. Roger smiled at him, though
his face felt like melted rubber, unable to hold its shape for more than a few
seconds.
“It’s all right, 
a bhalaich
.”
The strong smell of the bear mingled with the scent of whisky and dead
leaves. He could hear Aidan sobbing and looked for him. Ian had him, an arm
round the boy, cuddled against his side as they sat in the yellow leaves
against a fallen log. He saw that Ian had thumbed some of the white paint
mixed with bear fat from his own face and streaked it across Aidan’s
forehead.
Jamie and Gillebride were by the bear, examining it, Germain peeking
cautiously from behind his grandfather. With a great effort, Roger got to his
feet and held out a hand to Jem.
“Come on.”
It was a beautiful thing, in spite of the wounds. The softness of its muzzle,
the colors of the body, and the perfect vivid curves of claws, pads, huge
rounded back, brought him close to tears.Jamie knelt by the bear’s head and lifted it, the heavy skull moving easily
as he turned it and thumbed the lip away from the big teeth, fingers moving
along the jaw. He grimaced and, reaching gingerly into the bear’s maw, drew
out a tiny scrap from between the back teeth—something that looked like a
fragment of some plant, something dark green. He spread out his palm and
touched the thing, spreading it open, and Roger saw that it was a scrap of
dark-green homespun, tinged black at one edge. The wet black seeped out
onto Jamie’s palm, and Roger could see that it was blood.
Jamie nodded, as though to himself, and tucked the fragment of Amy’s
bodice into his sporran. Then he stood, with a definite intent of body that
made Ian stand up, too, leading Aidan to come and stand with them all, while
Jamie said the prayer for the soul of one fallen in battle.
THEY CAME DOWN to the Big House at sunset, Brianna and Tom
MacLeod carrying the coffin between them, he at the head and she at the foot.
She watched the back of his head as they negotiated their way through the
long tree-shadows, and wondered how old he might be. His hair was thin and
mostly white, tied back in a wisp, and his skin scaly and brown as a turtle’s.
But his eyes were bright and fierce as a turtle’s, too, and his broad hands
knew wood.
They hadn’t exchanged more than a dozen words during the afternoon, but
they hadn’t needed to.
At first, she’d felt deep sorrow at thought of a coffin; Amy being buried,
put away, separated. But her soul had settled in the work, fear, shock, and
worry fading with the concentration needed in the handling of sharp objects,
and she’d begun to feel a sense of peace. This was a thing she could do for
Amy: lay her to rest in clean wood. Her hands were rough now with sanding
and her clothes full of sawdust; she smelled of sweat and fresh pine, and the
balsam firs perfumed the coffin trail. 
Incense,
 she thought.
IT WAS NEARLY dark by the time Brianna left Tom and the coffin in the
yard and went upstairs to make a hasty toilet and change her clothes. They
fell off, heavy with sweat and sawdust, and she felt a moment’s relief, as
though she’d shed some small part of the day’s burden. She pushed the
discarded clothes into a corner with her foot and stood still, naked.The house below hummed like her mother’s beehive, with intermittent
bangs and callings-out as people came through the open door, the voices
instantly hushing in respect—but only momentarily. She closed her eyes and
ran her hands very slowly over her body, feeling skin and bone, the soft
swing of the damp, heavy hair that hung down her back, unbraided.
She thought she should feel guilty. She 
did
 feel guilty, through the fog of
exhaustion, but as her mother had said—more than once—the flesh has no
conscience. Her body was grateful to find itself alive in a cool, dark room,
being soothed and sponged and combed by candlelight.
A soft knock at the door, and Roger came in. She dropped the petticoat
she’d been about to put on and went to him in her shift and stays.
“What did you do with the bear?” she mumbled into his shoulder, some
minutes later. He smelled of blood.
“Gralloched it, put ropes on it, and dragged it home. I think your da put it
in the root cellar, to keep things from getting at it. He says he and Gilly
MacMillan will skin and butcher it tomorrow. It’ll be a lot of meat,” he
added.
A faint shudder went down her back and into her belly. He felt it and
hugged her closer.
“You okay?” he said softly into her hair. She nodded, unable to speak, and
they stood together in silence, listening to the subdued rumble of the house
below.
“Are 
you
 okay?” she asked, at last letting go. She stepped back to look at
him; his eyes looked bruised with tiredness and he’d just shaved. His face
was damp and blotched from scraping and there was a small cut just below
his jaw, a dark line of dried blood. “Was it awful?”
“Aye, it was—but really wonderful, too.” He shook his head and stooped
to pick up the fallen petticoat. “I’ll tell ye later. I’ve got to put on my gear
and go speak to people.” He’d straightened his shoulders as he spoke; she
could see him reach beyond his own emotion and tiredness and grasp his
calling as another man might grip his sword.
“Later,” she echoed, and thought fleetingly that maybe she should learn the
words of the blessing for a warrior going out.
IT TOOK HER some time to pull herself together enough to leave the
sanctuary of her bedroom and go down.Amy’s coffin had been placed on trestles in the kitchen, as the crowd come
to wake her would never fit into the small parlor. Everyone brought food;
Rachel and the two eldest Chisholm girls had taken charge of unpacking the
baskets and bags and laying things out. Brianna drew in a hesitant deep
breath as she entered the room, making her stays creak, but it was all right; if
there was any smell of bear or decay, it was masked by the scents of burning
firewood, candle wax, berry jam, apple cider, cheese, bread, cold meat, and
beer, with the comforting ghost of her father’s whisky floating through the
crowd.
Roger was by the hearth, dressed in his black broadcloth with the
minister’s high white neckcloth, greeting people quietly, clasping their hands,
offering calm and comfort. He caught Brianna’s eye and gave her a warm
look, but was engaged with Auld Mam, who stood on tiptoe, balancing with
her hand on his arm, shouting something into his ear.
She glanced at the coffin. She must go and pay her respects—find a few
words to say to Bobby.
Yeah, like what? I can’t just say, “I’m so sorry.”
 Tears had come to her
eyes, just looking at him.
The bereaved husband was making a valiant effort to keep upright and to
respond to a rush of sympathy that threatened to swamp him. Her father had
taken up a station standing beside Bobby, keeping an eye on him, fielding the
more exigent outpourings—and keeping Bobby’s cup topped up. He sensed
Brianna’s gaze on him and looked toward her, caught her eye, and lifted one
heavy brow in an expression that said clear as day, “Are ye all right, lass?”
She nodded and made her best effort at a smile, but a sense of panic was
rising in her and she turned abruptly and made her way out into the hall,
breathing fast and shallow. As she made her way down the chilly hallway,
she seemed to hear a slow, heavy tread behind her and the scrape of claws on
wood.
Her mother had told her that the smaller children had been fed and put to
bed in the surgery, safe behind the hanging quilt. Brianna paused, listening,
and even though all was quiet within, she pulled back the edge of the quilt
and looked into the room.
Small bodies were curled and sprawled in cozy heaps under the big table,
beside the hearth—though the fire had been smoored and the fire screen
brought in from the kitchen, to prevent accidents—and in every corner of the
room, sleeping on and under their parents’ outer garments and their own; shesaw Mandy in one pile, limbs spread like a starfish. Jem would be somewhere
else, out with the older boys. The whole room seemed to breathe with the
deep slow rhythms of sleep, and she longed suddenly to lie down beside them
and abandon consciousness.
She glanced for the dozenth time at the big window. That had an Indian
trade blanket tacked over it, to keep out cold drafts. The hair lifted on her
nape, looking at it; it wouldn’t keep out any of the things that walked at night.
“It’s all right, Bwee. I’m he-re.” The soft voice startled her and she jerked
back, looking round. The voice had come from the corner by the hearth, and
peering into the shadows, she made out Fanny, sitting cross-legged, Bluebell
on the floor beside her, sound asleep, the dog’s muzzle laid on Fanny’s thigh,
the muslin bandages round Bluey’s ribs a soft white patch in the dark.
“Are you all right, Fanny?” Bree whispered back. “Do you want anything
to eat?”
Fanny shook her head, neat white cap like a mushroom poking through
soil.
“Mrs. Fraser brought me supper. I said Bluey and me would stay with
Orrie and Rob,” she said, careful with her r’s. “If they wake up—”
“Not likely,” Bree said, smiling despite her disquiet. “But you can come
get me, if they do.”
A little of the sleeping children’s peace stayed with her as she left the
surgery, but it vanished the moment she stepped back into the kitchen, hot
and teeming with people. Her stays felt suddenly tighter and she lingered by
the wall, trying to remember how to breathe from the lower abdomen.
“Does Bobby own his cabin?” Moira Talbert was asking, her eyes fixed
speculatively on the little knot of people surrounding Bobby Higgins.
“Himself built it, and I ken his lass and her man dwelt there for a time, but
Joseph Wemyss told Andrew Baldwin as how Himself had given Bobby and
Amy the place, but he didna say was it the house and land by deed, or only
the use of it.”
“Dinna ken,” Peggy Chisholm replied, her own eyes narrowing in
speculation. She glanced toward the far side of the room, where her two
daughters were helping to cut and lay out slices of a vast fruitcake soaked in
whisky that 
Mandaidh
 MacLeod had brought down. “D’ye think maybe that
Himself has it in mind to wed his wee orphan lass to Bobby, though? If it was
her, he’d see Bobby right for the cabin, sure …”“Too young,” said Sophia MacMillan, shaking her head. “She’s but a maid
yet.”
“Aye, and he needs a mother for his wee lads,” Annie Babcock put in
dismissively. “That one couldn’t say boo to a goose. Now, there’s my cousin
Martina, she’s seventeen, and—”
“Even so, the man’s a murderer,” Peggy interrupted. “I dinna think I want
him for a son-in-law, even 
with
 a good hoose.”
Brianna, stifled by amazement, found her voice at this.
“Bobby’s not a murderer,” she said, and was surprised to hear how hoarse
she was. She cleared her throat hard and repeated, “He’s 
not
 a murderer. He
was a soldier, and he shot someone during a riot. In Boston.”
A small jolt ran through her at the word “Boston.” The Old State House
behind her and the smell of traffic, with the big round bronze plaque set into
the asphalt at her feet. Her fifth-grade classmates clustered around it, all
shivering in the wind off the harbor. 
The Boston Massacre,
 the plate read.
“A riot,” she said, more firmly. “A big group of people attacked a small
group of soldiers. Bobby shot someone to save the soldiers’ lives.”
“Oh, aye?” said Sarah MacBowen with a skeptical arch of her brow. “So
why is it he’s got yon 
M
 on his face, then?”
The scar had faded in the ten years since, but was clearly visible now;
Bobby sat by the coffin, and the pale glow of the candle showed the mark of
the brand, dark against the whiteness of his face. She saw that he was still
gripping the edge of the pine coffin, as though he could keep Amy from
going from him, refusing to acknowledge that she was already gone.
Brianna had to go to him. Had to look at Amy. Had to apologize.
“Excuse me,” she said abruptly, and pushed past Moira.
A small group of Bobby’s friends were clustered about him, murmuring
gruff words and giving him an occasional consoling squeeze of the shoulder.
She hung back, awaiting an opening, her heartbeat thumping in her ears.
“Och, Brianna!” A hand clutched her arm, and Ruthie MacLeod leaned in
to peer at her. “Are ye all right, 
a nighean
? They’re sayin’ as how ye were
with Amy when the wicked beast took her—is it so?”
“Yes,” she said. Her lips felt stiff.
“What happened?” Beathag Moore and another young woman were
clustering behind Ruthie, eyes bright with curiosity. “How close were ye to
the bear?”As though the word “bear” had been a signal, heads turned toward
Brianna.
“As close as I am to you right now,” she said. She could barely hear her
own words; her heart had speeded up and … oh, God. It burst into a violent
flutter in her chest, as though a flock of sparrows were trapped inside her, and
black spots swam at the edges of her sight. She couldn’t breathe.
“I—I have to—” She made a helpless gesture at the avid faces, turned, and
lurched out of the room, half-running for the stairs.
She was pulling at her bodice as she reached the landing, and all but ripped
it off as she stumbled into the bedroom and pushed the door closed behind
her.
She had to get out of the stays, she couldn’t breathe … She tore the straps
off her shoulders and squirmed out of the half-fastened corset, gasping for
air. 
Threw off her skirt and petticoat and leaned against the wall, heart still
galloping. 
Air.
Sweating and trembling, she flung open the door and started up the stairs
to the open air of the unfinished attic.
ROGER SAW BRIANNA go white, then turn and stumble out of the kitchen,
knocking into the propped-open door so it swung heavily shut behind her.
He made his way through the crowd as fast as he could, but she was gone
when he pushed out into the hall. Maybe she’d just needed air—God knew,
he did; the night-chilled breeze rushing in from the yard was a huge relief.
“Bree!” he called from the doorstep, but there was no answer—only the
shuffle and murmur of visitors making their way up the slope by the
flickering of a pine torch.
The surgery, then—she must have gone to look at the children …
He found her, finally, in the house. High up in the open air, clinging to one
of the uprights of the timbers framing the unfinished attic, a white shadow
against the night sky.
She must have heard him, though he tried to tread lightly; only a single
layer of boards served (for the moment) as both the ceiling of the second
floor and the floor of the attic. She didn’t move, though, save for the flow of
her hair and her shift, both rippling in the unsettled air. There was a late
thunderstorm in the neighborhood; he could see a mass of steely cloudboiling up behind the distant mountain, shot with constant vivid cracks of
lightning. The smell of ozone was strong on the wind.
“You look like the figurehead of a ship,” he said, coming close behind her.
He put his arms gently round her, covering her from the chill. “Ye feel like
one, too—you’re so cold, ye’re hard as wood.”
She made a sound that he took as an indication that she was glad to see
him and acknowledged his feeble joke but either was too cold to talk or
didn’t know what to say.
“Nobody knows what to say when something like this happens,” he said,
and his lips brushed a cold white ear.
“You do. You did.”
“Nah,” he said. “I said something, aye, but God knows—and I mean that,
by the way—whether it was the right thing to say, or if anything ever could
be, in a situation like that. You were there,” he said, in a softer voice. “Ye got
help, ye took care of the bairns. Ye couldn’t have done more.”
“I know.” She turned to him then, and he felt the wetness on her cheek
against his own. “That’s what—what’s so terrible. There was 
nothing
 to—to
fix it, to make things better. One second she was there, and then …” She was
shaking. He should have thought to bring a cloak, a blanket … but all he had
was his own body, and he held her as close as he could, feeling the solid life
of her trembling in his arms, and felt a terrible guilt at his relief that it hadn’t
been—
“It could have been me,” she whispered, her voice shaking as much as her
body. “She wasn’t ten feet away from me. The bear could have come from
the other side, and—and Jem and Mandy would be or-orphans t-tonight.” She
let out a small, suffocated sob. “Mandy was right by my feet, five minutes b-
before. She—it could have—”
“You’re freezing,” he whispered into her hair. “It’s going to rain. Come
down.”
“I can’t do it. We shouldn’t have come,” she said. “We shouldn’t have
come here.” And letting go of the upright, she bent her head on his shoulder
and cried, pressing hard against him. The cold had seeped from her body into
his, and the cold pellets of her words lay like frozen buckshot in his mind.
Mandy.
He couldn’t tell her it would be all right. But neither could he leave her to
stand alone here like a lightning rod.“If I have to pick ye up, I’ll likely fall off the roof and we’ll both be
killed,” he said, and took her cold hand. “Come down, aye?”
She nodded, straightened, and wiped her eyes on the sleeve of her shift.
“It’s not wrong to be alive,” he said quietly. “I’m glad you are.”
She nodded again, raised his hand to her cold lips, and kissed it. They
made their way down the ladder in the dark one after the other, each alone but
together, toward the distant glow of the hearth below.30
You Should Know …
WE BURIED AMY THE next day, in the small, high meadow that served the
Ridge as a graveyard. It was a peaceful, sunny day, and every step through
the grass revealed some flash of color, the purples and yellows of asters and
goldenrod. The warmth of the sun on our shoulders was a comfort, and
Roger’s words of prayer and commendment held something of comfort, too.
I found myself thinking—as one does, at a certain age—that I’d rather like
to have a funeral like this. Outdoors, among friends and family, with people
who’d known me, whom I’d served for years. A sense of deep sorrow, yes,
but a deeper sense of solemnity, not at odds with sunlight and the deep green
breath of the nearby forest.
Everyone stood silent as the last shovelful of dirt was cast on the heaped
grave. Roger nodded to the children, huddled mute and shocked around their
father, each clutching a small bouquet of wildflowers. Brianna had helped
them pick the flowers—and Mandy had of course insisted on making her own
bouquet, a loose handful of pink-tinged wild clover and grass gone to seed.
Rachel stood quiet, next to Bobby Higgins. She gently picked up his limp
hand and put a small bunch of the tiny white daisy-like flowers of fleabane
into it. She whispered something in his ear, and he swallowed hard, looked
down at his sons, and then walked forward to lay the first flowers on Amy’s
grave, followed by Aidan, the little boys, Jem, Germain, and Fanny—and
Mandy, frowning in concentration on doing it right.
Others stopped briefly by the grave, touching Bobby’s arms and back,
murmuring to him. People began to disperse, drifting back toward home,
work, dinner, normality, grateful that for now, death had passed them by, and
vaguely guilty in their gratitude. A few lingered, talking quietly to one
another. Rachel had appeared again beside Bobby—she and Bree had been
taking it in unspoken turn not to leave him alone.Then it was our turn. I followed Jamie, who didn’t say anything. He took
Bobby by the shoulders and tilted his head so they stood forehead-to-
forehead for a moment, sharing grief. He lifted his head then and shook it,
squeezed Bobby’s shoulder, and stood aside for me.
“She was beautiful, Bobby,” I whispered, my throat still thick, after all the
tears already shed. “We’ll remember her. Always.”
He opened his mouth, but there weren’t any words. He squeezed my hand
hard and nodded, tears oozing unheeded. He’d shaved for the burying, and
raw spots showed red and scraped against his pallid skin.
We walked slowly down the trail toward home. Not speaking, but touching
each other lightly as we went.
As we neared the garden, I paused.
“I’ll—get some—” I waved vaguely toward the palisades. What? I
wondered. What could I pick or dig up, to make a poultice for a mortal
wound to the heart?
Jamie nodded, then took me in his arms and kissed me. Stepped back and
laid a hand against my cheek, looking at me as though to fix my image in his
mind, then turned and went on down.
In truth, I didn’t need anything from the garden, save to be alone in it.
I just stood there for a time, letting the silence that is never silent sink into
me; the stir and sigh of the nearby forest as the breeze passed through, the
distant conversations of birds, small toads calling from the nearby creek. The
sense of plants talking to one another.
It was late afternoon, and the sun was coming in low through the deer
palings, throwing dappled light through the bean vines onto the twisted straw
of the skep, where bees were coming and going with a lazy grace.
I reached out and put a hand on the hive, feeling the lovely deep hum of
the workings within. 
Amy Higgins is gone—is dead. You know her—her
dooryard is full of hollyhocks and she’s got—had—jasmine growing by her
cowshed and a good patch of dogwood nearby.
I stood quite still, letting the vibration of life come into my hand and touch
my heart with the strength of transparent wings.
Her flowers are still growing.Part Three
THE BEE STING OF ETIQUETTE AND
THE SNAKEBITE OF MORAL ORDER
31
Pater Familias
Savannah, Royal Colony of Georgia
WILLIAM HAD BEEN HALF hoping that his inquiries for Lord John Grey
would meet either with total ignorance or with the news that his lordship had
returned to England. No such luck, though. Major General Prévost’s clerk
had been able to direct him at once to a house in St. James Square, and it was
with thumping heart and a ball of lead in his stomach that he came down the
steps of Prévost’s headquarters to meet Cinnamon, waiting in the street.
His anxiety was dispersed the next instant, though, as Colonel Archibald
Campbell, former commander of the Savannah garrison and William’s
personal 
bête noire,
 came up the walk, two aides beside him. William’s first
impulse was to put his hat on, pull it over his face, and scuttle past in hopes
of being unrecognized. His pride, already raw, was having none of this, and
instead, he marched straight down the walk, head high, and nodded regally to
the colonel as he passed.
“Good day to you, sir,” he said. Campbell, who had been saying something
to one of the aides, looked up absently, then halted abruptly, stiffening.
“What the devil are 
you
 doing here?” he said, broad face darkening like a
seared chop.
“My business, sir, is none of your concern,” William said politely, and
made to pass.
“Coward,” Campbell said contemptuously behind him. “Coward and
whoremonger. Get out of my sight before I have you arrested.”
William’s logical mind was telling him that it was Campbell’s relations
with Uncle Hal that lay behind this insult, and he ought not to take it
personally. He must walk straight on as though he hadn’t heard.He turned, gravel grinding under his heel, and only the fact that the
expression on his face made Campbell go white and leap backward allowed
John Cinnamon time to take three huge strides and grab William’s arms from
behind.
“Amène-toi, imbécile!”
 he hissed in William’s ear. 
“Vite!”
 Cinnamon
outweighed William by forty pounds, and he got his way—though in fact,
William didn’t fight him. He didn’t turn round, though, but backed—under
Cinnamon’s compulsion—slowly toward the gate, burning eyes fixed on
Campbell’s mottled countenance.
“What’s wrong with you, 
gonze
?” Cinnamon inquired, once they were
safely out the gate and out of sight of the clapboard mansion. The simple
curiosity in his voice calmed William a little, and he wiped a hand hard down
his face before replying.
“Sorry,” he said, and drew breath. “That—he—that man is responsible for
the death of a—a young lady. A young lady I knew.”
“Merde,”
 Cinnamon said, turning to glare back at the house. “Jane?”
“Wh—how—where did you get that name?” William demanded. The lead
in his belly had caught fire and melted, leaving a seared hollow behind. He
could still see her hands, small and delicate and white, as he’d laid them on
her breast—crossed, the torn wrists neatly bound in black.
“You say it in your sleep sometimes,” Cinnamon said with an apologetic
shrug. He hesitated, but his own urge was strong and he couldn’t keep from
asking, “So?”
“Yes.” William swallowed and repeated more firmly, “Yes. He’s here.
Number Twelve Oglethorpe Street. Come on, then.”
THE HOUSE WAS modest but neat, a white-painted clapboard with a blue
door, standing in a street of similarly tidy homes, with a small church of red
sandstone at the end of the street. Rain-shattered leaves had fallen from a tree
in the front garden and lay in damp yellow drifts upon a brick walk. William
heard Cinnamon draw in his breath as they came to the gate, and saw him
glance to and fro as they went up to the door, covertly taking note of every
detail.
William hammered on the door without hesitation, ignoring the brass
knocker in the shape of a dog’s head. There was a moment of silence, andthen the sound of a baby crying within the house. The two young men stared
at each other.
“It must be his lordship’s cook’s child,” William said, with assumed
nonchalance. “Or the maid. Doubtless the woman will—”
The door swung open, revealing a frowning Lord John, bareheaded and in
his shirtsleeves, clutching a small, howling child to his bosom.
“You woke the baby, damn your eyes,” he said. “Oh. Hallo, Willie. Come
in, then, don’t stand there letting in drafts; the little fiend is teething, and
catching a cold on top of that won’t improve his temper to any noticeable
extent. Who’s your friend? Your servant, sir,” he added, putting a hand over
the child’s mouth and nodding to Cinnamon with a fair assumption of
hospitality.
“John Cinnamon,” both young men said automatically, speaking together,
then stopped, equally flustered. William recovered first.
“Yours?” he inquired politely, with a nod at the child, who had
momentarily stopped howling and was gnawing ferociously on Lord John’s
knuckle.
“Surely you jest, William,” his father replied, stepping back and jerking his
head in invitation. “Allow me to make you acquainted with your second
cousin, Trevor Wattiswade Grey. I am delighted to meet you, Mr. Cinnamon
—will you take a drop of beer? Or something stronger?”
“I—” Panicked, Cinnamon looked to William for direction.
“We may require something a bit stronger, sir, if you have it.” William
reached for the baby, whom he received gingerly from Lord John’s wet,
relieved 
grasp. His father wiped his hand on his breeches and extended it to
Cinnamon.
“Your servant, s—” He stopped abruptly, having evidently got a good look
at Cinnamon for the first time. “Cinnamon,” he said slowly, eyes fixed on the
big Indian’s face. “
John
 Cinnamon, you said?”
“Yes, sir,” said Cinnamon huskily, and dropped suddenly to his knees with
a crash that rattled the china on the sideboard and made little Trevor stiffen
and shriek as though he were being disemboweled by badgers.
“Oh, God,” said Lord John, glancing from Trevor to Cinnamon and back
again. “Here.” He took the child from William again and joggled it in a
practiced fashion.
“Mr. Cinnamon,” he said. “Please. Do get up. There’s no need—”“What in God’s 
name
 are you doing to that baby, Uncle John?” The
furious female voice came from the doorway on the far side of the room, and
William’s head swiveled toward it. Framed in the doorway was a blond girl
of medium size, except for her bosoms, which were very large, white as milk,
and half-exposed by the open banyan and untied shift that she wore.
“Me?” Lord John said indignantly. “I didn’t do anything to the little beast.
Here, madam, take him.”
She did, and little Trevor at once thrust his face into her bosom, making
bestial rooting noises. The young woman caught a glimpse of William’s face
and glared at him.
“And who the devil are you?” she demanded.
He blinked. “My name is William Ransom, madam,” he said, rather stiffly.
“Your servant.”
“This is your cousin Willie, Amaranthus,” Lord John said, coming forward
and patting the top of Cinnamon’s head in an apologetic fashion as he pushed
past him. “William, may I present Amaranthus, Viscountess Grey, your
cousin Benjamin’s … widow.” It was almost not there, that pause, but
William heard it and glanced sharply from the young woman to his father,
but Lord John’s face was composed and amiable. He didn’t meet William’s
eye.
So … either they’ve found Ben’s body—or they haven’t, but they’re letting
his wife believe he’s dead.
“My sympathies, Lady Grey,” he said, bowing.
“Thank you,” she said. “Ow! Trevor, you beastly little 
Myotis
!” She had
stifled Trevor by stuffing him under a hastily pulled-forward wing of her
banyan, evidently pulling down her shift in the same movement, for the child
had battened onto her breast and was now making embarrassingly loud
sucking noises.
“Er … 
Myotis
?” It sounded vaguely Greek, but wasn’t a word William was
familiar with.
“A vesper bat,” she replied, shifting her hold to adjust the child more
comfortably. “They have very sharp teeth. I beg your pardon, my lord.” And
with that, she turned on her bare heel and vanished.
“Ahem,” said Cinnamon, who, ignored, had quietly risen to his feet. “My
lord … I hope you pardon my coming here without warning. I didn’t know
where to find you, until my friend”—nodding at William—“found out yourhouse just now. I should maybe have waited, though. I … can come back
…?” he added, with a hesitant movement toward the door.
“No, no.” Relieved of the presence of Amaranthus and Trevor, Lord John
had regained his usual equanimity. “Please—sit down, will you? I’ll send—
Oh. Actually, there’s no one 
to
 send, I’m afraid. The manservant’s joined the
army and my cook is quite drunk. I’ll get—”
William took him by the sleeve as he made to exit toward the kitchen.
“We don’t need anything,” he said, quite gently. Paradoxically, the chaos
of the last few minutes had settled his own sense of agitation. He put a hand
on his father’s shoulder, feeling the hard bones and warmth of his body,
wondering whether he would ever call him “Papa” again, and turned him
toward John Cinnamon.
The Indian had gone as pale as it was possible for someone of his
complexion to go, and looked as though he was about to be sick.
“I came to say thank you,” he blurted, and clamped his lips shut, as though
fearing to say more.
Lord John’s face lightened, softening as he looked the tall young man up
and down. William’s heart squeezed a little.
“Not at all,” he said, and stopped to clear his throat. “Not at all,” he said
again, more strongly. “I’m so happy to meet you again, Mr. Cinnamon.
Thank you for coming to find me.”
William found that there was a lump in his own throat, and turned away
toward the window, with an obscure feeling that he should give them a
moment’s privacy.
“It was Manoke who told me,” Cinnamon said, his voice husky, too. “That
it was you, I mean.”
“He told you … well, yes, now that I recall, he 
was
 there in Quebec when I
took you to the mission—after your mother died, I mean. You saw Manoke—
recently?” Lord John’s voice held an odd note, and William glanced back at
him. “Where?”
“At Mount Josiah,” William answered, turning round. “I … er … went
there. And found Mr. Cinnamon visiting Manoke. He—Manoke, I mean—
said to give you his regards, and tell you to come fishing with him again.”
A very odd look flickered in Lord John’s eyes, but then was gone as he
focused anew on John Cinnamon. William could see that the Indian was still
nervous, but no longer panic-stricken.“It’s kind of you to—to receive me, sir,” he said, with an awkward nod
toward Lord John. “I wanted to—I mean, I 
don’t
 want to—to impose upon
you, or—or cause any trouble. I would never do that.”
“Oh—of course,” Lord John said, puzzlement clear in his voice and face.
“I don’t expect acknowledgment,” Cinnamon continued bravely. “Or
anything else. I don’t ask anything. I just—I just … had to see you.” His
voice broke suddenly on the last words and he turned hastily away. William
saw tears trembling on his lashes.
“Acknowledgment.” Lord John was staring at John Cinnamon, his face
gone quite blank, and suddenly William couldn’t bear it anymore.
“As your son,” he said roughly. “Take him; he’s better than the one you
have.” And reaching the door in two strides, he yanked it open and went out,
leaving it ajar behind him.
WILLIAM WALKED PURPOSEFULLY to the gate, and stopped. He
wanted to be gone, go away and leave Lord John and his son to make what
accommodations they might. The less he knew of their conversation, the
better. But he hesitated, hand on the latch.
He couldn’t bring himself to abandon Cinnamon, not knowing what the
outcome of that conversation might be. If things went awry … he had a
vision of Cinnamon, rejected and distraught, blundering out of the house and
away, God knew where, alone.
“Don’t be a fool,” he muttered to himself. “You know Papa wouldn’t …”
“Papa” stuck like a thorn in his throat and he swallowed.
Still, he took his hand off the latch and turned back. He’d wait for a quarter
of an hour, he decided. If anything terrible was going to happen, it would
likely be quick. He couldn’t linger in the tiny front garden, though, let alone
skulk about beneath the windows. He skirted the yard and went down the side
of the house, toward the back.
The back garden was sizable, with a vegetable patch, dug over for the next
planting, but still sporting a fringe of cabbages. A small cook shed stood at
the end of the garden, and a grape arbor at one side, with a bench inside it.
The bench was occupied by Amaranthus, who held little Trevor against her
shoulder, patting his back in a business-like way.
“Oh, hullo,” she said, spotting William. “Where’s your friend?”“Inside,” he said. “Talking to Lord John. I thought I’d just wait for him—
but I don’t wish to disturb you.” He made to turn away, but she stopped him,
raising her hand for a moment before resuming her patting.
“Sit down,” she said, eyeing him with interest. “So you’re the famous
William. Or ought I to call you Ellesmere?”
“Indeed. And no, you oughtn’t.” He sat down cautiously beside her.
“How’s the little fellow?”
“Extremely full,” she said, with a small grimace. “Any minute—whoops,
there he goes.” Trevor had emitted a loud belch, this accompanied by a spew
of watery milk that ran over his mother’s shoulder. Apparently such
explosions were common; William saw that she had placed a napkin over her
banyan to receive it, though the cloth seemed inadequate to the volume of
Trevor’s production.
“Hand me that, will you?” Amaranthus shifted the child expertly from one
shoulder to the other and nodded toward another wadded cloth that lay on the
ground near her feet. William picked it up gingerly, but it proved to be clean
—for the moment.
“Hasn’t he got a nurse?” he asked, handing the cloth over.
“He did have,” Amaranthus said, frowning slightly as she mopped the
child’s face. “I sacked her.”
“Drunkenness?” he asked, recalling what Lord John had said about the
cook.
“Among other things. Drunk on occasion—too many of them—and dirty in
her ways.”
“Dirty as in filth, or … er … lacking fastidiousness in her relations with
the opposite sex?”
She laughed, despite the subject.
“Both. Did I not already know you to be Lord John’s son, that question
would have made it clear. Or, rather,” she amended, gathering the banyan
more closely around her, “the phrasing of it, rather than the question itself.
All of the Greys—all those I’ve met so far—talk like that.”
“I’m his lordship’s stepson,” he replied equably. “Any resemblance of
speech must therefore be a matter of exposure, rather than inheritance.”
She made a small interested noise and looked at him, one fair brow raised.
Her eyes were that changeable color between gray and blue, he saw. Just
now, they matched the gray doves embroidered on her yellow banyan.“That’s possible,” she said. “My father says that a kind of finch learns its
songs from its parents; if you take an egg from one nest and put it into
another some miles away, the nestling will learn the songs of the new parents,
instead of the ones who laid the egg.”
Courteously repressing the desire to ask why anyone should be concerned
with finches in any way, he merely nodded.
“Are you not cold, madam?” he asked. They were sitting in the sun, and
the wooden bench was warm under his legs, but the breeze playing on the
back of his neck was chilly, and he knew she wasn’t wearing anything but a
shift under her banyan. The thought brought back a vivid recollection of his
first sight of her, milky bosom and prominent nipples on display, and he
looked away, trying to think instantly of something else.
“What is your father’s profession?” he asked at random.
“He’s a naturalist—when he can afford to be,” she replied. “And no, I’m
not cold. It’s always much too hot in the house, and I don’t think the smoke
from the hearth is good for Trevor; it makes him cough.”
“Perhaps the chimney isn’t drawing properly. You said, ‘when he can
afford to be.’ What does your father do when he cannot afford to pursue his
… er … particular interests?”
“He’s a bookseller,” she said, with a slight tone of defiance. “In
Philadelphia. That’s where I met Benjamin,” she added, with a barely
perceptible catch in her voice. “In my father’s shop.” She turned her head
slightly, watching to see what he made of this. Would he disapprove of the
connection, knowing her now for a tradesman’s daughter? 
Not likely,
 he
thought wryly. 
Under the circumstances.
“You have my deepest sympathies on the loss of your husband, madam,”
he said. He wondered what she knew—had been told, rather—about
Benjamin’s death, but it seemed indelicate to ask. And he’d best find out just
what Papa and Uncle Hal knew about it now, before he went trampling into
unknown territory.
“Thank you.” She looked away, her eyes lowered, but he saw her mouth—
rather a nice mouth—compress in a way suggesting that her teeth were
clenched.
“Bloody Continentals!” she said, with sudden violence. She lifted her 
head,
and he saw that, far from being filled with tears, her eyes were sparking with
rage. “Damn them and their nitwit republican philosophy! Of all theobstinate, muddle-headed, treasonous twaddle … I—” She broke off
suddenly, perceiving his startlement.
“I beg your pardon, my lord,” she said stiffly. “I … was overcome by my
emotions.”
“Very … suitable,” he said awkwardly. “I mean—quite understandable,
given the … um … circumstances.” He glanced sideways at the house, but
there was no sound of doors opening or voices raised in farewell. “Do call me
William, though—we 
are
 cousins, are we not?”
She smiled fully at that. She had a lovely smile.
“So we are. You must call me Cousin Amaranthus, then—it’s a plant,” she
added, with the slightly resigned air of one frequently obliged to make this
explanation. “
Amaranthus retroflexus.
 Of the family Amaranthaceae.
Commonly known as pigweed.”
Trevor, who to this point had been perched on his mother’s knee, goggling
stupidly at William, now made an urgent noise and reached out toward him.
Fearing lest the child escape his mother’s clutches and pitch face-first onto
the brick pathway, William grabbed him round the midsection and hoisted
him onto his own knee, where the little boy stood, wobbling and crowing,
beaming into William’s face. Despite himself, William smiled back. The boy
was handsome, when not screeching, with soft dark hair and the pale-blue
eyes common to the Greys.
“Wotcha, then, Trev?” he said, lowering his head and pretending to butt
the child, who giggled and clutched at his hair.
“He looks quite like Benjamin,” he said, extracting his ears from Trevor’s
grip. “And my uncle. I hope I don’t give you pain by saying so?” he added,
suddenly unsure. She shook her head, though, and her smile turned rueful.
“No. It’s as well that he does. Your uncle was somewhat suspicious of me,
I think. We married rather in haste,” she explained, in answer to William’s
inquiring look, “and while Benjamin did write to tell his father of the
marriage, his letter apparently didn’t reach England before His Grace left for
the colonies. So when I discovered that His Grace was in Philadelphia, and
wrote to him myself …” She lifted one shoulder in a graceful shrug and
glanced toward the house.
“Tell me about your friend,” she said. “Is he an Indian?”
William felt a sudden weight come back, one that he’d shed without
noticing it over the last few minutes.“Yes,” he said. “His mother was half Indian, half French, he says. Though
I can’t say to what Indian nation she might have belonged. She died when he
was an infant, and he was raised in a Catholic orphanage in Quebec.”
Amaranthus was interested. She leaned forward, looking toward the house.
“And his father?” she asked. “Or does he know anything of his father?”
William glanced involuntarily at the house again, but all was silent.
“As to that,” he said, groping for something to say that was not a lie, but
still something short of the full truth, “it’s a long story—and it’s not my story
to tell. All I can say is that his father was a British soldier.”
“I did notice his hair,” Amaranthus said, dimpling. “Most remarkable.”
She glanced past him at the house, and reached to take the baby back. “Will
you be staying with his lordship?”
“I don’t think so.” Still, the thought of being home—even if home was a
place he’d never been before—swept through him with a sudden longing.
Apparently Amaranthus perceived this, for she leaned toward him and put a
gentle hand on his.
“Will you not stay—just for a bit? I know Uncle John would like it; he
misses you very much. And I should like to know you better.”
The simple sincerity of this statement moved him.
“I—should like to,” he said awkwardly. “I don’t—that is, it may depend
upon my friend. Upon his conversation with my father.”
“I see.” She petted Trevor, smoothing his soft hair and snuggling him into
her shoulder. William had a sudden pang of envy, seeing it. Amaranthus,
though, rose and stood swaying with the child in her arms, her own light hair
lifting in the breeze as she looked at the house.
“I should like to go inside, but I don’t want to disturb them. I wonder what
can be taking so long?”32
Lhude Sing Cuccu!
JOHN GREY STOOD FOR a moment, blinking at the door through which
his son had just vanished, and feeling just behind him the enormous quandary
perched on a tiny gilt chair. Without the slightest notion what might happen
next, he turned round and said the only thing possible in the circumstances.
“Would you like some brandy, Mr. Cinnamon?”
The young man sprang up at once, graceful in spite of his size and the look
of profound anxiety stamped upon his broad features. The mixture of dread
and hope in John Cinnamon’s eyes wrung Grey’s heart, and he put a hand
gently on the young man’s arm, turning him toward the sturdiest piece of
furniture available, a wide-armed chair with a solid oak frame.
“Sit down,” he said, gesturing to this object. “And let me get you
something to drink. I daresay you need it.” 
I certainly do,
 he thought, heading
for the door that led into the kitchen. 
What in God’s name am I to say to him?
Neither the time consumed in finding brandy, nor the ceremonious pouring
of it, provided him with any answers. He sat down in the green-striped wing
chair and picked up his own brandy, feeling a most peculiar mix of dismay
and exhilaration.
“I’m so pleased to make your acquaintance again, Mr. Cinnamon,” he said,
smiling. “I last saw you at the age of six months or so, I believe. You’ve
grown.”
Cinnamon flushed a little at this—an improvement over the pallor with
which he’d entered the room—and bobbed his head awkwardly.
“I—thank you,” he blurted. “For seeing to my welfare all these years.”
Grey lifted a hand in brief dismissal, but asked curiously, “How many
years has it been? How old are you?”
“Twenty, sir—or ought I to call you ‘my lord’ or ‘Excellency’?” he asked,
anxiety still evident.“‘Sir’ is quite all right,” Grey assured him. “May I ask how you fell into
company with my—with William?”
Having a straightforward story to tell seemed to relax the young man
somewhat, and by the time he’d got through it all, the brandy in his glass had
sunk to amber dregs and his manner was substantially less anxious. With
Cinnamon’s size in mind, Grey had poured with a lavish hand.
Manoke,
 he thought, with mingled exasperation and amusement. No point
in being angry; Manoke made his own rules, and always had. At the same
time, though … Despite the intermittent and casual nature of their
relationship, Grey trusted the Indian more than anyone, with the exception of
his own brother or Jamie Fraser. Manoke wouldn’t put Cinnamon on his trail
for the sake of mischief; either he’d thought Cinnamon likely 
was
 his son and
therefore had a right to know it—or having met William as an adult, he’d
thought that Grey might need another son.
Perhaps he did, he thought, with a small clench of the belly. If William
chose to deal with the problem of his paternity by simply disappearing … or
even if he didn’t … but no. It wouldn’t do, he concluded, with a surprising
sense of regret.
“I’m glad you’re here, Mr. Cinnamon,” he said, eyes on the brandy as he
poured another glass for the young man. “I must begin by apologizing.”
“Oh, no!” Cinnamon burst out, sitting upright. “I would never expect you
to—I mean, there’s nothing to apologize for.”
“Yes, there is. I ought to have written down a brief account of your
circumstances when I put you in the care of the Catholic brothers at Gareon,
rather than simply leave you there with nothing but a name. It is difficult,
though,” he added with a smile, “to look at a six-month-old child and
envision the … er … ultimate result of passing time. Somehow, one never
thinks that children will grow up.” He had a passing vision of Willie at the
age of two and a half, small and fierce—and already beginning to resemble
his real father.
Cinnamon looked down at his very broad hands, braced on his knees—and
then, as though he couldn’t help it, stared at Grey’s slender hand, still
wrapped around the brandy bottle. Then he looked up at Grey’s face,
searching for kinship.
“You do resemble your father,” Grey said, meeting the young man’s eyes
directly. “I wish that I were that man—both for your sake and for my own.”There was a deep silence in the room. Cinnamon’s face went blank and
stayed that way. He blinked once or twice, but gave away nothing of what he
felt. Finally he nodded, and took a breath that went to the roots of his soul.
“Can you—will you—tell me of my father, sir?”
Well, that was it, Grey thought. He’d realized the choices instantly: claim
the young man as his own, or tell him the truth. But how much of the truth?
The trouble was that Cinnamon’s existence wasn’t purely his own concern;
there were other people involved; did Grey have the right to meddle with
their affairs without consultation or permission? But he had to tell the boy
something,
 he thought. And reached for his glass.
“He was a British soldier, as Manoke told you,” he said carefully. “Your
mother was half French and half … I’m afraid I have no idea of the nation
from which her other parent originated.”
“Assiniboine, I always thought,” Cinnamon said. “I mean—I knew some
part of me must be Indian, and I’d look at the men who came through
Gareon, to see if— There are a lot of Assiniboine in that part of the country.
They’re often tall and …” His big hand lifted and gestured half consciously at
the breadth of his shoulders.
Grey nodded, surprised, but pleased that the young man was taking the
news calmly.
“I saw her, your mother,” he said, and took another swallow of the brandy.
“Only the once—but she was in fact tall for a woman; perhaps an inch or so
taller than I am. And very beautiful,” he added gently.
“Oh.” It was little more than a breath of acknowledgment, but Grey was
startled—and moved—to see the boy’s face change. Just for an instant, Grey
was reminded of the look on Jamie Fraser’s face when he had received
Communion from the hand of an Irish priest, when the two of them had gone
to Ireland in search of a criminal. A look of reverence, of grateful peace.
“She died of the smallpox, in an epidemic. I … er … purchased you from
your grandmother for the sum of five guineas, two trade blankets, and a small
cask of rum. She was a Frenchwoman,” he added, in apologetic explanation,
and Cinnamon actually gave a brief twitch of the lips.
“And … my father?” He leaned forward, hands on his knees, intent. “Will
you tell me his name? Please,” he added, some of the anxiety returning.
Grey hesitated, with the vivid images of what had happened when William
had discovered 
his
 true parentage fresh in his mind—but the situations were
quite different, he told himself, and in all conscience …“His name is Malcolm Stubbs,” he said. “You, um, didn’t inherit your
stature from him.”
Cinnamon stared at him for a bewildered instant, then, catching the
allusion, gave a brief, shocked laugh. He put a hand over his mouth in
embarrassment, but seeing that Grey was not discomposed, lowered it.
“You say 
is,
 sir. He is … alive, then?” All the hope—and all the fear—
with which he had entered the house was back in his eyes.
“He was, the last time I had word of him, though that will be more than a
year past. He lives in London, with his wife.”
“London,” Cinnamon whispered, and shook his head, as though London
surely could not be a real place.
“As I said, he was wounded when we took Quebec. Badly wounded—he
lost a foot and the lower part of his leg to a cannonball; I was amazed that he
survived, but he had great resilience. I’m quite sure he managed to pass that
trait on to you, Mr. Cinnamon.” He smiled warmly at the young Indian. He
hadn’t drunk as much brandy as the young man, but quite enough.
Cinnamon nodded, swallowed, and then, lowering his head, stared at the
pattern in the Turkey carpet for some moments. Finally, he cleared his throat
and looked up, resolute.
“You say he is married, sir. I do not imagine that his wife—is aware of my
existence.”
“A hundred to one against,” Grey assured him. He eyed the young man
carefully. Might he actually set out for London? At the moment, upright and
stalwart, he looked capable of anything. Grey tried—and failed—to imagine
just what Malcolm’s wife would do, should John Cinnamon turn up on her
doorstep one fine morning.
“Blame 
me,
 I expect,” he murmured under his breath, reaching for the
decanter. “Another drop, Mr. Cinnamon? I should advise it, really.”
“I—yes. Please.” He inhaled the brandy and set the glass down with an air
of finality. “Be assured, sir, I wish to do nothing that would cause my father
or his wife the least discomfort.”
Grey took a cautious sip of his own fresh glass.
“That’s most considerate,” he said. “But also rather prudent. May I ask,
had I actually proved to be your father—and let me repeat that I regret the
fact that I am not—” He lifted his glass an inch and Cinnamon cast down his
eyes, but gave a brief nod of acknowledgment. “What did you intend to do?
Or ought I to ask what you had hoped for?”Cinnamon’s mouth opened, but then shut as he considered. Grey was
beginning to be impressed by the young man’s manner. Deferential but not
shy at all; straightforward but thoughtful.
“In truth, I scarcely know, sir,” Cinnamon said at last. He sat back a little,
settling himself. “I did not expect, nor do I seek”—he added, with an
inclination of his head—“any recognition or … or material assistance. I
suppose it was in good part curiosity. But more, perhaps, a desire for some
sense of … not of belonging; it would be foolish to expect that—but some
knowledge of connection. Just to know that there is a person who shares my
blood,” he ended simply. “And what he is like.
“Oh!” he said then, abashed. “And of course I wished to thank my father
for taking thought for my welfare.” He cleared his throat again. “Might I ask,
sir—a particular favor of you?”
“Certainly,” Grey replied. His mind had been stimulated by his own
question—what 
might
 an abandoned child seek from an unknown parent?
William certainly wanted nothing from Jamie Fraser, but that was quite a
different circumstance; William had known Jamie since he was a child,
though knowing him as a man was likely to prove a different kettle of fish ….
And then, too, William had a family, a proper family, people who shared not
his blood, but his place in the world. Grey tried—and failed completely—to
imagine what it must be like to feel oneself totally alone.
“—if I were to write such a letter,” Cinnamon was saying, and Grey
returned to the present moment with a jerk.
“Send a letter,” he repeated. “To Malcolm. I—yes, I suppose I could do
that. Er … saying what, if you don’t mind my asking?”
“Just to acknowledge his kindness in providing for my welfare, sir—and to
assure him of my service, should he ever find himself in want of it.”
“Oh. His … yes, his kindness …” Cinnamon looked sharply at him, and
Grey felt a flush rise in his cheeks that had nothing to do with the brandy.
Damn it, he should have realized that Cinnamon thought Malcolm had
provided the funds for his support all these years. Whereas, in reality …
“It was you,” Cinnamon said, surprise almost covering the disappointment
in his face. “I mean—Mr. Stubbs didn’t …”
“He couldn’t have,” Grey said hurriedly. “As I said—he was badly
wounded, very badly. He nearly died, and was sent back to England as soon
as possible. Truly, he—he would have been unable …”Unable to take thought for the son he’d made and left behind. Malcolm
had never mentioned the boy to Grey, nor asked after him.
“I see,” Cinnamon said bleakly. He pressed his lips together and focused
his gaze on the silver coffeepot sitting on the sideboard. Grey didn’t try to
speak further; he could only make matters worse.
Finally, Cinnamon’s eyes cleared and he looked at Grey again, serious.
The young man had very beautiful dark eyes, deep-set and slightly slanting.
Those had come from his mother—Grey wished that he could tell him so, but
this was not the moment for such details.
“Then I thank you, sir,” he said softly, and bowed, deeply, toward Grey. “It
was most generous in you, to perform such a service for your friend.”
“I didn’t do it for Malcolm’s sake,” Grey blurted. His glass was empty—
how had that happened?—and he set it down carefully on the little drum
table.
They sat regarding each other, neither knowing quite what to say next.
Grey could hear Moira the cook talking outside; she often talked to the
faeries in the garden even when not drunk. The carriage clock on the mantel
struck the half hour, and Cinnamon jerked in surprise, turning to look at it. It
had musical chimes, and a mechanical butterfly under a glass dome, that
raised and lowered its cloisonné wings.
The movement had broken the awkward silence, though, and when
Cinnamon turned back, he spoke without hesitation.
“Father Charles said that you gave me a name, when you left me at the
mission. You did not know what my mother called me, I suppose?”
“Why, no,” Grey said, disconcerted. “I didn’t.”
“So it was you who called me John?” A slight smile appeared on
Cinnamon’s face. “You gave me your own name?”
Grey felt an answering smile on his own face, and lifted one shoulder in a
deprecating way.
“Oh, well …” he said. “I liked you.”33
Spoilt for Choice
WHATEVER PAPA AND JOHN Cinnamon were doing, they were taking
the devil of a long time about it. After a few minutes, during which Trevor
yowled unceasingly, Amaranthus had made her excuses and withdrawn to the
house in search of clean clouts.
Without occupation or acquaintance in town or camp, and reluctant to go
into the house himself, William found himself at loose ends. The last thing he
wanted was to encounter anyone he knew, in any case. He pulled the black
slouch hat well down over his brow and forced himself to stroll, rather than
stride, through the town toward camp. The place was full of private soldiers,
sutlers, and support troops; it would be easy to escape notice.
“William!”
He stiffened at the shout, but smothered the momentary impulse to run. He
recognized that voice—just as the owner of it had undoubtedly recognized his
height and figure. He turned reluctantly to greet his uncle, the Duke of
Pardloe, who had emerged from a house directly behind him.
“Hallo, Uncle Hal,” he said, with what grace he could muster. He supposed
it didn’t matter; Lord John would tell his brother about William’s and John
Cinnamon’s presence, in any case.
“What are you doing here?” his uncle inquired—mildly, for him. His sharp
glance took in everything from William’s mud-caked boots to the stained
rucksack on his shoulder and the worn cloak over his arm. “Come to enlist?”
“Haha,” William said coldly, but felt immediately better. “No. I came with
a—friend, who had business in camp.”
“Seen your father?”
“Not really.” He didn’t elucidate, and after a thoughtful pause, Hal shook
out his own gray military cloak and slung it over his shoulders.
“I’m going down to the river for a bit of air before supper. Come along?”William shrugged. “Why not?”
They made their way out of the town and down from the bluffs without
being accosted, and William felt the tightness between his shoulder blades
ease. His uncle didn’t indulge in idle conversation, and didn’t mind silence in
the least. They reached the edge of the narrow beach without exchanging a
word, and made their way slowly through scrubby pines and yaupon bushes
to the clean, solid sand of the tidal zone.
William placed his feet just so, enjoying making prints in the silty gray
sand. The summer sky was vast and blue above them, a blazing yellow sun
coming slowly down into the waves. They followed the curve of the beach,
ending on a tiny spit of sandy gravel inhabited by a gang of orange-billed
oystercatchers, who eyed them coldly and gave way with ill grace, turning
their heads and glaring as they waddled sideways.
Here they stood for some minutes, looking out into the water.
“Do you miss England?” Hal asked abruptly.
“Sometimes,” William answered honestly. “But I don’t think about it
much,” he added, with less honesty.
“I do.” His uncle’s face looked relaxed, almost wistful in the fading light.
“But you haven’t a wife there, or children. No establishment of your own,
yet.”
“No.”
The sounds of slaves working in the fields behind them were still audible,
but muted by the rhythm of the surf at their feet, the passage of the silent
clouds above their heads.
The trouble with silence was that it allowed the thoughts in his head to take
on a tiresome insistence, like the ticking of a clock in an empty room.
Cinnamon’s company, disturbing as it occasionally was, had allowed him to
escape them when he needed to.
“How does one go about renouncing a title?”
He hadn’t actually been intending to ask that just yet, and was surprised to
hear the words emerge from his mouth. Uncle Hal, by contrast, didn’t seem
surprised at all.
“You can’t.”
William glared down at his uncle, who was still looking imperturbably
downriver toward the sea, the wind pulling strands of his dark hair from his
queue.“What do you mean, I can’t? Whose business is it whether I renounce my
title or not?”
Uncle Hal looked at him with an affectionate impatience.
“I’m not speaking rhetorically, blockhead. I mean it literally. You can’t
renounce a peerage. There’s no means set down in law or custom for doing it;
ergo, it can’t be done.”
“But you—” William stopped, baffled.
“No, I didn’t,” his uncle said dryly. “If I could have at the time, I would
have, but I couldn’t, so I didn’t. The most I 
could
 do was to stop using the
title of ‘Duke,’ and threaten to physically maim anyone who used it in
reference or address to me. It took me several years to make it clear that I
meant that,” he added offhandedly.
“Really?” William asked cynically. “Who did you maim?”
He actually 
had
 supposed his uncle to be speaking rhetorically, and was
taken aback when the once and present duke furrowed his brow in the effort
of recall.
“Oh … several scribblers—they’re like roaches, you know; crush one and
the others all rush off into the shadows, but by the time you turn round, there
are throngs of them back again, happily feasting on your carcass and
spreading filth over your life.”
“Anyone ever tell you that you have a way with words, Uncle?”
“Yes,” his uncle said briefly. “But beyond punching a few journalists, I
called out George Mumford—he’s the Marquess of Clermont now, but he
wasn’t then—Herbert Villiers, Viscount Brunton, and a gentleman named
Radcliffe. Oh, and a Colonel Phillips, of the Thirty-fourth—cousin to Earl
Wallenberg.”
“Duels, do you mean? And did you fight them all?”
“Certainly. Well—not Villiers, because he caught a chill on the liver and
died before I could, but otherwise … but that’s beside the point.” Hal caught
himself and shook his head to clear it. Evening was coming on, and the
onshore breeze was brisk. He wrapped his cloak about his body and nodded
toward the town.
“Let’s go. The tide’s coming in and I’m dining with General Prévost in
half an hour.”
They made their way slowly through the twilight, the rough marram grass
rasping at their boots.“Besides,” his uncle went on, head down against the wind, “I had another
title—one without taint. Refusing to use the Pardloe title meant I also refused
to use the income from the title’s estates, but it meant almost nothing in terms
of my daily life, bar a bit of eye-rolling from society. My friends largely
remained my friends, I was received in most of the places I was accustomed
to go, and—the important point—I continued doing what I intended to do:
raise and command a regiment. You—” He glanced at William, running an
appraising eye over him from slouch hat to clodhopper boots.
“Not to put too fine a point on it, William—it might be easier to ask what it
is you want to do, rather than asking how not to do what you don’t.”
William stopped, closed his eyes, and just stood, listening to the water for
a few moments of blessed relief from the tick-tock thoughts. Absolutely
nothing was happening inside his head.
“Right,” he said at last, taking a deep breath and opening his eyes. “Were
you born knowing that’s what you wanted to do?” he asked curiously.
“I suppose so,” his uncle answered slowly, beginning to walk again. “I
can’t recall ever thinking of being anything save a soldier. As to 
wanting
 it,
though … I don’t think that question ever occurred to me.”
“Exactly,” said William, with a certain dryness. “You were born into a
family where that’s what the oldest son did, and that happened to suit you. I
was raised believing that my sacred duty was to care for my lands and
tenants, and it never occurred to me for an instant that what I wanted came
into it—no more than it did to you.
“The fact remains,” he went on, taking off his hat and tucking it under his
arm to keep it from being carried away by the wind, “that I don’t feel entitled
—as it were—to 
any
 of the titles I was supposedly born to …. Besides—” A
thought struck him, and he gave his uncle a narrow look.
“You said you didn’t accept the dukedom’s income. I don’t suppose you
also neglected the care of the estates you weren’t profiting from?”
“Of course n—” Hal broke off and gave William a look in which
annoyance was tempered by a certain respect. “Who taught you to think,
boy? Your father?”
“I imagine Lord John may have had some small influence,” William said
politely. His insides had turned over—as they did with monotonous regularity
recently—at mention of his erstwhile father. He couldn’t forget the look 
of
fearful eagerness in John Cinnamon’s eyes … oh, bloody hell, of course hecould forget. It was a matter of will, that’s all. He shoved it aside, the next
best thing.
“But you didn’t in fact renounce your responsibilities, even though you
wouldn’t profit by them. You’re telling me, though, that you couldn’t have
done so. There are 
no
 circumstances in which a peer can stop being a peer?”
“Well, not at his own whim, no. Mind you, a peerage is the gift of a
grateful monarch. A monarch who ceases to be grateful can indeed strip a
peer of his titles, though I doubt any monarch could do so without support
from the House of Lords. Peers don’t like to feel threatened—it so seldom
happens to any of them these days, they’re not used to it,” he added
sardonically.
“Even so—it isn’t a matter of kingly whim, either. Grounds for revoking a
peerage are rather limited, I believe. The only one that comes to mind is
engaging in a rebellion against the Crown.”
“You don’t say.”
William had spoken lightly—or meant to—but Hal stopped and turned a
piercing look on his nephew.
“If you consider treason and the betrayal of your King, your country, and
your family a suitable means of solving your personal difficulties, William,
then perhaps John hasn’t taught you as well as I supposed.”
Without waiting for an answer, he turned and stumped off through the beds
of rotting waterweed, leaving amorphous footprints in the sand.
WILLIAM STAYED BY the shore for some little while. Not thinking. Not
feeling much of anything, either. Just watching the currents move through the
river, washing out his tired brain. A squadron of brown pelicans with white
heads came floating down the sky, keeping formation as they skimmed two
feet above the surface of the water. Evidently seeing nothing interesting, they
rose again as one and sailed back over the marshes toward the open sea.
No wonder that people run away to sea,
 he thought, with a small sense of
longing. To slough off the small cares of daily life and escape the demands of
a life unwanted. Nothing but miles of boundless water, boundless sky.
And bad food, seasickness, and the chance of being killed at any moment
by pirates, rogue whales, or, much more likely, the weather.
The thought of rogue whales made him laugh and the thought of food, bad
or not, reminded him that he was starving. Turning to go, he discovered thatwhile he had stood there vegetating, a large bull alligator had crawled out of
the shrubbery behind him and was reposing about four feet away. He
shrieked, and the reptile, startled and indignant, opened a horrifying set of
jaws and made a noise between a growl and an enormous belch.
He had no idea exactly how he’d done it, but when he stopped, panting and
drenched with sweat, he was in the middle of the army camp. Heart still
pounding, he made his way through the neat aisles of tents, feeling once more
safe amid the normal noises of a camp settling toward supper, the air thick
with the smells of wood fire, hot earth from the camp kitchens, grilling meat,
and simmering stew.
He was ravenous by the time he reached Papa’s house, though at this time
of summer, it would be broad daylight for another hour at least. He assumed
that Trevor would be abed, sunlight notwithstanding, and so walked as
quietly as he could, using the damp grass beside the brick walk.
As Trevor—and necessarily Trevor’s mother—was in his mind, he glanced
round the side of the house and discovered that the bench in the grape arbor
was occupied, all right, but not by Amaranthus, with or without baby
attached.
“Guillaume!”
 John Cinnamon spotted him and erupted from the leafy
bower with such force as to scatter leaves and stray grapes across the gravel.
“John! How did it go?” He could see Cinnamon’s broad face, shining with
joy, and his inner organs shriveled. Had Papa accepted John Cinnamon as his
son?
“Oh! It was—he was—your father is a great, good man, 
Guillaume
!
You’re so fortunate to have him.”
“I—er—yes,” William said, a little dubiously. “But what did he say—”
“He told me all about my father,” Cinnamon said, and stopped to swallow
at the enormity of the word. “My father. He’s called Malcolm Stubbs; have
you ever met him?”
“I’m not sure,” William said, frowning in an effort at recollection. “I’m
sure I’ve heard the name once or twice, but if I’ve ever met him, it must have
been when I was quite young.”
Cinnamon flapped a large hand, dismissing this.
“He was a soldier, a captain. He was badly hurt in the big battle for the
City of Quebec, up on the Plains of Abraham, you know?”
“I know about the battle, yes. But he survived?”“He did. He lives in London.” Cinnamon squeezed William’s shoulder in a
transport of delight at the name, and William felt his collarbone shift.
“I see. Well, that’s good, I suppose?”
“Lord John says that if I choose to write a letter, he will see that Captain
Stubbs receives it. In 
London
!” Clearly, London was next door to Faery-land,
and William smiled at his friend, at once truly happy that Cinnamon was
genuinely thrilled about this revelation—and secretly and shamefacedly
relieved that, after all, Cinnamon really wasn’t Papa’s natural son.
It was necessary to walk up and down the yard several times, listening to
Cinnamon’s excited account of exactly what he had said, and what Lord John
had said, and what he had thought when Lord John said it, and …
“So you are going to write a letter, aren’t you?” William finally managed
to interrupt him sufficiently as to ask.
“Oh, yes.” Cinnamon grabbed his hand and squeezed. “Will you help me,
Guillaume
? Help me decide what to say?”
“Ouch. Yes, of course.” He retrieved his crushed hand and flexed the
fingers gently. “Well. I suppose that means that you’d like to remain here in
Savannah for a bit, in case there should be a reply from Captain Stubbs?”
Cinnamon seemed to pale slightly, whether at the thought of receiving
such a reply, or at the possibility that he might not, but he took a huge breath
and nodded.
“Yes. Lord John was so kind as to invite us to remain with him, but I think
that wouldn’t be right. I told him I’ll find work, a little place to live. Oh,
Guillaume,
 I’m 
so
 happy. 
Je n’arrive pas à y croire!
”
“So am I, 
mon ami,
” William said, and smiled; Cinnamon’s delight was
catching. “But I tell you what—let’s go and be happy together over supper.
I’m going to drop dead of starvation any minute.”34
The Son of a Preacher-man
Fraser’s Ridge
THE MEETING HOUSE, AS everyone had taken to calling the cabin that
was to serve the Ridge as schoolroom, Masonic Lodge, a church for
Presbyterian and Methodist services, and a place for Quaker meeting, was
now finished, and in the afternoon of that day, the reluctant schoolteacher, the
Worshipful Master of the Lodge, and the three competing preachers met—
spouses brought along as congregation—to inspect and bless the place.
“It smells like beer,” said the nominative schoolteacher, wrinkling her
nose.
It did, the smell of hops strong enough to compete with the fragrance of the
raw pinewood of the walls and the new benches, so freshly cut as still to be
oozing a pale golden sap in places.
“Aye,” said the Master. “Ronnie Dugan and Bob McCaskill had a
difference of opinion about whether there should be something for the
preachers to stand on besides the floor, and someone kicked over the keg.”
“No great loss,” replied the husband of the sole practicing Quaker on
Fraser’s Ridge. “Worst beer I’ve had since wee Markie Henderson pissed in
his mother’s brew tub and no one found it out before the beer was served.”
“Oh, it wasn’t quite 
that
 bad,” the Presbyterian minister said, presumably
on the judge-not principle, but he was drowned out by a general buzz of
agreement.
“Who made it?” asked Rachel in a low voice, glancing over her shoulder in
case the miscreant brewer should be in earshot.
“I blush to admit that I supplied the keg,” Captain Cunningham said,
frowning, “but I’ve no notion of its manufacture. It came up with some of my
books from Cross Creek.”There was a general murmur of understanding—punctuated by a grunt of
disapproval from Mrs. Cunningham—and the topic of beer was tabled by
unspoken general consensus.
“Well, now.” Jamie called the meeting to order, opening one of his spare
ledgers, this now devoted to the business of the Meeting House. “Brianna
says she’s willing to teach the wee bug—er, the bairns—for two hours in the
morning, from nine o’clock until elevenses, so spread the word about that—
she’ll be starting after the harvest. And if any of the older lads and lassies
canna read or write yet, they can come to learn their letters … when, 
a
nighean
?”
“Let’s say ‘by appointment,’” Bree replied. “What about slates—do we
have any?”
“No,” Jamie replied, and wrote down 
Slates—10
 in his ledger with a
pencil.
“Only ten?” I said, peering over his arm. “Surely there are more children
than that to be taught.”
“They’ll come once they’re sure Brianna won’t beat them,” Roger said,
grinning at his wife. “I think we can find out where to get slates from Gustav
Grunewald, the Moravian schoolmaster; I know him and he’s a good sort. I’ll
paint you a blackboard to use until we get them.”
“I know where there’s a decent chalk bed,” I chimed in. “I’ll bring some
back when I go up there tomorrow after cranesbill.”
“Desks?” Bree asked tentatively, glancing round. The room was spacious
and well lighted, with windows—so far, uncovered—in three of the four
walls, but there were no furnishings beyond the benches—apparently
whoever had wanted to construct a podium had lost the argument.
“As soon as someone has the time, 
mo chridhe.
 It willna hurt them to hold
their slates on their knees for a bit, and ye’ll no have more than a few before
the autumn. They need to be working until the crops are in, ken.” Jamie
flipped over a page.
“Business of the Lodge … well, that’s for the Lodge to deal with. Now,
we’ve been accustomed—last time we had a gathering place—to have the
regular Lodge meeting on a Wednesday, but I understand that the captain
here would like to have that night for a church service?”
“If it does not discommode you too much, sir?”
“Not at all,” Roger said, causing the captain to look sharply at him. “You’d
be more than welcome to join us at Lodge, of course, Captain.”Cunningham glanced at Jamie, who nodded, and the captain relaxed, just
slightly, with an inclination of his own head.
“Then it will be regular meeting of the Lodge on Tuesday, and … we’ve
been accustomed to use the cabin as a meeting place on other evenings, just
socially, aye?”
“Bring your own stool and bottle,” Roger clarified. “And a stick of wood
for the hearth.”
Mrs. Cunningham snorted in a ladylike fashion, indicating what she
thought of free-form social gatherings of men involving bottles. I rather
thought she had a point, but Jamie, Roger, and Ian had all assured me that the
informal evenings were a great help in finding out what was going on around
the Ridge—and just possibly doing something about it before things got out
of hand.
“So, then.” Jamie flipped to a new page, this one headed 
Church
 in large
black letters, underlined. “How d’ye want to manage Sundays—or is it
Sunday for Friends, Rachel?”
“They call it First Day, but it’s really Sunday, aye,” Young Ian put in.
Rachel looked amused, but nodded.
“So, will the three of ye hold service—or meeting,” he added, with a nod
to Rachel, “every Sunday? Or d’ye want to alternate?”
Roger and the captain eyed each other, hesitant to say anything that might
seem confrontational, but determined to claim time and space for their
nascent congregations.
“I will be here each First Day,” Rachel said calmly. “But given the nature
of Quaker meeting, I think perhaps it would be best if I were to come in the
later part of the afternoon. Those who attend service earlier in the day might
find it useful to sit and contemplate in the quietness of their hearts what
they’ve heard, or to share it with others.”
“Mam and I will be there, too,” Ian said firmly.
The two preachers looked surprised, but then nodded.
“We’ll also hold service every Sunday,” Roger said. “The third
commandment doesn’t say, 
‘Thou shalt keep holy the Lord’s day twice a
month,’
 after all.”
“Quite true,” said the captain, but before he could speak further, Mrs.
Cunningham said what everyone was thinking.
“Who goes first?”There was an uneasy silence, which Jamie broke by digging in his sporran
and pulling out a silver shilling, which he flipped into the air, caught on the
back of his hand, and clapped the other hand over it.
“Heads or tails, Captain?”
“Um …” Caught by surprise, Cunningham hesitated, and I saw his mother
begin to mouth “tails”—quite unconsciously, I thought. “Heads,” he said
firmly. Jamie lifted his hand to peek at the coin, then showed it to the group.
“Heads it is. D’ye choose first or second, then, Captain?”
“Can ye sing, sir?” Roger asked, startling Cunningham anew.
“I—yes,” he said, taken aback. “Why?”
“I can’t,” Roger said, touching his throat in illustration. “If ye go first, ye
can leave them in an uplifted frame of mind with a parting hymn. So they’ll
be more receptive, maybe, to what I have to say.” He smiled, and there was a
small ripple of laughter, but I didn’t think he was joking.
Jamie nodded.
“Ye needna worry about bein’ first or last, Captain. Entertainment’s
scarce.”
JOHN QUINCY MYERS had, during his short stay with us, opined that
mountain-dwellers were so lacking in opportunities for entertainment that
they would travel twenty miles to watch paint dry. This thought was part of
his modest disclaimer to being entertaining in himself, but he wasn’t wrong.
One new preacher would have been enough to draw a crowd. Two was
unheard of, and two preachers representing different faces of Christianity …!
As I stood with Jamie outside the new Meeting House, waiting for Captain
Cunningham’s service to begin, I heard muttered bets behind me—first, 
as to
whether the two preachers would fight each other, and if so, who might win.
Jamie, also hearing this, turned round to address the gaggle of half-grown
boys doing it.
“A hundred to one says they willna fight each other,” he said, in a carrying
voice, adding then in a lower tone, “But if they do, I’ll have ten shillings on
Roger Mac, five to one.”
This caused a minor sensation among the boys—and a clucking of
disapproval among the few actual Methodists and Anglicans present—which
died away as the captain approached, in full naval uniform, including gold-
laced hat, but with a surplice over one arm, and his mother—fine in black,with a black lace bodice—on the other. An approving murmur broke out, and
Jamie and I made our way to the front of the crowd to bid them welcome.
The captain was sweating a little—it was a warm morning—but seemed
both in good spirits and self-possessed.
“General Fraser,” he said, bowing to Jamie. “And Mrs. General Fraser. I
hope I see you well on this blessed morning.”
“You do, sir,” Jamie said, bowing back. “And I thank ye. I’ll thank ye
further, though, to grant us a title more modest, perhaps, but more fitting. I
am Colonel Fraser—and this is my lady.”
I spread my calico skirts and curtsied, hoping I remembered how. I
wondered whether the captain had caught the intimation that Jamie had, did,
or could command a militia. Yes, he had …
The captain had stiffened noticeably, but Mrs. Cunningham executed a
beautiful straight-backed curtsy to Jamie and rose smoothly.
“Our thanks to you, Colonel,” she said, not batting an eye, “for providing
my son the opportunity to bring God’s word to those most in need of it.”
ROGER HAD BEEN of several minds regarding attending Captain
Cunningham’s service.
“Mama and Da are going,” Bree had argued. “
And
 Fanny and Germain.
We don’t want to look as though we’re avoiding the poor man, do we—or
high-hatting his service?”
“Well, no. But I don’t want to look as though I’ve just come to judge the
competition, as it were. Besides, your da has to go; he can’t seem … partial.”
She laughed, and bit off the thread she’d been sewing with, hemming one
of Mandy’s skirts, which had somehow contrived to unhem itself on one side
while the owner was supposedly virtuously occupied with helping Grannie
Claire make applesauce.
“Da doesn’t like things happening on the Ridge behind his back, so to
speak,” she said. “Not that I think Captain Cunningham is going to preach
insurrection and riot from the pulpit.”
“Neither am I,” he assured her. “Not first thing, anyway.”
“Come on,” she said. “Aren’t you curious?”
He was. Intensely so. It wasn’t as though he’d not heard his share of
sermons, growing up as the son of a Presbyterian minister—but at the time,
he hadn’t had the slightest thought of becoming a minister himself, andhadn’t 
paid much attention to the fine points. He’d learned quite a bit during
his first go at sermonizing on the Ridge, and more during his try at
ordination, but that was a few years past—and many of the present audience
wouldn’t know him as anything other than Himself’s son-in-law.
“Besides,” she added, holding up the skirt and squinting at it to judge her
work, “we’ll stick out like a sore thumb if we don’t go. 
Everybody
 on the
Ridge will be there, believe me. And they’ll all be there for your service, too
—remember what Da said about entertainment.”
He had to admit that she was right on all counts. Jamie and Claire were
there in their best, looking benign, Germain and Fanny with them, looking
unnaturally clean and even more unnaturally subdued.
He cast a narrow glance at his own offspring, who were at least clean, and
—if not completely subdued—at least closely confined on the bench between
him and Brianna. Jemmy was twitching slightly, but reasonably quiescent,
and Mandy was occupied in teaching Esmeralda the Lord’s Prayer in a loud
whisper—or at least the first line, which was all Mandy knew—pressing the
doll’s pudgy cloth hands piously together.
“I wonder how long the sermon’s likely to be,” Bree said, with a glance at
the kids.
“Well, he’s used to preaching to sailors—I suppose with a captive
audience that doesn’t dare leave or interrupt, ye might be tempted to go on a
bit.” He could hear from the shuffle and muttering at the back of the room
that a number of older boys were standing back there, similar to the lot who’d
loosed a snake during his own first sermon.
“You aren’t planning to heckle him, are you?” asked Bree, glancing over
her shoulder.
“I’m not, no.”
“What’s heckle, Daddy?” Jem came out of his comatose state, attracted by
the word.
“It means to interrupt someone when they’re speaking, or shout rude things
at them.”
“Oh.”
“And you’re never, 
ever
 to do it, hear me?”
“Oh.” Jem lost interest and went back to looking at the ceiling.
A stir of interest ran through the congregation as Captain Cunningham and
his mother came in. The captain nodded to right and left, not preciselysmiling, but looking agreeable. Mrs. Cunningham was glancing sharply
round, with an eye out for trouble.
Her eye lighted on Esmeralda, and she opened her mouth, but her son
cleared his throat loudly and, gripping her elbow, steered her to a spot on a
front bench. Her head swiveled briefly round, but the captain had taken his
place and she swiveled back, amid the shufflings and shushings of the
congregation.
“Brothers and sisters,” the captain said, and everyone straightened
abruptly, as he’d addressed them in what Roger thought must be the voice
used on his quarterdeck, raised to be heard over the flapping of sails and the
roar of cannon. Cunningham coughed, and repeated more quietly, “Brothers
and sisters in Christ, I bid you welcome.
“Many of you know me. For those who do not—I am Captain Charles
Cunningham, late of His Majesty’s navy. I received a call from God two
years ago, and I am endeavoring to answer that call to the best of my ability. I
will tell you more about my journey—and yours—toward God, but let us
now begin our services this morning by singing ‘O God, Our Help in Ages
Past.’”
“I think he’s actually going to be good,” Bree whispered to Roger as the
congregation obligingly rose.
The captain 
was
 good. After the hymn—which roughly half the
congregation knew, but it was a simple tune, and easy enough for the rest to
hum along—he opened his worn leather Bible and read them Matthew 4:18–
22:
“And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for
they were fishers.
And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of
men.
And they straightway left their nets, and followed him.
And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the
son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their
father, mending their nets; and he called them.
And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed
him.”After which, he set down his worn leather Bible and told them, with great
simplicity, what had brought him here.
“Two years ago, I captained one of His Majesty’s ships, HMS 
Lenox,
 on
the North American Station. It was our charge to blockade the colonial ports
and carry out occasional raids against rebellious communities.”
Roger felt the instant wariness that spread through the room like low-lying
fog. Some of those present were bound to be secret Loyalists, though most of
those who had declared themselves openly had done so as rebels, whether
from conviction or from a pragmatic desire to ally themselves with their
landlord—the landlord sitting in the third row—he didn’t know.
“My son Simon had recently joined the ship as second lieutenant. I was
very pleased, as we had not seen each other for at least two years, he having
seen duty in the Channel.”
The captain paused for a moment, as though looking into the past.
“I was proud of him,” he said quietly. “Proud that he chose to follow me
into the navy, and proud of his conduct. He was a very young lieutenant—
only just eighteen—but enterprising and courageous, and with a great care of
his men.”
He pressed his lips together for a moment, then took an audible breath.
“While patrolling the coast of Rhode Island, we encountered and pursued a
rebel cutter, and brought her to action. My son was killed in that action.”
There was a muffled sound of shock and sympathy from the congregation,
but Cunningham gave no evidence of having heard it, and went steadily on.
“I was no more than a few feet away from him when the shot struck him,
and I caught him in my arms. I felt him die.
“I felt him die,” he repeated, softly, and now his eyes searched the
congregation. “Some of you will know that feeling.”
Many of them did.
“There is no time to mourn, of course, in the midst of an action, and it was
nearly an hour later that we took possession of the cutter and made her crew
prisoners. I sent the cutter into port under the command of my master’s mate
—normally, that duty would have fallen to my son, as lieutenant. But at that
point, all activity, all motion, all the need to lead and command—all of that
dropped away. And I went to bid my son farewell.”
Roger glanced involuntarily down at Jemmy, at the soft swirl of hair on the
crown of his head, the backs of his clean, pink ears.“He was below, laid on a cot in the sick bay, and I sat down beside him. I
cannot say what I felt, or what I thought; the space within me was void. Of
course I knew what had happened to me, the loss of a part of myself, a loss
greater than any loss of limb or physical injury—and yet I felt nothing. I
think”—he broke off and cleared his throat—“I think I was afraid to feel
anything. But while I sat, I watched his face—that face that I knew so well—
and I saw the light enter it again.
“It changed,” he said, looking from face to face, urgent that they should
understand. “His face became … transcendent. And beautiful, suddenly, the
face of an angel. And then he opened his eyes.”
The shock brought every soul in the room upright. Mrs. Cunningham,
Roger saw, already 
was
 as upright as it was possible for someone with a
backbone to be. She sat rigid and immobile, her face turned away.
“He spoke to me,” the captain said, and his voice was husky. “He said,
‘Don’t worry, Father. I’ll see you again. In seven years.’” He cleared his
throat again, harder. “And—then he closed his eyes and … was dead.”
It took several moments for the murmurs and gasps to die away, and
Cunningham stood patiently until the silence returned.
“As I rose from my son’s side,” he said, “I realized that the Lord had given
me both a blessing and a sign. The knowledge—the 
sure
 knowledge,” he
emphasized, “that the soul is not destroyed by death, and the conviction that
the Lord had called me to go forth and give this message to His people.
“So I have come among you in answer to God’s call. To bring you the
word of God’s goodness, to humbly offer guidance where I may do so—and
to honor the memory of my son, First Lieutenant Simon Elmore
Cunningham, who served his King, his country, and his God always with
honor and fidelity.”
Roger rose for the final hymn in a flurry of feeling. He’d been with
Cunningham through every word, totally absorbed, filled with sorrow, pride,
warmth, uplifted—and even putting aside the purely emotional aspects of the
captain’s sermon, he had to admit that it was a really good bit of work in
terms of religion.
Roger turned to Brianna, and under the rising song, said, “Jesus Christ,”
meaning no blasphemy whatever.
“You can say that again,” she replied.
I DID WONDER just how Roger proposed to follow Captain Cunningham’s
act. The congregation had scattered under the trees to take refreshment, 
but
every group I passed was discussing what the captain had said, with great
excitement and absorption—as well they might. The spell of his story
remained with me—a sense of wonder and hope.
Bree seemed to be wondering, too; I saw her with Roger, in the shade of a
big chinkapin oak, in close discussion. He shook his head, though, smiled,
and tugged her cap straight. She’d dressed her part, as a modest minister’s
wife, and smoothed her skirt and bodice.
“Two months, and she’ll be comin’ to kirk in buckskins,” Jamie said,
following the direction of my gaze.
“What odds?” I inquired.
“Three to one. Ye want to wager, Sassenach?”
“Gambling on Sunday? You’re going straight to hell, Jamie Fraser.”
“I dinna mind. Ye’ll be there afore me. Askin’ me the odds, forbye …
Besides, going to church three times in one day must at least get ye a few
days off purgatory.”
I nodded.
“Ready for Round Two?”
Roger kissed Brianna and strode out of the shade into the sunlit day, tall,
dark, and handsome in his best black—well, his only—suit. He came toward
us, Bree on his heels, and I saw several people in the nearby groups notice
this and begin to put away their bits of bread and cheese and beer, to retire
behind bushes for a private moment, and to tidy up children who’d come
undone.
I sketched a salute as Roger came up to us.
“Over the top?”
“Geronimo,” he replied briefly. With a visible squaring of the shoulders,
he turned to greet his flock and usher them inside.
Back inside, it was noticeably warm, though not yet hot, thank God. The
smell of new pine was softer now, cushioned by the rustle of homespun and
the faint scents of cooking and farming and the messy business of raising
children that rose in a pleasantly domestic fog.
Roger let them resettle for a moment, but not long enough for
conversations to break out. He walked in with Bree on his arm, left her on the
front bench, and turned to smile at the congregation.“Is there anyone here who doesna ken me already?” he asked, and there
was a slight ripple of laughter.
“Aye, well, the fact that ye do ken me and ye’re here anyway is reassuring.
Sometimes it’s the things we know that mean a lot, in part because we ken
them well and understand their strength. Will ye be upstanding then, and
we’ll say the Lord’s Prayer together.”
They rose obligingly and followed him in the prayer—some, I noticed,
speaking it in the 
Gàidhlig,
 though most in variously accented English.
When we all sat down again, he cleared his throat, hard, and I began to
worry. I was sure that his voice was better than it had been, whether from
natural healing or from the treatments—if something so simple and yet so
peculiar as Dr. McEwan’s laying on of hands could be dignified by the name
—I’d been giving him once a month. But it had been a long time since he’d
spoken at length in public, let alone preached—let alone 
sung,
 and the stress
of expectation was a lot to deal with.
“Some of ye are from the Isles, I know—and from the North. So ye’ll ken
what lined singing is.”
I saw Hiram Crombie glance down the bench at his assembled family, and
felt the interested stir of others in the crowd who did indeed know.
“For those of ye who’ve come lately from other parts—it’s nay bother;
only a way of dealing wi’ things like Psalms and hymns, when ye havena got
more than one prayer book amongst ye. Or most of one.” He held up his own
battered hymnal, a coverless wodge of tattered pages that Jamie had found in
a tavern in Salisbury and bought for threepence and two pig’s trotters, the
latter having been recently acquired in a card game.
“Today, we’re going to sing Psalm One Thirty-three. It’s a short one, but
one I like. I’ll sing—or chant, maybe”—he smiled at them and cleared his
throat again, but shortly—“the first line, and then ye sing it back to me. I’ll
do the next, and so on we go, aye?”
He opened the book to his marked page and managed—in a voice that was
at least powerful enough to be heard and rhythmic enough to follow—the
first phrase:
“Behold how good!”
An instant’s pause, and several voices, confident, took it up:
“Behold how good!”
A look of joy rose up in his face, and it was only then that I realized he
hadn’t been sure it would work.“And how pleasant it is …”
“And how pleasant it is!”
More voices, a spreading confidence, and by the third phrase, we were
sharing Roger’s happiness, moving into the words and their meaning.
It was a fairly short psalm, but they were having such a good time that he
went through it twice, and stopped, finally, wringing with sweat and flushed
with heat and effort, 
“Even life for evermore!”
 still ringing in the air.
“That was good,” he said, in a croak, and they laughed, though kindly.
“Jamie—will ye come read to us from the Old Testament?”
I glanced at Jamie in surprise, but apparently he was ready for this, for he
picked up his small green Bible, which he’d brought along with him, and
came to the front of the room. He was wearing the best of his two kilts, with
the only sober-looking coat he possessed, and taking his spectacles from the
pocket, put them on and looked sternly over the tops of them at the boys in
the back, who instantly ceased their whispering.
Evidently satisfied that the stern look would suffice, he opened the book
and read from Genesis the story of the angels who visited Abraham, and in
receipt of his hospitality, assured him that by the time they came again, his
wife, Sarah, would have borne him a son, 
“Therefore Sarah laughed within
herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old
also?”
He glanced up briefly at that line, and his eyes met mine. He said,
“Mmphm,” in the back of his throat and ended with 
“Is any thing too hard
for the Lord? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to the
time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.”
I heard a tiny snigger from somewhere behind me, but it was instantly
drowned by the final verse: 
“Then Sarah denied, saying I laughed not: for
she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.”
Jamie closed the book with neat decision, handed it to Roger, and sat down
beside me, folding away his spectacles.
“I dinna ken how people can think God doesna have a wicked sense o’
humor,” he whispered to me.
I was saved from reply by Roger, announcing that they would try a brief
hymn, and how many here were familiar with “Jesus Shall Reign”? Seeing a
satisfactory show of hands, he started them off, and while his voice cracked
like a broken cup in the midst of the first line, enough of them 
did
 know thehymn to keep them going, with Roger measuring the pitch with a flattened
hand, and managing the first few words of each verse.
Even if it hadn’t been ninety degrees and a thousand percent humidity in
the small room, I would have been wringing wet in sheer sympathy with
Roger.
Bree had brought a canteen, and now rose and handed it to him. He drank
deeply, breathed, and wiped a sleeve across his face.
“Aye,” he said, voice still very rough, but working. “I’ve asked my wife to
read a bit from the New Testament for ye.” He gestured to Brianna, who was
flushed from the warmth of the room, but now went significantly pinker. She
looked gravely round the room, though, making eye contact, and then without
preliminary opened Jamie’s small green Bible and read the passage
describing the wedding feast at Cana, where Jesus, at the behest of his
mother, had saved the bridegroom from humiliation by changing water into
wine.
She read well, in a strong, clear voice, and sat down to nods of somewhat
grudging acceptance. Roger, who had sat during the reading, stood up and—
once more—cleared his throat.
“As ye can tell … I won’t be able to talk for long. So the sermon will be
short.” That seemed agreeable to the congregation, who all nodded and
settled themselves.
“I know ye mostly all heard Mr. Cunningham talk this morning, and ye
were moved by his testimony. So was I.” His voice was a sandpaper rasp, but
it was understandable. A hum of response, and sober nods.
“It’s important to hear of great events, of revelations and of miracles.
These remind us of the greatness of God, and His glory. But most of us—”
He paused to breathe. “Most of us don’t live life in situations of great danger
or adventure. We aren’t called upon so often to make a grand gesture … to be
heroes. Though we have a few among us.” He smiled at them, meeting eyes
here and there in the crowd.
“But each one of us is called to live our lives in the smaller moments; to do
kindness, to risk our feelings, to take a chance on someone else, to meet the
needs of the people we care for. Because God is everywhere, and lives in all
of us. Those small moments are His. And He will make of those small things
glory … and let His … greatness … shine in … in you.”
He barely made it through the last line, forcing air to support each word,
and had to stop, mouth half open, struggling for breath.“Amen,” said Jamie, in his most decided voice, and the people chorused
“Amen!” with great enthusiasm.
Roger was instantly submerged by well-wishers mobbing up to the front. I
saw Brianna, off to one side, smiling through tears, and it dimly occurred to
me that I was doing the same thing.
I’D THOUGHT THAT most people would have lost their appetite for
religion after the first two rounds, and at least half of them did head back to
their homes for dinner, still discussing the virtues and defects of the rival
liturgies. But a good twenty people—not counting our family—came back
down through the woods in the late afternoon, and—in some cases, visibly
girding their loins—prepared to enter the Meeting House once more, clearly
wondering what the hell they were about to encounter.
Rachel and Jenny had rearranged the benches so that they stood in a
square, facing into the center of the room. In the center was my small
instrument table, now holding a jug of water and a tin cup.
Rachel herself stood by the door to welcome people, with Jenny and Ian at
her elbows.
“I bid thee welcome, Friend McHugh, and thy family with thee,” she said
to Sean McHugh. “It is our custom that women sit on one side of the room
and men the other.” She smiled at Mairi McHugh. “So as thee is the first
woman, thee may take thy choice.”
“Oh. Well, then. Er … thank thee? Is that right?” she whispered to her
husband.
“How would I know?” he asked reasonably. “Do we say ‘thee’ and ‘thou’
when we’re here?” he asked Rachel, who, with a straight face, told them that
they needn’t use Plain Speech unless the spirit moved them to do so, but that
no one would laugh if they did.
I heard a murmur of relief from the people behind me, and a slight
relaxation as the very large McHugh boys passed gingerly through the door,
one at a time.
Jamie and I waited until everyone went in.
“Ye’ll do fine, lass,” Jamie said to Rachel, patting her shoulder as he
turned to go in.
“Oh, I don’t mean to do anything,” she assured him. “Unless I am moved
by the spirit to speak, in which case, I imagine I’ll say something suitable.”“That doesna necessarily mean she willna start a stramash,” Ian muttered
in my ear. “The spirit tends to be very free wi’ its opinions.”
SUPPER WAS SIMPLE, because there had been no one to stay at home and
cook it during the day. I’d made a huge kettle of milky corn chowder in the
morning, with onions, bacon, and sliced potatoes to fill it out, and after the
usual obsessive checking of hearth and coals had covered the cauldron and
left it to simmer, along with a prayer that the house would not burn down in
our absence. There was bread from yesterday, and four cold apple pies for
pudding, with a little cheese.
“’Snot a pudding,” Mandy had said, frowning when she heard me say that.
“Issa pie!”
“True, darling,” I said. “It’s just an English manner of speech, to call all
desserts ‘pudding.’”
“Why?”
“Because the English dinna ken any better,” Jamie told her.
“Says the Scot who has ‘creamed crud’ for his dessert,” I replied, making
Jem and Mandy roll on the floor with laughter, repeating “creamed crud” to
each other whenever they paused for breath.
Germain, who had been eating creamed curd for pudding—and
pronouncing it “crud” in the Scottish fashion—since he was born, shook his
head at them and sighed in a worldly fashion, glancing at Fanny to share his
condescension. Fanny, who had likely not encountered anything beyond
bread-and-butter or pie in the dessert line, looked confused.
“Regardless,” I said, ladling chowder into bowls. “Get the bread, will you
please, Jem? Regardless,” I repeated, “it’s good to be able to sit down to
supper, isn’t it? It was rather a long day,” I added, smiling at Roger and then
at Rachel.
“Thee was wonderful, Roger,” Rachel said, smiling at him. “I hadn’t heard
of lined singing before. Had thee, Ian?”
“Oh, aye. There was a wee Presbyterian kirk on Skye that I stopped by wi’
my da once, when I went with him to buy a sheep. There’s nothing else to do
on Skye on Sunday,” he explained. “Kirk, I mean, not buying sheep.”
“It seems familiar,” I remarked, shaking a large pat of cold butter out of its
mold. “That kind of singing, I mean, not Skye. But I don’t know why it
should.”Roger smiled faintly. He couldn’t talk above a whisper, but happiness
glowed in his eyes.
“African slaves,” he said, barely audible. “They do it. Call and response,
it’s called sometimes. Did ye maybe … hear them at River Run?”
“Oh. Yes, perhaps,” I said, a little dubiously. “But it seems more …
recent?” A lift of one dark eyebrow indicated that he took my meaning as to
“recent.”
“Aye.” He took up his beer and took a deep swallow. “Aye. Black singers,
then others … took it up. It’s one of”—he glanced at Fanny and then Rachel
—“one of the roots you see, in, um, more modern music.”
Rock ’n’ roll, I supposed he meant, or possibly rhythm and blues—I was
no kind of a music scholar.
“Speaking of music, Rachel, you have a beautiful voice,” Bree said,
leaning across the table to wave a bit of bread under Oggy’s nose.
“I thank thee, Brianna,” Rachel said, and laughed. “So does the dog. She
added greatly to our first meeting, though perhaps she gave substance to the
argument that singing in meeting is a distraction.” She took the bread and let
Oggy squash it in his fist. “I was pleased that so many people chose to share
our meeting—though I suppose it was mostly curiosity. Now that they know
the terrible truth about Friends, they likely won’t come again.”
“What’s the terrible truth about Friends, Auntie Rachel?” Germain asked,
fascinated.
“That we’re boring,” Rachel told him. “Did thee not notice?”
“Well, except for Bluebell, it was kind of boring,” Jem agreed, poking his
bowl of chowder in search of crispy bits of bacon. “But not in a bad way,” he
added hastily, catching Ian’s eye upon him. “Just—you know—peaceful.” He
slurped soup and lowered his head.
“That’s the point, is it not? Have we any pepper?” Jamie had salted his
soup and passed the cellar down the table, but the pepper mill had rolled
away and fallen to the floor.
“Yes, we have. Oh—Bluebell’s got it. Here, dog …” I bent to reach under
the table, where Bluey was sniffing cautiously at the pepper mill. She
sneezed explosively, several times, and I came up with the snot-spattered
pepper mill, which I gingerly wiped on my apron.
“You want to watch that pepper, dog,” Roger rasped, peering under the
table. “Bad for your vocal cords.”Bluebell uttered an amiable 
garoo,
 and wagged her tail in reply. Rachel
had assured Fanny that Bluebell—who had been left outside during the
morning services to ramble in the woods with other dogs who had
accompanied their owners—was welcome to come to meeting, too, a
courtesy Bluey had repaid lavishly by joining in enthusiastically on the
chorus of the simple hymn Rachel had been moved to sing. She’d told me
that meetings generally had no music, owing to a presumption that it would
interfere with the spontaneousness of worship—but that it was acceptable for
one person to sing, if they felt so moved. It had certainly done as much as the
captain’s and Roger’s sermons to lift the spirits of the congregation.
“I liked your meeting, 
a leannan,
” Jamie said, smiling at Rachel as he
ground a generous amount of pepper over his soup. “And I think ye’ll be
surprised, come next week. Folk talk, ken.”
“I do,” she assured him. “And the Lord knows what they will say. But
thank thee, Jamie, for coming—and all of you, too,” she added, smiling round
to include me, Bree and Roger, and the assorted children, all of whom had
been compelled to attend all three services. Unlike at the earlier services,
though, they had been allowed and even encouraged to talk.
Rachel had explained the basic working of a Friends meeting to the
attendees—that you sat in silence, listening to your inner light, unless or until
the spirit moved you to say something—whether that was a worry you
wished to share, a prayer you wanted to make, a song to sing, or a thought
you might want to discuss.
She’d added that while many meetings both began and ended in silence,
she felt moved of the spirit to begin today’s meeting by singing, and while
she did not pretend to do so with the skill of Friend Cunningham or Friend
Roger (the MacKenzies had come, of course, but the Cunninghams had not,
which didn’t surprise me), if anyone wished to join her, she would be grateful
for their company.
A good deal of warmth having been enkindled by the song—and
Bluebell’s contribution—everyone had sat quietly for a few minutes. I’d felt
Jamie, beside me, draw himself up a little, as though having made a decision,
and he’d then told the congregation about Silvia Hardman, a Quaker woman
he’d met by chance at her house near Philadelphia, and who had cared for
him for several days, his back having chosen to incapacitate him.
“Besides her great kindness,” he said, “I was taken by her wee daughters.
They were as kind as their mother—but it was their names I liked most.Patience, Prudence, and Chastity, they were called. So I’d meant to ask ye,
Rachel—do Friends often call their children after virtues?”
“They do,” she said, and smiling at Jemmy, who had started to twitch a
little, added, “Jeremiah—if thee wasn’t called Jeremiah, what name would
thee choose? If thee were to be named for a virtue, I mean.”
“Whassa virtue?” Mandy had asked, frowning at her brother as though
expecting him to sprout one momentarily.
“Something good,” Germain had told her. “Like …” He glanced dubiously
at Rachel for confirmation. “… Peace? Or maybe Goodness?”
“Exactly,” she’d said, nodding gravely. “What name would thee choose,
Germain, while Jemmy is thinking? Piety? Or perhaps Obedience?”
“No!” he’d said, horrified, and amid the general laughter, people had
begun proposing 
noms-de-vertu,
 both for themselves and for various family
members, with ensuing outbursts of laughter or—once or twice—heated
discussions regarding the appropriateness of a suggestion.
“You started it, Da,” Brianna said now, amused. “But I noticed you didn’t
pick a virtuous name at the meeting.”
“He’s already got the names of three Scottish kings,” Roger protested.
“He’ll be gettin’ above himself if ye give him any more to play with.”
“You didn’t pick one, either, did you, Mama?” I could see the wheels
turning in Bree’s mind, and moved to forestall her.
“Er … how about Gentleness?” I said, causing many of those at the table to
burst into laughter.
“Is Ruthlessness a virtue?” Jamie asked, grinning at me.
“Probably not,” I said, rather coldly. “Though I suppose it depends on the
circumstances.”
“True,” he said, and, taking my hand, kissed it. “Resolve, then—or maybe
Resolution?”
“Well, Resolution Fraser does have a certain ring to it,” I said. “I have one
for you, too.”
“Oh, aye?”
“Endurance.”
He didn’t stop smiling, but a certain look of ruefulness came into his eyes.
“Aye,” he said. “That’ll do.”35
Ambsace
To General James Fraser, of Fraser’s Ridge, Colony of North
Carolina
From Captain Judah M. Bixby
Dear General Fraser,
I hope as this Letter finds you well and Mrs. Fraser too. I am
Captain now of an Infantry Company under General Wayne, whom
you know and who said to send his kind Regards, so I do so here.
General Wayne told me that he had heard you have returned to your
Home in North Carolina. I hope this is true and that you will receive
this.
In case you don’t, I will be brief, and write another Letter later
which you may receive, with such further News as I may have then.
For the Moment, I wished to tell you first, that we had a skirmish
last week with the British, near a British fort called Stony Point, on
the banks of the Hudson. We did not attack the fort but we made them
run back into it right smart!
Second, I am very sorry to tell you that Doctor Hunter was
captured in the course of the fight and he is held Prisoner in the Fort.
He was not hurt, so far as I know, and I am sure that with him being a
Doctor and also a Quaker who hasn’t fought against them, the British
will likely treat him kindly and not hang him.
I know the Doctor is a good Friend to you and to Mrs. Fraser and
you would wish to know what has befallen him. I keep you both in my
Prayers at Night, and will so keep the Doctor and his Wife as well.
Your Most Humble and Obedient Servant (and Aide),
Judah Mordecai Bixby, Captain in the Continental ArmyJAMIE TOOK THE LETTER back from me and read it over again,
frowning. We were sitting on a log just outside my garden, and now I moved
closer to him in order to look over his shoulder. My stomach had clenched
into a knot at the word “captured” and rose into my throat at the word
“hang.”
“Stony Point,” I said, striving for calmness. “Do you know where that is?”
Jamie shook his head, eyes still fixed on the paper.
“Somewhere in New York, I think.” He handed me the letter. “His wife,”
he said. “D’ye think Dottie kens where Denny is? Or d’ye think she’s maybe
with him?”
“In prison?” I asked, incredulous. It had been nearly a year since we’d last
seen Denzell and Dottie, and at sight of the words “Doctor Hunter” my hand
had gone involuntarily to my side. The small scar where Denny had removed
a musket ball from my liver after the Battle of Monmouth had healed well,
but I still felt a deep twinge in my side when I turned to reach for something
—and I still woke suddenly now and then in the middle of the night with a
sense of deep confusion, my body vibrating with the memory of impact. The
body forms internal scars as well as surface scars when a wound heals—and
so does the mind.
“Perhaps.” The frown had faded, but he still looked troubled. “In the town,
at least. She could help him,” he added, in answer to my puzzled expression.
“Food, medicine, blankets. He got a message out, aye?” He waved the paper.
Dottie could be in the prison, at that, I realized, though probably not as a
prisoner herself. It wasn’t unknown for wives—and sometimes children—to
go to live with an imprisoned husband, going out by day to beg for food or
perhaps to find a little work. Prisoners were normally fed poorly and
sometimes not fed at all, being forced to rely on help from families or friends,
or from charitably inclined souls in the community, if they were imprisoned
far from home. Likely wives wouldn’t be allowed in a military prison, though
…
“Have you got any paper in your study?” I asked, sliding off the log.
“Aye. Why?” He folded the letter, raising a brow at me.
“I’m going to write to John Grey,” I said, trying to sound as though this
were both a simple and an obvious thing to do. Well, it was obvious. Or so I
thought.
“No, you’re not.” He said it calmly, though his answer had come so fast, I
thought he’d said it from pure reflex. Then I looked at his eyes. I straightenedmy back, folded my arms, and fixed him with a stare of my own.
“Would you care to rephrase that?” I said politely.
One of the benefits of long marriage is that you can see quite clearly where
some conversations are likely to lead—and occasionally you can sidestep the
booby traps and choose another path by silent mutual assent. He pursed his
lips a little, looking thoughtfully up at me. Then he took a deep breath and
nodded.
“Dorothea will write to her father, if she hasna done it already,” he said
reasonably. He tucked Judah’s letter into his sporran and stood up. “His
Grace will do whatever can be done.”
“We don’t know that Dottie 
can
 write to her father. She may not be near
Denzell—she may not even know that he’s in prison! For that matter, we
don’t know where Hal—er, I mean the duke—is, either,” I added. 
Bloody
hell, I shouldn’t have called Hal by his first name …
 “But he and John can
both be found, at least. The British army certainly knows where they are.”
“By the time I sent a message to Savannah or New York, Denzell will
likely have been released, or paroled. Or moved.”
“Or died.” I unfolded my arms. “For heaven’s sake, Jamie. If anybody
knows what the conditions are like inside a British prison, it’s you!”
He’d turned to go, but at this, his head whipped round like a snake’s.
“Aye, I do.”
Aye, he did. Prison is where he
 met 
John …
“Besides,” I said, trying to scramble back onto safer ground, “I said 
I’d
write to him. Denzell’s more my friend than yours. You needn’t be involved
at all.”
The blood was rising up the column of his neck, never a good sign.
“I dinna mean to be ‘involved,’” he said, handling the word as though it
had fleas. “And I dinna mean 
you
 to be ‘involved’ with John Grey. At all,” he
added as an emphatic footnote, and snatched up the shovel with which he’d
been digging the new well for the garden, in a manner suggesting that he
would have liked nothing better than to crown John Grey with it—or, failing
that, me.
“I’m not suggesting any sort of involvement,” I said, with a fair
assumption of calm.
“It’s a wee bit late for 
that,
” he said, with a nasty emphasis that sent the
blood up into my own cheeks.
“For God’s sake! You 
know
 what happened. 
And
 how. You know I—”“Aye, I ken what happened. He laid ye down in his bed, spread your
thighs, and swived ye. Ye think I’m ever going to hear the man’s name and
not think of that?” He said something very rude in Gaelic featuring John’s
testicles, drove the blade of his shovel into the ground, then pulled it up
again.
I breathed slowly through my nose, lips pressed firmly together.
“I thought,” I said after a moment, “that we’d done with that.”
I had rather thought that. Apparently that had been wishful thinking on my
part. And quite suddenly, I remembered what he’d said—well, one of the
things he’d said—when he’d come to find me in Bartram’s Garden, he risen
from the dead and smelling of cabbages, me mud-stained and shattered with
joy.
“I have loved ye since I saw you, Sassenach. I will love ye forever. It
doesna matter if ye sleep with the whole English army—well, no,”
 he had
corrected himself, 
“it would matter, but it wouldna stop me loving you.”
I drew a slightly calmer breath, though my mind went right ahead and
presented me with something else he’d said, later in that conversation:
“I don’t say that I dinna mind this, because I do. And I don’t say that I’ll
no make a fuss about it later, because I likely will.”
He moved close to me and looked down into my face, blue eyes dark with
intent.
“Did I tell ye once that I am a jealous man?”
“You did, but …”
“And did I tell ye that I grudged every hour ye’d spent in another man’s
bed?”
I took a deep breath to squash down the hasty words I could feel boiling
up.
“You did,” I said, through only slightly clenched teeth.
He glared at me for a long moment.
“I meant it,” he said. “I still mean it. Ye’ll do what ye damn please—God
knows, ye always 
do
—but don’t pretend ye dinna ken what I feel about it!”
He turned on his heel and stalked off, shovel over his shoulder like a rifle.
My fists were clenched so hard I could feel my nails cutting into my palms.
I would have thrown a rock at him, but he was already out of range and
moving fast, shoulders bunched with anger.
“What about William?” I bellowed after him. “If he’s ‘involved’ with
John, so are you, you pigheaded Scot!”The shoulders bunched harder, but he didn’t turn round. His shout floated
back to me, though.
“Damn William!”
A SMALL COUGH from behind me distracted me from the mental list of
synonyms for “bloody Scot!” I was compiling. I turned round to find Fanny
standing there, her apron bulging with dirt-covered turnips and her sweet face
fixed in a troubled frown, this directed at Jamie, who was vanishing into the
trees by the creek.
“What has Will-iam done, Mrs. Fraser?” she asked, glancing up at me from
under her cap. I smiled, in spite of the recent upheaval. Her speech was very
fluent now, save when she was upset or talking fast, but she often still had
that slight hesitation between the syllables of William’s name.
“William hasn’t done anything amiss,” I assured her. “Not that I know of.
We haven’t seen him since … er …” I broke off an instant too late.
“Jane’s funeral,” she said soberly, and looked down into the purple-and-
white mass of turnips. “I thought … maybe Mr. Fraser had had a letter. From
William. Or maybe about him,” she added, the frown returning. She nodded
toward the trees. “He’s angry.”
“He’s Scottish,” I amended, with a sigh. “Which means stubborn. Also
unreasonable, intolerant, contumelious, froward, pigheaded, and a few other
objectionable things. But don’t worry; it really isn’t anything to do with
William. Here, let’s put the turnips in the tub there and cover them with
water. That will keep the tops from wilting. I’m making bashed neeps for
supper, but I want to cook the tops with bacon grease and serve them
alongside. If anything will make Highlanders eat a leafy green vegetable,
bacon grease ought to do it.”
She nodded as though this made sense and let down her apron slowly, so
the turnips rolled out into the tub in a tumbling cascade, dark-green tops
waving like pom-poms.
“You probably shouldn’t have told him.” Fanny spoke with an almost
clinical detachment.
“Told who what?” I said, picking up a water bucket and sloshing it over
the muddy turnips. “Get another bucket, will you?”
She did, heaved the water into the tub, then set down the bucket, looked up
at me, and said seriously, “I know what ‘swived’ means.”I felt as though she’d just kicked me sharply in the shin.
“Do you, indeed?” I managed, picking up my working knife. “I, um …
suppose you would.” She’d spent half her short life in a brothel in
Philadelphia; she probably knew a lot of other words not in the vocabulary of
the average twelve-year-old.
“It’s too bad,” she said, turning to fetch another bucket; the boys had filled
all of them this morning; there were six left. “I like his lordship a lot. 
He
wath—
was
 so good to me and—and Jane. I like Mr. Fraser, too,” she added,
though with a certain reserve.
“I’m sure he appreciates your good opinion,” I said gravely, wondering,
What the hell?
 “And yes, his lordship is a very fine man. He’s always been a
good friend to us.” I put a bit of emphasis on the “us,” and saw that register.
“Oh.” A small frown disturbed the perfect skin of her forehead. “I thup-
suppose that makes it worse. That you went to bed with him,” she explained,
lest I have missed her point. “Men don’t like to share a woman. Unless it’s an
ambsace.”
“An ambsace?” I was beginning to wonder how I might extricate myself
from this conversation with any sort of dignity. I was also beginning to feel
rather alarmed.
“That’s what Mrs. Abbott called it. When two men want to do things to a
girl at the same time. It costs more than it would to have two girls, because
they often damage her. Mostly just bruises,” she added fairly. “But still.”
“Ah.” I paused for a moment, then picked up the last bucket and finished
filling the tub. The smaller turnips bobbed on the surface of the water, hairy
roots shedding swirls of dirt. I looked down at Fanny, who met my eyes with
an expression of calm interest. I’d really rather she didn’t share her
interesting thoughts with anyone else on the Ridge, and I was reasonably sure
that Jamie would feel the same.
“Come sit down with me inside for a moment, will you, Fanny?” Not
waiting for acquiescence, I beckoned her to follow me back to the house. I
pushed aside the canvas sheet that was substituting for the front door of our
emergent house and led the way into the cavernous space of the kitchen. The
canvas covering the door stirred gently with the sound of sails, and the space
had a soothing dimness, broken only by light from the open back door and
the two windows that looked out onto the well and the garden path.
We had a table and benches, but in addition there were two serviceable
three-legged stools, one rather decrepit wooden chair that Maggie MacAllanhad given me in payment for midwifing the birth of her granddaughter, two
small kegs of salt fish, and several packing cases that hadn’t yet been broken
down for their lumber, whose presence increased the ambient illusion of
being in the hold of a ship under sail. I motioned Fanny to one stool and took
the other, sighing with the pleasure of taking the weight off my feet.
Fanny sat, too, looking mildly apprehensive, and I smiled, in hopes of
reassuring her.
“You really needn’t worry about William,” I said. “He’s a very resourceful
young man. He’s just … a bit confused, I think. And maybe angry, but I’m
sure he’ll get over that soon.”
“Oh,” Fanny said slowly, “you mean nobody told him that Mr. Fraser is his
father, but then he found out?” She frowned at her clasped hands, then looked
up at me. “I think I’d be angry, too. But why is Mr. Fraser angry? Did he give
William away?”
“Ah … not exactly.” I looked at Fanny in some concern. Within a very few
minutes, without knowing it, she’d managed to touch on a good many of the
family secrets, including the very hot potato of my relations with Lord John.
“Mr. Fraser was a Jacobite—do you know what that means?”
She nodded uncertainly.
“The Jacobites were supporters of James Stuart, and fought against the
King of England,” I explained. “They lost that war.” A hollow place opened
under my ribs as I spoke. So few words for such a shattering of so very many
lives.
“Mr. Fraser went to prison afterward; he wasn’t able to take care of
William. Lord John was his friend, and he raised William as his son, because
neither of them thought that Mr. Fraser would ever be released, and Lord
John thought that he would never have children of his own.” I caught the
distant echo of Frank’s advice, like a spider’s whisper behind the empty
hearth: 
Always stick to the truth, as far as possible …
“Was Lord John wounded?” Fanny asked. “In the war?”
“Wounded—oh, because he couldn’t have children, you mean? I don’t
know—he was certainly wounded, though.” I’d seen his scars. I cleared my
throat. “Let me tell you something, Fanny. About myself.”
Her eyes widened in curiosity. They were a soft light brown gone almost
black as her pupils went large in the shadows of the kitchen.
“I fought in a war, too,” I said. “Not the same war; another one, in a
different country—before I met either Mr. Fraser or Lord John. I was a—healer; I took care of wounded men, and I spent a lot of time among soldiers,
and in bad places.” I took a breath, fragments of those times and places
coming back. I knew the memories must show on my face, and I let them.
“I’ve seen very bad things,” I said simply. “I know you have, too.”
Her chin trembled slightly and she looked away, her soft mouth drawing in
on itself. I reached out slowly and touched her shoulder.
“You can say anything to me,” I said, with slight emphasis on “anything.”
“You don’t ever have to tell me—or Mr. Fraser—anything that you don’t
want to. But if there are things that you want to talk about—your sister,
maybe, or anything else—you can. Anyone in the family—me, Mr. Fraser,
Brianna, or Mr. MacKenzie … You can tell any of us anything you need to.
We won’t be shocked—” 
Actually, we probably would be,
 I thought, 
but no
matter.
 “And perhaps we can help, if you’re troubled about anything. But—”
She looked up at that, instantly alert, unsettling me a little. This child had
had a lot of experience in detecting and interpreting tones of voice, probably
as a matter of survival.
“But,” I repeated firmly, “not everyone who lives on the Ridge has had
such experiences, and many of them have never met anyone who has. Most
of them have lived in small villages in Scotland, many of them aren’t
educated. They 
would
 be shocked, perhaps, if you told them very much about
… where you lived. How you and your sister—”
“They’ve never met whores?” she said, and blinked. “I think some of the
men must have.”
“Doubtless you’re right,” I said, trying to keep my grip on the
conversation. “But it’s the women who talk.”
She nodded soberly. I could see a thought come to her; she looked away
for an instant, blinked, then looked back at me, a thoughtful squint to her
eyes.
“What?” I said.
“Mrs. MacDonald’s mother says you’re a witch,” she replied. “Mrs.
MacDonald tried to make her stop, when she saw I was listening, but the old
lady doesn’t stop talking about anything, ever, except when she’s eating.”
I’d met Janet MacDonald’s mother, Grannie Campbell, once or twice, and
was not overly surprised to hear this.
“I don’t suppose she’s the only one,” I said, a little tersely. “But I’m
suggesting that perhaps you should be careful about what you say to people
outside the family about your life in Philadelphia.”She nodded, accepting what I’d said.
“It doesn’t matter that Grannie Campbell says you’re a witch,” she said
thoughtfully. “Because Mr. MacDonald is afraid of Mr. Fraser. He tried to
make Grannie stop talking about you,” she added, and shrugged. “Anyway,
nobody’s afraid of me.”
Give them time, child,
 I thought, eyeing her.
“I wouldn’t say that people are 
afraid
 of Mr. Fraser, really—but they do
respect him,” I said carefully.
She ducked her head a little, indicating that she knew better but wasn’t
going to argue with me.
“Sometimes,” she said, “one of the girls would find a protector. Once in a
very long while, he would even marry her”—she sighed briefly at the thought
—“but usually he just would make sure that she had good food and nice
clothes, and nobody would hurt her or use her badly.”
I didn’t know quite where this was going, but tilted my head inquiringly.
“When my sister met William again near Philadelphia, he th-
said
 that he
would take her and me both under his protection. She was so happy.” Her
small, clear voice was suddenly thick with tears. “If—if we could have stayed
wif him …”
Jamie had told me exactly what had happened to Fanny’s sister, Jane—and
had done so in the bare minimum of words, his terseness betraying just how
deeply it had shocked him, and how deeply it had wounded both him and
William. I got up and knelt down by Fanny, gathering her into my arms. She
wept almost silently, in the way of a child hiding grief or pain for fear of
attracting punishment, and I held her tight, my own eyes stinging with tears.
“Fanny,” I whispered at last. “You’re safe. We won’t let anything happen
to you, ever again.”
She hiccuped and shuddered briefly, but didn’t cling to me. She didn’t
move away, either; just sat on her stool, quiet and fragile as a wounded bird,
her feathers fluffed to keep what life she still had.
“William,” she said, so low I could hardly hear her. “He asked Mr. Fraser
to look after me. But … Mr. Fraser doesn’t have to. I’m not weally under hith
protection.”
“You are, Fanny,” I said, into the limp linen smell of her cap, and patted
her gently. “William gave you to him, and—”
“And now he’s angwy with Will-iam.” She pulled away, knuckling the
tears from her eyes.“Oh, dear God. You mean you’re afraid that we’d put you out, because 
Mr.
Fraser has a—um—difference of opinion with William? No. No, really,
Fanny. Believe me, that won’t happen.”
She gave me a doubtful look, but nodded dutifully. Clearly she 
didn’t
believe me.
“Mr. Fraser is a man of his word.”
She looked at me for a long moment, a frown puckering the soft skin
between her brows. Then she stood up abruptly, wiped her sleeve under her
nose, and curtsied to me. “I won’t talk to anybody,” she said. “About
anything.”36
What Lies Unseen
I HAD MADE UP my mind what to do about Denny within moments of
shouting “pigheaded Scot!” at Jamie, but the ensuing conversation with
Fanny had momentarily driven the matter out of my mind, and what with one
thing and another, it was late the next afternoon before I managed to find
Brianna alone.
Sean McHugh and his two biggest lads had come in the morning—with
their hammers—to help with the roofing of the kitchen and the framing of the
third story; Jamie and Roger had been up there with them, and the effect of
five large men armed with hammers was much like that of a platoon of
overweight woodpeckers marching in close formation overhead. They’d been
at it all morning—causing everyone else to flee the house—but had broken
for a late lunch down by the creek, and I’d seen Bree go back inside with
Mandy.
I found her in my rudimentary surgery, sitting in the late sun that fell
through the big window, the largest window in the New House. There was no
glass in it yet—there might not be glass before spring, if then—but the flood
of unobstructed afternoon light was glorious, glowing from the new yellow-
pine boards of the floor, the soft butternut of Bree’s homespun skirt, and the
fiery nimbus of her hair, half-bound in a long, loose plait.
She was drawing, and watching her absorbed in the paper pinned to her lap
desk, I felt a deep envy of her gift—not for the first time. I would have given
a lot to be able to capture what I saw now, Brianna, bronze and fire in the
deep clear light, head bent as she watched Mandy on the floor, chanting to
herself as she built an edifice of wooden blocks and the small, heavy glass
bottles I used for tinctures and dried herbs.
“What are you thinking, Mama?”“What did you say?” I looked up at Bree, blinking, and her mouth curled
up.
“I said,” she repeated patiently, “what are you thinking? You have that
look.
”
“Which look is that?” I asked warily. It was an article of faith amongst the
members of my family that I couldn’t keep secrets; that everything I thought
was visible on my face. They weren’t entirely right, but they weren’t
completely wrong, either. What never occurred to them was just how
transparent they were to 
me.
Brianna tilted her head to one side, eyes narrowed as she examined my
face. I smiled pleasantly, putting out a hand to intercept Mandy as she trotted
past me, three medicine bottles in hand.
“You can’t take Grannie’s bottles outside, sweetheart,” I said, removing
them deftly from her chubby grasp. “Grannie needs them to put medicine in.”
“But I’m gonna catch leeches wif Jemmy and Aidan and Germain!”
“You couldn’t get even one leech into a bottle that size,” I said, standing
up and placing the bottles on a shelf out of reach. I scanned the next shelf
down and found a slightly chipped pottery bowl with a lid.
“Here, take this.” I wrapped a small linen towel around the bowl and
tucked it into the pocket of her pinafore. “Be sure to put in a little mud—a
little
 mud, all right? No more than a pinch—and some of the waterweed you
find the leeches in. That will keep them happy.”
I watched her trot out the door, black curls bouncing, then braced myself
and turned back to Bree.
“Well, if you must know, I was thinking how much I should tell you.”
She laughed, though with sympathy.
“That’s the look, all right. You always look like a heron staring into the
water when you have something you can’t quite decide whether to tell
somebody.”
“A heron?”
“Beady-eyed and intent,” she explained. “A contemplative killer. I’ll draw
you doing it one of these days, so you can see.”
“Contemplative … I’ll take your word for it. I don’t think you’ve ever met
Denzell Hunter, have you?”
She shook her head. “No. Ian mentioned him once or twice, I think—a
Quaker doctor? Isn’t he Rachel’s brother?”“That’s him. To keep it to the essentials for the moment, he’s a wonderful
doctor, a good friend of mine, and besides being Rachel’s brother, he’s
married to the daughter of the Duke of Pardloe—who happens to be Lord
John Grey’s elder brother.”
“Lord John?” Her face, already glowing with light, broke into a brilliant
smile. “My favorite person—outside the family. Have you heard from him?
How is he?”
“Fine, to the best of my knowledge. I saw him briefly in Savannah a few
months ago—the British army is still there, so it’s likely he is, too.” I’d
thought out what to say, in hopes of avoiding anything awkward, but a script
is not a conversation. “I was thinking that you might write to him.”
“I suppose I might,” she said, tilting her head and looking at me sideways,
one red brow raised. “Right this minute?”
“Well … soonish. The thing is, Jamie’s just had a letter from one of his
aides—from the army—I’ll tell you about that later. Anyway, the gist of it is
that Denzell Hunter was captured by the British army and is being held in a
military prison camp at Stony Point.”
“Captured doing what?” She sat up straighter and set her lap desk aside.
She hadn’t been drawing a sentimental portrait of her daughter, I saw—it
looked like a floor plan of something, embellished with small marginal
sketches of apes. “You said he’s a Quaker?”
I sighed. “Yes. He’s what they call a Fighting Quaker, but he doesn’t fight.
He joined the Continental army as a surgeon, though, and was evidently
scooped up off a battlefield somewhere.”
“Sounds like an interesting man,” she remarked, the brow still high. “What
does he have to do with me writing to Lord John?”
I explained, as briefly as possible, the connections and possibilities,
concluding, “So I—we—want to see that the duke knows where Denny is.
Even if he can’t get him released directly—and knowing Hal, I wouldn’t bet
against him doing exactly that—he 
can
 make sure that Denny’s well treated,
and naturally he’d find Dottie and see she’s taken care of.”
Bree was watching me with a curiously analytic look on her face, as
though she were estimating the shear forces on the girders of a bridge.
“What?” I said. “John was a good friend of yours. Before, I mean. I should
think you’d want to write to him in any case.”
“Oh, I do,” she assured me. “I’m just wondering why 
you
 aren’t writing to
him. Or for that matter, why aren’t you writing to ‘Hal’? Since you’re onfirst-name terms, I mean.”
Damn.
 I couldn’t outright lie; questions of honesty aside, she’d detect it
instantly. 
Stick to the truth as much as possible, then …
“Well, it’s Jamie,” I said reluctantly. It 
was,
 but I felt some scruples about
dropping him in it with Bree. “He had a falling-out with the Greys a little
while ago. They’re not on speaking terms, and if I were to write to John or
Hal, he’d … take it amiss,” I ended, rather weakly.
Being her father’s daughter, she instantly put her finger on the crux of the
matter.
“What sort of falling-out?” she asked. The analytical look had gone,
subsumed by curiosity.
Well, that was it. I could either say, “Ask your father,” and she bloody
would,
 or I could bite the bullet and hope for the best. While I was still trying
to make up my mind, though, she went on to the next thought.
“If Da would mind about your writing to Lord John, why wouldn’t he
mind me doing it?” she asked reasonably. She’d laid the drawing on the
counter, where I could see it clearly. The little apes all looked like Mandy.
“Because he theoretically wouldn’t know I’d told you there was a falling-
out to begin with.” 
And with luck, he might not find out you’d written it.
 The
room was warm with sunlight, but I was feeling uncomfortably hot, my
clothes prickling and wilting on my skin.
“Okay,” she said, after a moment’s thought, and reached for a quill. “I’ll
do it right now. But”—she said, pointing the quill at me—“unless you tell me
what this is all about, I’m asking Lord John. He’ll tell me.” He bloody well
might. He’d told Jamie, for God’s sake …
“Fine,” I said, and closed my eyes. “He married me, when we thought
Jamie was dead.” Total silence. I opened my eyes to find Bree staring at me,
both eyebrows raised, her face completely blank with incomprehension. And
then I remembered my conversation with Fanny. I thought she would keep
quiet about the conclusions she’d drawn. But if she didn’t …
“And I slept with him. But it’s not what you think …”
At this inauspicious moment, Jamie walked past the window with Sean
McHugh. They were talking, both of them looking upward, Jamie pointing at
something on the upper story. Brianna made a noise as though she’d tried to
swallow a pawpaw whole, and Jamie glanced in at us, startled.
I felt as though I had swallowed a hand grenade, but I hastily pounded
Brianna on the back, making an “It’s nothing” gesture at Jamie. He frowned,but McHugh said something and he glanced away, then back at me, still
frowning. I waved him away more firmly, but he said, “A moment, 
a
charaid,
” over his shoulder to Sean and strode toward the window.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I muttered under my breath, and thought I
heard a strangled laugh from Brianna.
“Is the lass all right?” Jamie asked, thrusting his head through the window
and lifting his chin at Bree, who was huddled on her stool, gasping a little.
“I—fine,” she croaked. “Swallowed s-something …” She waved feebly at
the counter, where a mug of something sat among the scatter of dried herbs
and crockery.
He lifted one eyebrow but didn’t pursue the matter, instead turning to me.
“Can ye come up? Geordie’s smashed his thumb wi’ a hammer. He says
it’s naught, but it looks sideways to me.”
I felt as though I’d just run a mile on a full stomach.
“All right,” I said, wiping my sweaty palms on my apron. I glanced over
my shoulder. “Bree—I’ll be right back.” The scarlet was fading from her
face.
“Mm-hm.” She coughed and took a deep breath. “Don’t fall off the roof.”
BRIANNA PICKED UP the sketch of a potential schoolhouse and stared at it
for a minute, but she wasn’t seeing windows and benches. She was—with a
mixture of horror and profound curiosity—envisioning her mother in bed
with Lord John Grey.
“How on 
earth
 did that happen?” she asked the sketch. She set it down
again and turned to look out the window, now empty and tranquil, with its
view of the long slope that fell away below the house, filled with flowering
grass and clumps of dogwood. “And how in bloody hell am I ever going to be
able to look John Grey in the eye next time I see him?”
For that matter, looking her father in the eye … Okay, she could see why
Da would have a problem with her mother writing to John Grey. Despite her
perturbation, a shocked giggle escaped her and she clapped a hand to her
mouth.
“I do like women,”
 he’d told her once, exasperated. 
“I admire and honor
them, and for several of the sex I feel considerable affection—your mother
among them, though I doubt the sentiment is reciprocated.”
 Her diaphragm
gave a small, disconcerted lurch at that. “Oh, really?” she murmured,recalling his 
last remark on the subject: 
“I do not, however, seek pleasure in
their beds. Do I speak plainly enough?”
“Loud and clear, your lordship,” she said aloud, torn between shock and
amusement. People changed, of course—but surely not 
that
 much. She shook
her head. Her breathing had slowed, but her bodice still felt too tight. She put
a finger in the top of her stays to pull them out a little, and then felt the
tremble in her chest.
“Oh, bloody hell …” she whispered, and grabbed the edge of the stool to
keep from falling. All the blood had left her head and her vision had gone
white. Her heart had stopped again. Literally. Stopped.
One … two … three … beat, goddammit, beat!
 In panic, she thumped the
heel of her hand hard against her breastbone. And then gasped when it did
start beating, with shock at the startling thud in her chest, as much as with
relief. And then it was off like a hare at a greyhound race, juddering in her
chest, leaving her breathless and terrified, hand pressed flat to her chest.
“Stop it, stop it, stop it …” she whispered through clenched teeth. It had
stopped before, the racing … it would stop again … But it didn’t.
“Bree? Where did you—Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!”
Her mother was suddenly there, snatching the crumpled paper out of her
hand, seizing her with a strong arm round her waist.
“Down,” her mother said, calm and authoritative. “Sit all the way down.
Yes, that’s it—” Her skirts bloomed around her as she sank to the floor, a
yellowish cloud flickering through the white haze. Hands braced flat on the
floor, she resisted her mother’s pressure to lie down, shaking her head.
“No.” She didn’t seem to have any connection with her voice, but she
heard it, hoarse but clear. “Be okay. It’s okay.”
“All right.” A creak of boards; her mother eased down beside her, and she
heard the scrape of a wooden cup against the floorboards. Warmth … her
mother’s hand wrapped round her wrist, a thumb moving in search of a pulse.
Good luck with that one,
 she thought muzzily. But as she thought it, the
racing eased. A confused halt, one or two random beats, and then her heart
quietly resumed its normal operations, as though nothing had happened.
It had, though, and she lifted her head to find her mother’s eyes fixed on
her face, with a look of intent thoughtfulness she knew all too well. The
heron.
“I’m fine,” she said firmly, trying anyway. “Just—I just got light-headed
for a minute.”One of her mother’s brows twitched up, but Claire said nothing. Her hand
was still wrapped around Brianna’s telltale wrist.
“Really. It’s nothing,” she said, detaching herself from her mother’s grip.
Each time, she’d told herself it was nothing.
“When did it start?” Claire’s eyes were normally a soft amber—except
when she was being a doctor. Then they went a sharp, dark-pupiled yellow,
like the eyes of a bird of prey.
“When you told me you— Jesus, did you just tell me …” Brianna got her
feet under her and rose. Cautiously, but her heart went on quietly beating, just
as it should. 
It’s nothing.
“Yes, I did. And I don’t mean this time,” her mother said dryly, rising, too.
“When did it 
first
 happen?”
She debated lying, but the urge to keep denying that anything was truly
amiss was fading fast against the need—the hope—of being reassured.
“Right after we came through the stones on Ocracoke. It was—I didn’t
think I’d make it.” The giddiness threatened to come back with the memory
of that … that … Her gorge rose suddenly, and she leaned over and threw up,
a light spatter of half-digested porridge on the clean new boards of the
surgery.
“Dear me.” Her mother’s voice was mild. “You aren’t pregnant, are you?”
“Don’t even 
think
 it!” She shuddered, wiping her mouth on her apron. “I
can’t be.” She hadn’t even thought of the possibility, and wasn’t about to
start. She was already haunted by the idea that she might die and leave Jem
and Mandy …
“On Ocracoke,” she repeated, getting hold of herself. “I came out of the
stones with Mandy in my arms. I couldn’t see—it was all black and white
spots, and I thought I was going to faint, and then I sort of 
did
 … I was lying
on the ground and I still had hold of Mandy; she was fighting to get loose and
yelling, ‘Mummy, Mummy!’ but I couldn’t answer her and then I realized my
heart wasn’t beating. I thought I was dying.” She smelled something sweet
and pungent, and her mother wrapped Bree’s fingers around a cup and guided
it to her lips.
“You’re not going to die,” her mother said, with a welcome tone of
conviction. Bree nodded, wanting to believe it, even though her heart was
still skipping beats, leaving moments of emptiness in her chest. She sipped
the liquid; it was whisky, sweetened with honey, and with something herbal
and very fragrant in it.She closed her eyes and concentrated on taking slow sips, willing things to
settle down, to go back to normal. Her surroundings were beginning to come
back. The sun from the big window fell warm on her shoulders.
“How often has it happened?”
She swallowed, savoring the sweetness that was seeping into her
bloodstream, and opened her eyes.
“Four times, before now. At Ocracoke, then again the next night. We were
camping, on the road.” She flinched at the memory; lying rigid on the ground
next to Roger, the children asleep between them. Her heart racing, fists
clenched not to grab Roger’s arm and shake him awake. “That was bad—it
went on for hours. Or at least it seemed like hours. It stopped finally, just
before dawn.” She’d felt wrung out, limp as the dew-damp clothes that
wrapped her limbs; she still remembered the terrible effort needed to rise, to
put one foot in front of the other …
The next time had been a week later, on a barge in the Yadkin River, and
the last before this on the road from Cross Creek to Salisbury.
“Those weren’t so bad. Just a few minutes—like this one.” She took
another sip, held it in her mouth, then swallowed and looked up at her
mother. “Do you know what it is?”
Her mother was wiping up the last of the vomit from the raw floorboards,
lips compressed, a pair of vertical lines visible between her soft brows.
“There’s a limit to what I can say for certain, lacking an EKG,” Claire said,
eyes on the cloth she was using. “But speaking very generally—it sounds as
though you’re exhibiting something called atrial fibrillation. It’s not life
threatening,” she added quickly, looking up and seeing the alarm on Bree’s
face.
Her heart had given a sort of flopping leap at her mother’s words, and was
beating now in what seemed a tentative fashion. Her knees were quivering
and she sat down, quite suddenly. Her mother dropped the cloth, got down
beside her, and pulled her close. Her face was half buried in her mother’s
coarse gray apron, smelling of grease and rosemary, soft soap and cider. The
smell of the cloth, of Mama’s body, brought helpless tears to her eyes. Maybe
it wasn’t life threatening, but she could tell that it wasn’t nothing, either.
“It’s going to be all right,” her mother whispered into her hair. “It’ll be all
right, baby.”
She was clutching her mother’s arm, hard, the slender bone a life raft.“If—if anything happens—you’ll take care of the kids for me.” It wasn’t a
question and her mother didn’t take it as one.
“Yes,” she said, without hesitation, and the quivering sensation eased in
Bree’s chest. She was breathing hard, but there didn’t seem room for enough
air.
“Okay,” she said. She could feel her fingers trembling on her mother’s
arm, and with an effort let go. “Okay,” she said again, and sitting up straight,
pushed her hair out of her face. “Okay. Now what?”
LUB-DUB, LUB-DUB …
 THE meaty sounds of a healthy heart were clear
through my wooden Pinard stethoscope. Beating a little faster than normal—
and no wonder—but healthy. I straightened up and Bree instantly clutched
the neck of her blouse closed, her face tense.
“Your heart sounds perfect, darling,” I said. “I’m sure that it’s a bit of
atrial fibrillation, but that’s just a matter of stray electrical impulses. You
aren’t going to have a heart attack or anything of that sort.”
The tension in her face eased, and my own heart clenched a little.
“Well, thank God for that.” A thick lock of hair had come loose from its
ribbon, and I saw that her hand was trembling as she brushed it back from her
face. “But it—is it going to keep happening?”
“I don’t know.” Aside from bad news, “I don’t know” is the worst thing a
doctor can say to a patient, but it’s unfortunately the most usual thing, too. I
took a deep breath and turned to my medicine shelves.
“Oh, God,” Bree said, the genuine apprehension in her voice tinged with
reluctant amusement. “You’re getting out more whisky. It must be serious.”
“Well, if you don’t want any, I do,” I said. I’d chosen the good stuff, the
Jamie Fraser Special, rather than the strictly medicinal whisky I gave the
patients, and the scent of it rose warm and lively, displacing the smells of
turpentine, scorched metal, and pollen-laced dust.
“Oh, I’m pretty sure I do.” She took the tin cup and inhaled the comforting
fumes, her eyes closing involuntarily and her face relaxing.
“So,” she said, raising an eyebrow. “What 
do
 you know?”
I rolled my own whisky slowly round my tongue, then swallowed, too.
“Well, as I said, atrial fibrillation is a matter of irregular electrical
impulses. Your heart muscle is sound, but it’s—once in a while—getting its
signals crossed, so to speak. Normally, all the muscle fibers in your atriacontract at once; when they don’t get a synchronized message from the
electrical node in your heart that supplies them, they contract more or less at
random.”
Brianna swallowed another sip, nodding.
“That’s pretty much what it feels like, all right. But you said it’s not
dangerous? It’s freaking scary.”
I hesitated, a fraction of a second too long. No one but Jamie was more
sensitive to the transparency of my face, and I saw the alarm rise again at the
back of her eyes.
“It’s not 
very
 dangerous,” I said hastily. “And you’re young and very fit;
it’s much less likely.”
“
What’s
 less likely?” She put down the cup, agitated, and glanced
involuntarily up at the ceiling; Mandy was back in the children’s room just
overhead, loudly singing “Frère Jacques” to her doll Esmeralda.
“Well … stroke. If the atria don’t contract properly for too long—they’re
meant to squeeze blood down into the ventricles; the right ventricle pumps
blood to the lungs, the left to the rest of the body—” Seeing her ruddy brows
draw together, I cut to the chase. “Blood can pool in the atria long enough
that it forms a clot. And if so, it might dissolve before it gets out into the
body, but if not …”
“Curtains?” She took a much bigger gulp of her drink. She’d been pale as a
fish belly after the attack, and looked much the same way now. “Or just being
disabled, so I drool and can’t talk and people have to feed me and drag me
around and wipe my butt?”
“It’s not likely to happen,” I said, as reassuringly as possible, which under
the circumstances was not all that reassuring. I could visualize the hideous
possible outcomes as well as she was obviously doing. Somewhat better, in
fact, as I’d actually seen a good many people suffering the aftereffects of
stroke, including death. I had a momentary absurd impulse to tell her a
fascinating fact about men who die of stroke, but this wasn’t the time.
“So what can you do about it?” she asked, straightening up and firming her
lips. I saw her eyes turn toward the bulk of the new 
Merck Manual,
 and I
handed it to her.
“I’m not sure,” I said. “Have a look.” I wasn’t hopeful, given what atrial
fibrillation actually was—an intermittent derangement of the heart’s electrical
system.“I mean,” I said, watching her thumb through the book, brows furrowed,
“you can stop a severe attack—one that goes on for days—”
“For 
days
?” she blurted, looking up wide-eyed. I patted the air.
“You don’t have that sort of fibrillation,” I assured her. 
Mind, you can
always develop it …
 “You just have the minor, paroxysmal kind that comes
and goes and may just disappear altogether one day.” 
And God, please,
please let it do just that …
“But for a severe attack, the normal treatment in the 1960s was to
administer 
an electric shock to the heart with paddles applied to the chest.
That makes the fibrillating stop and the heart start working normally again.”
Most of the time …
“Which we plainly can’t do here,” Bree said, looking round the surgery as
though estimating its resources.
“No. But I repeat—
you don’t have anything as severe as that.
 You won’t
need it.” My mouth had dried at the remembered visions of cardioversion.
Even when it worked, I’d seen a patient shocked repeatedly, the poor body
seized by electricity and jerked high into the air, to fall back limp and
tortured onto the table, only to face another round when the EKG pen
fluttered like a seismograph. I gulped the rest of my whisky, coughed, and set
down the cup.
“Does it say anything helpful?”
“No,” she said, closing the book. Her tone was deliberately casual, but I
could see clearly how shaken she was. “It’s just the same as you said—
administration of electric shock. I mean—they 
do
 have a medicine that they
say works sometimes on some patients, but I’m sure that isn’t anything we
can manage here, either. Digitalis?”
I shook my head. Penicillin was one thing—and even that was by no
means dependable; I still had no way of producing a standard dosage, or of
telling whether a given batch of the stuff was even potent.
“No,” I said regretfully. “I mean—you 
can
 extract digitalin from foxglove
leaves, and people do. But it’s dreadfully dangerous, because you can’t
predict the dosage, and even a bit too much will kill you. And we do have a
few things to hand.” I tried to sound brightly helpful. “We’ll make sure to
keep a good stock of the white willow tea on hand—it’s the most powerful.”
White willow didn’t grow in North Carolina but was reasonably available
from city apothecaries, and I had a good stock that Jamie had brought me
from Salisbury.“Tea?” she asked skeptically.
“As a matter of fact, the active principle in willow-bark tea is exactly the
same chemical that you find in aspirin. And while people mostly use it for
pain relief, it has the interesting side effect of thinning the blood.”
“Oh. So … if my heart starts twitching, I should brew up a cup of willow-
bark tea and it will at least keep my blood from clotting?” She was trying to
keep her dubious tone, but I could see that a tiny ray of hope had been
kindled. Now it was my job to blow on it and try to encourage it to take hold
and burn.
“Yes, exactly. Now, the tea won’t do away with the disturbing symptoms,
but there are a few sorts of 
ad hoc
 things you can try for those.”
“Such as?”
“Well, plunging the face into cold water sometimes works—”
“Or so you’re told? I bet you’ve never seen anybody do that, have you?”
She was definitely interested, though.
“In fact, I have. At L’Hôpital des Anges, in Paris.” Plunging various body
parts in cold—or sometimes hot—water was a widely prescribed treatment
for a lot of different maladies at the 
hôpital,
 water being both widely
available and cheap. And surprisingly, it often worked, at least in the short
term.
“Or—if you happen not to be near any cold water—you can try one of the
vagal maneuvers.”
That caught her unaware, and she gave me a cat-eyed look.
“If you mean having sex—”
“Not 
vaginal
 maneuvers,” I said, “though I’d think the fibrillating might be
too distracting to want to do that, in any case. I said 
vagal
 maneuvers—as in,
stimulating the vagus nerve. There are a few different ways of doing that, but
the simplest—and probably the best—is something called the Valsalva
maneuver. That sounds rather grand, but it’s basically just taking a deep
breath and holding it, as though you were trying to cure hiccups, then
pressing your abdominal muscles down as hard as you can—like trying to
force out an uncooperative bowel movement while holding your breath.”
She gave me a long, considering stare, exactly the sort of look Jamie would
have given me in receipt of this sort of advice. Deeply suspicious that I was
practicing upon him, but inwardly fearful that I wasn’t.
“Well, that should make me very popular at parties,” she said.37
Maneuvers Beginning with the Letter “v”
NEITHER JAMIE NOR I had said anything to each other regarding Lord
John Grey, sexual jealousy, or general pigheadedness since he had stamped
off in the midst of our argument—whether to put a stop to the argument or
merely in order to muffle the urge to throttle me, I didn’t know.
He’d been perfectly calm and outwardly amiable when he came in for
supper, but I bloody knew him. He bloody knew me, too, and we lay down to
sleep side by side, wished each other good night and 
oidhche mhath,
respectively, turned our backs on each other, and took turns breathing heavily
until we fell asleep, me thinking that whichever sage had urged not letting the
sun go down on your wrath obviously didn’t know any Scots.
I’d meant to find him alone and have it out with him the next day, but what
with the roof, Geordie McHugh’s smashed thumb, and the worrying news of
Brianna’s disturbed heartbeat, there hadn’t been an opportunity.
Supper was outwardly peaceful; there was no company, no culinary
disasters, and no emergencies like one of the children catching fire—which
had actually happened to Mandy a few days before, though she had been
saved by Jamie noticing her dress sparking, whereupon he dived across the
table, tackled her, rolled her on the hearth rug, and then picked her up and
stuffed her into the water-filled cauldron, which was half-full of sliced
potatoes and carrots, 
but fortunately not yet boiling. She and Esmeralda had
emerged from the ordeal dripping, hysterical, and slightly singed around the
edges, but basically sound.
I was feeling slightly singed around the edges myself, and was determined
to extinguish the smoldering embers we were presently walking on.
So when we rose from supper, I left the dishes on the table and invited
Jamie to come for a stroll with me—ostensibly in search of a night-blooming
begonia I’d found. Fanny, who had some idea of what a begonia was, glancedsharply at me, then Jamie, then down at her empty plate with her face
studiously blank.
“Are begonias the stuff ye plant around the privy?” he asked, breaking the
silence in which we’d come from the house. We were passing the main house
privy at the moment, and the bitter scent of tomatoes had begun to
overwhelm the heady smell of jasmine. “Is that what I smell?”
“No, that’s jasmine; the flowers don’t bloom past August, though, so I
have tomato plants coming up under the vines. Tomato plants have a strong
scent and it comes from the leaves, so you have that almost up until the truly
cold weather—when nothing smells anyway, because it’s all frozen.”
“So is anyone who spends more than thirty seconds in a privy in January,”
Jamie said. “Ye wouldna linger to smell flowers when ye think your shit
might turn to ice before ye’ve got it all the way out.”
I laughed, and felt the tension between us ease, feeble as the joke was. He
wanted to resolve it, too, then.
“One of the unappreciated aspects of female clothes,” I said. “Insulation.
When the temperature goes down, you just add another petticoat. Or two. Of
course,” I added, looking back at the house to be sure we hadn’t picked up
any outriders, “not having private parts that can be exposed to the elements is
rather a help, too.”
A sliver of moon gleamed briefly on the top rail of the paddock, the wood
polished by long use. Beyond, the house was huge against the half-dark sky,
only a few of the lower windows lit. Solid and handsome, like the man who’d
made it.
I stopped by the paddock fence and turned to face him.
“I could have lied, you know.”
“No, ye couldn’t. Ye canna lie to anybody, Sassenach, let alone me. And
given that his lordship had already told me the truth—”
“You wouldn’t have been sure it 
was
 the truth,” I said. “Given what both
parties told me about that fight. I could have told you John was talking out
his backside because he wanted to annoy you, and you would have believed
me.”
“Ye could choose your words wi’ a bit more care, Sassenach,” he said, a
hint of grimness in his voice. “I dinna want to hear anything about his
lordship’s backside. Why d’ye think I would have believed ye, though? I
never believe anything ye tell me that I havena seen with my own eyes.”“Now who’s being annoying?” I said, rather coldly. “And you would have
believed me because you would have wanted to—and don’t tell me
otherwise, because 
I
 won’t believe 
that.
”
He made a 
huh
 sort of sound under his breath. We were leaning back
against the paddock rails, and the smells of jasmine, tomatoes, and human
excrement had been replaced with the sweeter odor of manure and the slow,
heavy exhalations of the forest beyond: the spiciness of dying leaves overlaid
by the sharp, clean resins of the firs and pines.
“Why didn’t ye lie, then?” he asked, after a long silence. “If ye thought I’d
believe it.”
I paused, choosing my words. The air was still and warm and filled with
cricket songs. 
Find me, come to me, love me …
 stridulations of the heart? Or
merely grasshopper lust?
“Because I promised you honesty a long time ago,” I said. “And if honesty
turns out to be a double-edged sword, I think the wounds are usually worth
it.”
“Did Frank think that?”
I inhaled, very slowly, and held the breath until I saw spots at the corners
of my eyes.
“You’d have to ask him that,” I said, very precisely. “This is about you and
me.”
“And his lordship.”
I lost the temper I’d been holding.
“What the bloody hell do you want me to say? That I wish I hadn’t slept
with John?”
“Do ye?”
“Actually,” I said, through my teeth, “given the situation, or what I thought
the situation 
was …
”
He was no more than a tall black shape against the night, but I saw him
turn sharply toward me.
“If ye say no, Sassenach, I may do something 
I’ll
 regret, so dinna say it,
aye?”
“What’s wrong with you? You forgave me, you said so—”
“No, I didn’t. I said I’d love ye forever, and I will, but—”
“You can’t love somebody if you won’t bloody forgive them!”
“I forgive you,” he said.
“How fucking 
dare
 you?” I shouted, turning on him with clenched fists.“What’s wrong wi’ you?” He made a grab for my arm, but I jerked away
from him. “First ye’re angry because I didna say I forgave ye and now ye’re
outraged because I did?”
“Because I didn’t do anything wrong to start with, you fatheaded arsehole,
and you know it! How dare you try to forgive me for something I didn’t do?”
“Ye did do it!”
“I didn’t! You think I was unfaithful to you, and I. Bloody. 
Wasn’t!
”
I was shrieking loudly enough to drown out the crickets, and shaking with
rage.
There was a long moment of silence, in which the crickets cautiously tuned
up again. Jamie turned to the fence and gripped the top rail and shook it
violently, making the wood creak. He might be speaking Gaelic, but
whatever he was saying sounded like an enraged wolf.
I stood still, panting. The night was warm and humid, and sweat was
beginning 
to bloom on my body. I ripped off my shawl and threw it over the
fence. I could hear Jamie breathing, too, fast and deep, but he was standing
still now, gripping the fence rail with his shoulders stiff, head bent.
“Ye want to ken what’s wrong wi’ me?” he asked at last. His voice was
pitched low, but it wasn’t calm. He straightened up, looming in the
moonlight.
“I swear to myself I will put … this … thing … out o’ my head, and
mostly I manage. But then that sodomite sends me a letter, out o’ the blue—
just as though it never happened! And it’s all back again.” His voice shook
and he stopped for a second, shaking his head violently, as though to clear it.
“And when I think of it, and then I see you … I want to have ye, then and
there. Ye rouse me, whether ye’re slicing cucumbers or bathing naked in the
creek wi’ your hair loose. I want ye bad, Sassenach. But 
he’s
 there in my
head, and if—if—” Lost for words, he smashed a fist down on the fence rail
and I felt the wood tremble by my shoulder.
“If I canna stand the notion that you and he were fucking 
me
 behind my
back, how do ye think I can stand to think that you and I are sharing a bed wi’
him
 in it?”
I would have hammered the fence myself, save for knowing it would hurt.
Instead, I rubbed my hands hard over my face and dug my fingers into my
scalp, scattering hairpins. I stood there, huffing.
“We’re not,” I said, in a tone of complete certainty. “We’re not, because
I’m
 not. I have never, not for one second, thought of anyone but you whenI’ve been in your bed. And I ought to be really offended at the notion that you
do,
 but—”
“I don’t.” He gulped air, and took me by the arms. “I don’t, Claire. It’s
only that I’m afraid I might.”
I felt dizzy from hyperventilation and put my own hands flat on his chest
to steady myself, and smelled the sudden pungent musk of his body, the
waves of it an acrid hot ghost surrounding us. I did rouse him.
“I tell you what,” I said at last, and lifted my head to look at him. It was
full dark now, but my eyes were well-enough adapted as to see his face, his
eyes searching mine. “I tell you what,” I said again, and swallowed. “You—
leave that to me.”
He trembled slightly; it might have been a buried laugh.
“Ye think highly of yourself, Sassenach,” he said, his voice husky. “Ye
think a warm place to stick my cock’s enough to make me forget?”
I stared at him.
“What on 
earth
 do you mean by that, you—” Words failed me, and I
jerked loose, flapping my arms in bewildered frustration. “Why would you
say something like that? You know it isn’t true!”
He scratched his jaw; I could hear the whiskers rasp.
“No, it isn’t,” he agreed. “I was just tryin’ to think of something offensive
enough to say as to make ye strike me.”
I actually did laugh, though more from surprise than real humor.
“Don’t tempt me. Why do you want me to hit you?”
He rocked back on his heels and looked me over, slowly, from undone hair
to battered moccasins. And back.
“Well, in about ten seconds, I mean to lay ye on your back in the grass, lift
your skirts, and address ye wi’ a certain amount of forcefulness. I thought I’d
feel better about doing that if ye provoked me first.”
“Me … provoke 
you
?”
I stood stock-still for three of those seconds, blood thundering in my ears
and pulsing through my fingers. Then I walked toward him.
“Seven,” I said.
“Six,” and I reached for the neck of his shirt.
“Five … Four …” I yanked it down, said, “Three,” rather loudly, leaned
forward, and bit his nipple. Not a teasing love-bite, either.
He yelped, jerked back, grabbed me, and with a big hand gripping the back
of my head pushed my face into his. Our mouths collided messily, and stayedthat way, open, voracious, amorous, seeking as much as kissing, lips, ears,
noses, tongues, and teeth, hands groping and snatching and pulling and
rubbing. I found his cock and rubbed it hard through his breeches and he
made a deep growling sound and grasped my buttocks and then we 
were
 in
the grass in a tangle of knees and limbs and rumpled clothes and hot flesh
bared to the starry sky.
It seemed to last a long time, though it couldn’t have. I came back to
myself slowly, reverberations passing through me in a slow, pleasant throb.
Provocation. Forsooth.
He was lying on his back next to me, face turned to the moon, eyes closed,
and breathing like one rescued from the sea. His right hand was still between
my thighs and I was curled beside him, the whorls of his ear, beautiful as a
seashell, a few inches from my mouth.
“Have we got that out of our system, do you think?” I said drowsily.
“Our?” His right hand twitched, but he didn’t pull it away.
“Our.”
He sighed deeply and turned his head toward me, opening his eyes.
“We have.” He smiled a little and closed his eyes again, his chest rising
and falling under my hand. I could feel his nipple through his shirt, small and
still hard against my palm.
“Did I break the skin?”
“Ye do that every time ye touch me, Sassenach. I’m no bleeding, though.”
We lay in silence for some time, and the sounds of crickets and the rustle
of leaves flowed over us like water.
He spoke, quietly, and I turned my head, thinking I hadn’t heard him
aright, but I had. I just didn’t know what language he was speaking.
“That isn’t 
Gàidhlig,
 is it?” I asked dubiously, and he shook his head
slowly, eyes still closed.
“Gaeilge,”
 he said. “Irish. I heard it from Stephen O’Farrell, during the
Rising. It just came back to me now.
“My body is out from my control,”
 he said softly. 
“She was the half of my
body—the very half of my soul.”38
Grim Reaper
I WAS DIGGING UP a number of four-leaved milkweeds, with the intent of
transplanting them to my garden, when I heard the unmistakable bray of an
annoyed mule. I’d had enough experience with Clarence and a few of his
fellows to tell the difference between a call of greeting and a declaration of
hostility. Both earsplitting, but different.
A couple of male voices and another mule now joined the argument.
Hastily tucking the uprooted milkweeds into the wet moss in my basket, I
picked up said basket and went to see what was happening.
Neither of the voices sounded familiar, and I stopped short of the racket,
peering through a screen of silver firs and tall, skinny aspens. Two men, two
mules, all right—but one of the mules, a light bay, had turned aside and was
browsing on the flowering grass by the trail, while the other, darker mule was
fiercely resisting the efforts of the two men to force him—I checked; yes, it
was a him—to continue up the narrow, rocky defile.
Frankly, I didn’t blame the mule in the slightest. He and his fellow were
both heavily laden, each with a long wooden crate slung on each side and
large canvas-covered bundles tied messily to a pack frame on top.
I could guess what had happened. There was a good, wide trail that led up
this side of the cove, but it branched at a spot called Wounded Lady, which
was a small, brilliantly blue spring with a single aspen on its edge, white-
barked and solid, but with trails of blood-red sap trickling slowly from the
wounds inflicted by burrowing insects and the woodpeckers hunting them.
The main trail made a sharp turn and went on to the east, while a narrower
deer path, much obstructed by growth and rolling stones, went straight up the
right side of the aspen.
The lead mule had either stumbled on rocks or been caught by the branches
of the trees that edged the path. Whatever had caused it, the bindings of hisbaggage had broken or slipped, and half the load was hanging down over his
tail, scattering small boxes and leather bags, with one of the long boxes
resting with one end on the ground, the other pointing at the sky, and a fragile
strand of rope still anchoring it to the mule.
I had seen the sort of cases used to ship firearms, many times. In France, in
Scotland, in America—it didn’t matter what the time period, a bang-stick is a
bang-stick, and you need a long, narrow box if you want to carry a large
number of them.
I didn’t recognize either of the men, and I didn’t wait about to introduce
myself. I took myself and my milkweeds off as fast as I could go.
Luckily, I found Jamie within half an hour, passing the time of day with
Tom MacLeod, the coffin maker.
“Who’s dead?” I gasped, out of breath from scrambling down the
mountain.
“No one, yet,” Jamie said, eyeing me. “But ye look like ye’re about to be,
Sassenach. What’s happened?”
I set my basket on a sawhorse, sat down on another, and told them, pausing
to gasp for breath or gulp water from the canteen Tom handed me.
“Nothin’ up that path but Captain Cunningham’s place, is there?” Tom
observed.
“Ye mean they maybe didna go up that way by accident, aye?” Jamie stuck
his head out of the coffin shed and looked up at the sky. “It’s going to rain
soon. Be a pity if our friends find themselves stuck in the mud.”
Tom grunted in approval, and without further consultation went into his
house, returning in less than a minute with an old leather hat on his head, a
good rifle in his hand, a pistol in his belt, and a cartridge box slung over his
bowed shoulder. He had a second pistol in his other hand, which he gave
Jamie. Jamie nodded, checked the priming, and stuck it in his own belt.
Absently touching his dirk, he nodded to me.
“Go get Young Ian, will ye, Sassenach? I saw him mowing in his upper
field not an hour since.”
“But what—”
“Go,” he said, though mildly. “Dinna fash, Sassenach. It will be fine.”
I FOUND YOUNG Ian, not in his upper field, but in the woods nearby, rifle
in hand.“Don’t shoot!” I called, spotting him through the brush. “It’s me!”
“I couldna mistake ye for anything save a small bear or a large hog,
Auntie,” he assured me as I pawed my way through a clump of dogwood
toward him. “And I dinna want either one of those today.”
“Fine. How about a nice, fat pair of gunrunners?”
I explained as well as I could while jog-trotting along behind him as he
detoured through the field in order to grab his scythe, which he thrust into my
hands.
“I dinna think ye’ll have to use it, Auntie,” he said, grinning at the look on
my face. “But if ye stand there blocking the trail, it would be a desperate man
would try to go through ye.”
When we arrived, we discovered that the trail had already been effectively
blocked by the first mule’s burden, which he had succeeded in shedding
completely. When Ian and I showed up a little way below the gunrunners, the
first mule, enjoying his new lightness of spirit, was nimbly climbing over the
pile of bags, boxes, and wickerwork toward us, intent on joining his fellow,
who was not letting his own pack stop him from browsing a large patch of
blackberry brambles that edged the trail just there.
Evidently, we had arrived almost at the same time as Jamie and Tom
MacLeod, for the two gunrunners had turned to gawk at me and Ian just as
Jamie and Tom came into sight on the trail above them.
“Who the devil are 
you
?” one of the men demanded, looking from me to
Ian in bewilderment. Ian had tied up his hair in a topknot to keep it out of the
way 
while mowing, and without his shirt, deeply tanned and tattooed, he
looked very like the Mohawk he was. I didn’t want to think what I must look
like, comprehensively disheveled and with my hair full of leaves and coming
down, but I gripped my scythe and gave them a stern look.
“I’m Ian Òg Murray,” Ian said mildly, and nodded at me. “And that’s my
auntie. Oops.” The first mule was nosing his way determinedly between us,
causing us both to step off the path.
“I’m Ian Murray,” Ian repeated, stepping back his rifle in a relaxed-but-
definitely-ready position across his chest.
“And I,” said a deep voice from above, “am Colonel James Fraser, of
Fraser’s Ridge, and that’s my wife.” He moved into sight, broad-shouldered
and tall against the light, with Tom behind him, sunlight glinting off his rifle.
“Catch that mule, will ye, Ian? This is my land. And who, may I ask, are
you gentlemen?”The men jerked in surprise and whirled to look upward—though one cast
an apprehensive glance over his shoulder, to keep an eye on the threat to the
rear.
“Er … we’re … um …” The young man—he couldn’t be much more than
twenty—exchanged a panicked look with his older companion. “I am
Lieutenant Felix Summers, sir. Of—of His Majesty’s ship 
Revenge.
”
Tom made a noise that might have been either menace or amusement.
“Who’s your friend, then?” he asked, nodding at the older gentleman, who
might have been anything from a town vagrant to a backwoods hunter, but
who looked somewhat the worse for drink, his nose and cheeks webbed with
broken capillaries.
“I—believe his name is Voules, sir,” the lieutenant said. “He is not my
friend.” His face had gone from a shocked white to a prim pink. “I hired him
in Salisbury, to assist with—with my baggage.”
“I see,” Jamie said politely. “Are ye perhaps … lost, Lieutenant? I believe
the nearest ocean is roughly three hundred miles behind you.”
“I am on leave from my ship,” the young man said, regaining his dignity.
“I have come to visit … someone.”
“No prize for guessing who,” Tom said to Jamie, and lowered his rifle.
“What d’ye want to do with ’em, Jamie?”
“My wife and I will take the lieutenant and his … man … down to the
house for some refreshment,” Jamie said, bowing graciously to Summers.
“Would ye maybe help Ian with—” He nodded toward the chaos scattered
among the rocks. “And, Ian, once ye’ve got things in hand, go up and bring
Captain Cunningham down to join us, will ye?”
Summers picked up the subtle difference between “invite” and “bring” just
as well as Ian did, and stiffened, but he had little choice. He did have a pistol
and an officer’s dirk in his belt, but I could see that the former wasn’t primed
and therefore likely wasn’t loaded, either, and I doubted that he’d ever drawn
his dirk with any motive beyond polishing it. Jamie didn’t even glance at the
weapons, let alone ask for their surrender.
“I thank you, sir,” Summers said, turned on his heel, and shying only
slightly as he passed me and my scythe, started down the trail, back stiff.
IT 
WAS NEARLY suppertime when Captain Cunningham arrived, not quite
in Young Ian’s custody, but definitely in his company and not that pleasedabout it.
I’d fortunately had time to wash, comb oak leaves and spruce needles out
of my hair, and generally put myself to rights while Jamie sat Lieutenant
Summers and Mr. Voules down in the parlor and offered them beer. Voules
accepted eagerly, Summers reluctantly—but they drank it. And now, two
hours and four quarts of beer later, they were, if not happy, somewhat more
relaxed.
“Who are those men?” Fanny whispered to me, coming back to the kitchen
after another beer delivery. “They don’t theem—
seem
 to like Mr. Fraser
much.”
“Friends of Captain Cunningham,” I said. “I think the captain will be
joining them shortly. Do we have anything they can eat? Men are always
easier to handle if their stomachs are full.”
“That’s true,” she said, nodding sagely. “A first-rate brothel hath—
has
 a
good cook. But you can’t let a man eat too much if you want him to do
anything. Mother Abbott thaid if a man’s belly sticks out so far he can’t see
his cock, you’d best give him enough wine that he falls asleep and then tell
him he had a good time when he wakes up. He—”
“How about the game pie Mrs. Chisholm sent down?” I interrupted hastily.
“Is there any of that left?” I’d told Fanny she could tell me anything, and I’d
meant it, but I was occasionally still disconcerted by the vivid detail of her
recollections.
The captain definitely had a lean and hungry look.
“Such men are dangerous,” I murmured, watching as he strode into the
parlor, Young Ian at his heels like a genial wolf.
Then I caught a glimpse of Jamie, rising to greet Cunningham, and
thought, 
And he’s not the only one …
I left Fanny to deal with the game pie, and followed the men into the parlor
with a tray holding a bottle of the JFS whisky, a small pitcher of water, and
five of our best glasses, these being the heavy-bottomed small glasses known
as shot glasses, as they made a sound strongly resembling a pistol shot when
slammed on the table following a toast. I hoped there would still be five of
them after this little social gathering.
“Captain,” I said, smiling pleasantly as I set the tray down. “How nice to
see you.”
He glared at me but was too well bred to say what he was patently
thinking. I wasn’t sure whether my presence would make things better orworse, but Jamie cut his eyes briefly sideways, indicating that said presence
wouldn’t be required, so I curtsied to the assembled and walked down the
hall to the kitchen, where I took my shoes off and crept back quietly in my
stocking feet, much to Fanny’s amusement.
“I imagine my nephew told ye the circumstances in which we encountered
your—acquaintances this afternoon?” Jamie was saying, in a pleasant tone of
voice. There was a splashing sound and the clink of glasses.
“Circumstances,” Cunningham repeated sharply. “Lieutenant Summers is
—was—a close friend of my late son. We have remained in correspondence
since Simon’s death, and I hold Felix in the same regard as I would were he
my son as well. I take considerable exception to your treatment of him and
his servant, sir!”
“A dram wi’ ye, sir? 
Slàinte mhath!
”
From my vantage spot, flattened against the wall, I couldn’t see Jamie, but
I could see the captain, who looked startled at this reply to his statement.
“What?” he said sharply, and looked down into his whisky glass as though
it might be poisoned. “What did you say, sir?”
“Slàinte mhath,”
 Jamie repeated mildly. “It means, ‘to your health.’”
“Oh.” The captain looked at Summers, who by this point resembled a pig
who has just been struck on the head with a maul. “Er … yes. To—your
health, Mr. Fraser.”
“Colonel Fraser,” Ian put in helpfully. 
“Slàinte mhath!”
The captain threw back his dram, swallowed, and turned purple.
“Perhaps a bit o’ water, Captain.” I saw Jamie’s arm stretch out, pitcher in
hand. “It’s said to open the flavor of the whisky. Ian?”
Ian took the pitcher and deftly mixed a fresh drink—half water, this time—
for the captain, who took it, eyes watering.
“I repeat … sir …” he said hoarsely. “I take exception …”
“Well, so do I, sir,” Jamie said, in the same amiable tone. “And I think any
self-respecting man would do the same, at discovering a martial enterprise
taking place under his nose, upon his land, without warning or notice. D’ye
not agree?”
“I do not pretend to understand what you mean by ‘a martial enterprise,’
Colonel.” Cunningham had got hold of himself and sat up straight as a poker.
“Lieutenant Summers has had the kindness to bring me some supplies I had
requested from friends in the navy. They—”“I did wonder, ken, why a Lowlander, and especially one who’s a naval
captain, should choose Fraser’s Ridge to settle,” Jamie said, interrupting him.
“And why ye should have wanted land so far up the Ridge, for that matter.
But of course, your place is nay more than ten miles from the Cherokee
villages, isn’t it?”
“I—I’m sure I don’t know,” the captain said. “But this has nothing to do
—”
“I was an Indian agent for some time, ken,” Jamie went on, in the same
mild tone. “Under Superintendent Johnson. I spent considerable time wi’ the
Cherokee, and they ken me for an honest man.”
“I was not impugning your honesty, 
Colonel
 Fraser.” Cunningham
sounded rather testy, though it was obvious that this was news to him. “I do
take issue with your—”
“Ye’ll ken, I suppose, that the British government has been in cahoots wi’
various Indians in the conduct of this war, encouraging them to attack
settlements suspected of rebellious persuasions. Providing them wi’ guns and
powder on occasion.”
“No, sir.” The captain’s tone had changed, his belligerence slightly tinged
now with wariness. “I was not aware of that.”
Jamie and Ian both made polite Scottish noises indicating skepticism.
“Ye’ll admit that ye do ken I am a rebel, Captain?”
“You are fairly open about it, sir!” Cunningham snapped. He sat upright,
fists clenched on his knees.
“I am,” Jamie agreed. “Ye make no secret of your own loyalties—”
“Loyalty to King and country requires neither secrecy nor defense,
Colonel!”
“Aye? Well, I suppose that depends on whether that loyalty results in
actions that might be considered injurious to me and mine, Captain. My cause
or
 my family.”
“We didn’t mean—” Lieutenant Summers was beginning to be alarmed.
Stirred from his lethargy by the rising tone of the conversation, he made an
attempt to sit up straight, his round face earnest. “We wasn’t meaning to
bring Indians down upon you, sir, so help me God!”
“Mr. Summers.” The captain lifted a hand, and the lieutenant went red and
subsided.
“Colonel. I repeat that I make no secret of my loyalties. I preach them in
public each Sunday, before God and man.”“I’ve heard ye,” Jamie said dryly. “And ye’ll notice, I suppose, that I’ve
made nay move to hinder ye doing so. I take no issue with your opinions;
speak as ye find and let the devil listen.”
I blinked. He 
was
 angry, and was beginning to let it show.
“Talk all ye like, Captain. But I’ll not countenance any action that
threatens the Ridge.”
Lieutenant Summers made a small, involuntary movement, and Captain
Cunningham made a short, sharp movement that silenced him.
“You have my word, Colonel,” he said between his teeth.
There was a long moment of silence, and then I heard Jamie take a deep
breath, this succeeded by the pouring of whisky.
“Then let us drink to the understanding between us, Captain,” he said
calmly, and I heard the brief shifting and scrape of glass on wood as they all
picked up their drams.
“To peace,” Jamie said. He emptied his glass and slammed it on the table
with a bang that startled Mr. Voules out of his stupor.
“What the hell was 
that
?” He sat up, staring blearily to and fro. “They
shootin’ at us with our own guns?”
The brief silence was broken by Jamie.
“Guns?” he said mildly. “Did ye notice any guns, Ian, when ye packed up
the captain’s gear?”
“No, Uncle,” Ian said, in exactly the same tone. “No guns.”
DESPITE ITS FARCICAL aspects, the incident with the captain’s guns was
truly alarming. Preaching loyalty to the King in church of a Sunday was one
thing; preparing—evidently—for an armed conflict under Jamie’s nose was
another.
“Can you evict him?” I asked tentatively. The children had all gone to bed
after supper, and Jamie, I, Brianna, and Roger were holding a minor council
of war over dishes of corn pudding.
“I could,” Jamie said, frowning at the cream jug. “But I’ve been turnin’ it
over in my mind, and I think it’s maybe better to let him stay, where he’ll be
under my eye, than have him up to mischief where he’s not.”
“What do ye think he was—or is—planning to do?” Roger asked. “I mean
—it’s at least possible that he wanted arms for protection; his place 
is
 very
near the Cherokee Line.”“Twenty muskets is maybe that wee bit excessive for keepin’ stray Indians
out of his house,” Jamie replied. “If he’s bought guns, he had a plan to use
them. For what, though? Does he have it in mind to try to assassinate me and
burn out my tenants? What would be the point of that?”
“Maybe he’s doing the same thing you are, Da.” Bree poured cream on her
own pudding, and then on Jamie’s. “Raising a personal militia to guard his
property.”
I glanced at Jamie. He returned the look, but shook his head almost
imperceptibly and took up his spoon. While preventing attacks on the Ridge
was certainly 
one
 of Jamie’s motives in arming some of his men, I was sure
he had others. He clearly didn’t feel this was the time to be telling Roger and
Bree about them, though.
“Ian said one of the men who’d brought the guns was a naval lieutenant—
one of the captain’s men from his career at sea, I suppose?” Bree asked.
“I’d suppose that, too,” Jamie said, with a certain terseness.
“Implying,” she said, “that he still has connections with the navy. Which is
probably where the guns came from—do they use muskets on ships?”
“Aye, they do.” Jamie shifted slightly, as though his shirt was too tight—
which it wasn’t. “When ships come close together, fightin’, the sailors take
muskets up into the rigging and fire down into the other ship. The navy has a
great many guns.”
“How do you know that?” Bree asked, curious.
“I read, lass,” her father said, raising one eyebrow at her. “There was an
account of a sea battle in the Salisbury newspaper, and a drawing showin’ the
wee sailors up among the masts, blastin’ away.”
“Aye, well,” said Roger, spooning ripe, sliced strawberries over his
pudding, “I doubt Cunningham will try to bring guns up that way again. And
if he does …”
“Then he’s arming us, instead of himself.” Despite the seriousness of the
discussion, Bree was amused. The look of amusement faded, though, and she
leaned toward us.
“But you’ll need more guns than what you took from the captain, won’t
you?”
“I will,” Jamie admitted. “But it may take some time to find them. 
And
 buy
the powder and shot to fire them.”
Roger and Bree exchanged a look, and he nodded.“Let us help with that, Da,” she said, and reaching into her pocket drew out
three small, flat strips of what could only be gold, glowing dully in the
candlelight.
“Where on earth did you get those?” I picked one up, fingering it gingerly.
It was surprisingly heavy for its size; definitely gold.
“A jeweler on Newbury Street in 1980,” she said. “I had fifty of these
made; I sewed some into the hems of our clothes, and hid others in the heels
of our shoes. It only took ten to provision us for the trip and buy passage on
the ship from Scotland. There’s plenty left, I mean, if you need to buy
powder or anything.”
“You’re sure, lass?” Jamie touched one of the slips with a forefinger. “I’ve
gold enough. It’s just—”
“Just that wee bit more difficult to use,” Roger said, smiling. “Don’t fash
yourself; we’re honored to help finance the Revolution.”39
I Have Returned
To Lord John Grey, in care of the commander of His Majesty’s
Forces in Savannah, Royal Colony of Georgia
Dear Lord John—
I’m back. Though I suppose I should say “I have returned!”—more
dramatic, you know? I’m smiling as I write this, imagining you saying
something about how lack of drama is not one of my failings. Yours
either, my friend.
We—my husband, Roger, and our two children, Jeremiah (Jem)
and Amanda (Mandy)—have taken up residence on Fraser’s Ridge.
(Though it’s more like the residence is taking up existence around us;
my father is building his own fortress.) We’ll be here for the
foreseeable future, though I know better than most people just how
little one can foresee of the future. We’ll leave the details until I see
you again.
I would have written to you in any case, but am doing it today
because my father received a letter three days ago from a young man
named Judah Bixby, who was his aide-de-camp during the Battle of
Monmouth (were you involved with that one? If so, I hope you weren’t
hurt). Mr. Bixby wrote to tell Da that a friend of his, Dr. Denzell
Hunter, had been captured in New York and is presently being held in
the military prison at Stony Point.
Mama says you will know perfectly well why I’m writing to you
about Denzell Hunter, rather than she doing it. Da says no one needs
to write to you, as Dr. Hunter’s wife will surely have written to her
father (your brother, if I have things straight?) already, but I agree
with Mama that it’s better to write, just in case Mrs. Hunter doesn’tknow where her husband is, or can’t write to you for some other
reason.
All my best to you and your family—and do please give my best to
your son William. I look forward to meeting him—and you, of course!
—again.
(Does one sign a letter “Your most obedient, humble, etc.” if one is
a woman? Surely not …)
Yours truly,
Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie (Mrs.)
P.S. Enclosed are a few sketches that I made of New House (as my
father calls it) in its present state of construction, as well as a brief
look at the members of my family, in their present states. (How long
has it been since you’ve seen either of my parents?) I’m pretty sure
you can tell who is who (should that be “who is whom”? If so, please
make the grammatical adjustment for me).40
Black Brandy
Savannah
M, THE DUKE OF Pardloe wrote, and then stopped. Dipping his quill again,
he carefully inserted the word “Dear,” though he was obliged to angle it
upward in order to squeeze it onto the page, having begun his writing too far
to the left. He stared at the blank page for a moment, then looked up to find
his younger brother staring at him, one eyebrow raised.
“What the devil do you want?” he snapped.
“Brandy,” John answered mildly. “And so do you, from the look of it.
What the devil are you doing?” Crossing the room, he went down on one
knee to rummage in his campaign chest, emerging with a round-bellied black
bottle that sloshed in a reassuringly weighty fashion.
“That’s brandy? Are you sure?” Hal nevertheless reached round the small
table on which he’d perched his writing desk, and dipped into his own chest
for a pair of dented pewter cups.
“Stephan von Namtzen said it was.” John shrugged and, coming to the
table, picked up Hal’s penknife and started removing the wax seal from the
bottle. “You recall our friend the Graf von Erdberg? He says it’s black
brandy, to be exact.”
“Is it really black?” Hal asked, interested.
“Well, the bottle is, though I gather from his letter that it’s called that
colloquially 
because it’s made by a small group of monks who live on the
edge of the Black Forest. Its real name is something German …” Discarding
the last shreds of wax, he held the bottle up close to his eyes and squinted at
the handwritten label. “
Blut der Märtyrer.
 Blood of Martyrs.”
“How jolly.” Hal held out his cup, and the rich aroma of what was plainly
good brandy, if perhaps a little more red than usual—he squinted into his cup—filled his nose. “You’ve kept up your German, then?”
John glanced up from his own cup, raising the other eyebrow.
“I’ve scarcely had time to forget it,” he said. “It’s barely a year since
Monmouth and bloody Hessians coming out of every crack in the earth.
Though I suppose,” he added casually, glancing away, “that you mean have I
seen our friend the 
graf
 lately. I haven’t. This came with a brief note saying
that Stephan was in Trier, God knows why.”
“Ah.” Hal took a sip of the brandy and closed his eyes, both to enhance the
taste and to avoid looking at John.
The brandy began to settle in John’s limbs, the warmth of it softening his
thoughts. And, just possibly, his judgment.
“Have you decided to write to Minnie, then?” John’s voice was casual, but
the question wasn’t.
“I haven’t.”
“But you—oh. I see, you mean you haven’t quite decided, which is why
you were hovering over that sheet of paper like a vulture waiting for
something to die.”
Hal opened his eyes and sat up straight, fixing John with the sort of look
meant to shut him up like a portmanteau. John, though, picked up the bottle
and refilled Hal’s cup.
“I know,” he said simply. “I wouldn’t want to, either. But you think Ben’s
really dead, then? Or are you writing to her about Dottie and her husband?”
“No, I bloody don’t.” The cup tilted in Hal’s hand. He saved it with no
more than a splash of brandy landing on his waistcoat, which he ignored. “I
don’t believe it, and I think Mrs. MacKenzie is likely right about Dottie
writing to me. I want to wait until we hear from her before I alarm Minnie.”
John watched this, his own expression deliberately blank.
“It’s only that I’ve never seen you begin 
any
 letter, to anyone, with the
salutation ‘Dear.’”
“I don’t need to,” Hal said irritably. “Beasley does all that nonsense when
it’s official, and if it’s not, whoever I’m writing to already knows who they
are and what I think of them, for God’s sake. Pointless affectation. I do sign
them,” he added, after a brief pause.
John made a noncommittal 
hm
 noise and took a swig of brandy, holding it
meditatively in his mouth. The quill had made an inky spot on the table
where his brother had dropped it. Seeing it, Hal stuffed the quill back into its
jar and rubbed at the mark with the side of his hand.“It was just—I couldn’t think how to begin, dammit.”
“Don’t blame you.”
Hal glanced at the sheet of paper, with its accusatory salutation.
“So I … wrote … ‘M.’ Just to get started, you know, and then I had to
decide whether to go on and write out her name, or leave it at ‘M.’ … So
while I was thinking …” His voice died away, and he took a quick,
convulsive swallow of the Blood of Martyrs.
John took a somewhat more reserved mouthful, thinking of Stephan von
Namtzen, who wrote now and then, always addressing him with German
formality as “My Esteemed and Noble Friend,” though the letters themselves
tended to be much less formal …. Jamie Fraser’s salutations ranged from the
casual “Dear John” to the slightly warmer “My dear friend,” and depending
upon the state of their relations, “Dear Sir” or a coldly abrupt “My Lord,” in
the other direction.
Possibly Hal was right. People he wrote to never 
were
 in any doubt about
what he thought of them, and the same was true of Jamie. Perhaps it was
good of Jamie to give fair warning, so you could open a bottle before reading
on ….
The brandy was good, dark and very strong. He ought to have watered it,
but—but given the rigidity of Hal’s body, thought that it was just as well that
he hadn’t.
Dear M.
 It was true that Hal had always addressed letters to 
him
 merely as
“J.” Just as well that Mr. Beasley, Hal’s clerk, 
did
 tidy up Hal’s
correspondence, or the King might well have found himself addressed curtly
as “G.” Or would it be “R,” for “Rex”?
Absurd as it was, the thought jarred loose the memory that had been
niggling at him since he’d seen the vestigial letter, and he glanced at it, and
then at his brother’s face.
Hal had called Esmé that—“Em.” His first wife, dead in childbirth—and
Hal’s first child dead with her. He’d been accustomed to write notes to her
beginning that way—just an “M,” with no other salutation; John had seen a
few. Perhaps seeing the single letter, black and bold against the white paper,
had brought it all back with the unexpected suddenness of a bullet in the
heart.
Hal cleared his throat explosively and gulped brandy, which made him
cough, sputtering amber-red droplets all over the paper. He grabbed it andcrumpled it up, then tossed it into the fire, where it caught and blazed up with
a blue-tinged flame.
“I can’t,” he said definitely. “I won’t! I mean—I don’t 
know
 that Ben’s
dead. Not for sure.”
John rubbed a hand over his face, then nodded. He himself had a very cold
feeling round the heart when he thought of his eldest nephew.
“All right. Is anyone else likely to tell Minnie? Adam or Henry? Or, you
know—Dottie?” he added diffidently.
The blood drained from Hal’s face. To the best of John’s knowledge,
neither of Ben’s brothers was a very good correspondent. But his sister,
Dottie, was accustomed to write regularly to her mother—had, in fact, even
written to inform her parents that she was eloping with a Quaker doctor. 
And
becoming a rebel, in the bargain. She wouldn’t scruple to tell Minnie
anything she thought her mother ought to know.
“Dottie doesn’t know, either,” Hal said, trying to convince himself. “All I
told her was that he was missing.”
“Missing, presumed dead,” John pointed out. “And William said—”
“And where’s William, speaking of writing?” Hal demanded, seeking
refuge in hostility. “Unless you know something I don’t know, he’s just run
off without a word.”
John exhaled strongly, but kept his temper.
“William found good evidence that Ben 
didn’t
 die at that prison camp in
New Jersey,” he pointed out. “
And
 he discovered Ben’s wife and child for
us.”
“He found a body in a grave with Ben’s name on it, and it wasn’t Ben—
but for all we know, Ben is in a grave with that fellow’s name on it, and
whoever buried them simply muddled the bodies.” Hal wanted urgently to
believe that someone had buried a stranger under Ben’s name—but why
should anyone have done that?
John picked up the thought as neatly as if Hal had stenciled it on his
forehead.
“They might have. But they might also have done it deliberately—buried a
stranger under Ben’s name. And there are any number of reasons why
someone might have done that. Ben managing it to cover his escape is the
best one.”
“I know,” Hal said shortly. “No. You’re right, I don’t know for sure that
he’s dead. I wasn’t going to tell Minnie that I thought he was—though I 
dothink there’s a good chance of it.” He firmed his jaw as he said it. “But I have
to tell her something. If I don’t write fairly soon, she’ll know something’s
wrong—she’s bloody good at knowing things one doesn’t want her to know.”
That made John laugh, and Hal huffed a little, the tension in his shoulders
relaxing slightly.
“Well,” John suggested, “you told her that Ben had married and had a son,
didn’t you? Why not write and tell her you’ve met the girl—Amaranthus, I
mean—and your presumed grandson and invited her to take up residence here
while Ben is … absent? That’s surely news enough for one letter.”
And if Ben
 is 
dead, the knowledge that he’s left a son will be some
consolation.
 John didn’t say that out loud, but the words hovered in the air
between them.
Hal nodded, exhaling.
“I’ll do that.” His mind, released from immediate dread, took flight. “Do
you think that fellow Penobscot or whatever he’s called—you know,
Campbell’s mapmaker—do you think he might be able to draw a passing
likeness of young Trevor? I should like Minnie to see him.”
And if anything should happen to the boy, at least we’d have that ….
“Alexander Penfold, you mean,” John said. “I’ve never seen him draw
anything more complex than a compass rose, but let me ask round a bit. I
might just know of a decent portrait painter.” He smiled then, and lifted his
newly filled cup. “To your grandson, then. 
Prosit!
”
“Prosit,”
 Hal echoed, and drank the rest of the brandy without stopping to
breathe.41
Awkward Sod
JOHN GREY TOOK UP his penknife—a small French thing cased in
rosewood and extremely sharp—and cut a fresh quill with a sense of
anticipation. In the course of his life to date, he reckoned that he’d written
more than a hundred letters to Jamie Fraser, and had always experienced a
slight 
frisson
 at the thought of impending connection—whatever the nature of
that connection might be. It always happened, no matter whether the letters
were written in friendship, in affection—or in anxious warning, in anger, or
in longings that went up in flames and the smell of burning, leaving bitter ash
behind.
This one, though, would be different.
August 13, A.D. 1779
To James Fraser, Fraser’s Ridge
Royal Colony of North Carolina
He envisioned Jamie in his chosen habitat amid the wilderness, his hands
hard and smooth with calluses and his hair bound back with a leather lace,
companion to Indians, wolves, and bears. And companioned also by his
female accoutrements, to be sure …
From Lord John Grey, Oglethorpe Street, No. 12
Savannah, Royal Colony of Georgia
He wanted to begin with the salutation “My dear Jamie,” but he hadn’t yet
earned back the right to do that. He would, though.
“In another thousand years or so …” he murmured, dipping the quill again.
“Or … maybe sooner.”Ought it to be “General Fraser”?
“Ha,” he muttered. No point in putting the man’s back up 
a priori …
Mr. Fraser,
I write to offer a Commission of Employment to your Daughter. I
have often spoken of her Gifts as an Artist to Friends and
Acquaintances, and recently one such Acquaintance—a Mr. Alfred
Brumby, a Merchant of Savannah—admired several Sketches she had
sent to me and inquired whether I might have the Goodness to
perform the Office of Ambassador for him in obtaining your Consent
for your 
Daughter to travel to Savannah in order to paint a Portrait
of his new Wife.
Brumby is a wealthy Gentleman, and quite able to afford both a
handsome Fee (if your Daughter should wish it, I will be most happy
to negotiate the Price for her) and the Expenses of her Journey and
her Lodgings whilst in Savannah.
He smiled a little to himself at the thought of Brianna Fraser MacKenzie—
and Claire Fraser—and what either woman might say in answer to his offer
of assistance in her affairs.
I can assure you that Mr. Brumby is a Gentleman and his
Establishment beyond reproach (lest you fear that I propose to kidnap
the young Woman for my own fell Purposes).
“Which,” he murmured to himself, “is exactly what I do propose to do, you
awkward sod …”
If he’d been at all circumspect about it, Fraser would have been
immediately suspicious of his motives. But in a long career of soldiery and
diplomacy, he’d seen just how often the bald-faced truth, spoken in all
seriousness, might be taken for a jest. He continued, tongue firm in his cheek:
In all Seriousness, I guarantee her Safety, and that of any Friend or
Family Member you may choose to send with her.
Might Jamie come himself? That would be deeply interesting … bloody
dangerous, though …In these unsettled times, you will of course have great Concern for
the Well-being of Travelers—and it may perhaps strike you that
inviting a young Woman of outspoken Republican Sentiments to take
up temporary Residence in a City presently under the Control of His
Majesty’s Army might be injudicious.
With a Sense of your probable Feelings regarding the Rebel Cause,
I will spare you a full Enumeration of my Reasons, but I assure you—
there is not the slightest Risk that Savannah will suffer Invasion or
Conquest by the Americans, and Brianna will not be exposed to
physical Harm.
He stopped to consider, twiddling the quill. Should he mention the French?
What could Fraser possibly know already, perched up there in his
mountainous lair? Granted, the man wrote—and presumably received—
letters, but given the dramatic circumstances of his resignation of his field
general’s commission at Monmouth, John rather doubted that Jamie was
exchanging daily notes with George Washington, Horatio Gates, or any other
American commander privy to such intelligence.
But what if he 
did
 know that Admiral d’Estaing and his navy of frogs
might possibly be hopping up onto the beaches of Charles Town or Savannah
within a few weeks?
He’d played chess with Jamie Fraser for years and had considerable
respect for the man’s abilities. Best sacrifice that particular pawn, then, to
draw him away from the lurking knight …
It is true that the French …
No, wait. He paused, frowning at the half-written sentence. What if
someone who was 
not
 James Fraser happened to get their hands on this
missive? And here he was, putting unequivocally sensitive information
directly into the hands of the rebels.
“Well, 
that
 won’t do …”
“What won’t do? And why aren’t you dressed?” Hal had come in,
unnoticed, and was peering at himself in the large looking glass that reflected
the French doors at the far side of the study. “Why am I bleeding?” He
sounded rather startled.
John took a moment to obliterate the line about the French with a quick
swath of ink, then rose to inspect his brother, who was in fact oozing blood
from a deep scrape just in front of his left ear. He was trying to stop the bloodgetting onto his stock, but didn’t appear to have a handkerchief available for
the purpose. John reached into the pocket of his banyan and gave Hal his.
“It doesn’t look like a shaving cut. Were you fencing without a mask?”
This was intended to be a joke—Hal had never even tried one of the new wire
masks, as he seldom used a sword these days unless he meant to kill someone
with it, and thought it would be rank cowardice to fight a duel hiding behind
a mask.
“No. Oh … I recall. I was just turning in to the street when a young lad
shot out of the alley, and two soldiers just behind him shouting, ‘Stop, thief!’
One of them knocked into me and I hit the corner of that church. Didn’t
realize I’d hurt myself.” He pressed the handkerchief to his face.
The scrape must have been painful—but he believed Hal hadn’t felt it. Hal
was Hal—which meant that he either was oblivious to physical circumstance
in times of stress, or pretended to be, to much the same effect. And he was
most assuredly under stress these days.
John took the handkerchief back, dipped it into the cup of wine he’d been
sipping, and pressed it to the wound again. Hal grimaced slightly, but took
hold of the cloth himself.
“Wine?” he asked.
“Claire Fraser,” John replied, with a shrug. His ex-wife’s notions of
medicine occasionally made sense, and even army surgeons would wash a
wound with wine, now and then.
“Ah.” Hal had experienced Claire Fraser’s medical attentions at close
range, and merely nodded, pressing the stained handkerchief to his cheek.
“Why ought I to be dressed?” John asked, glancing sidelong at his
unfinished letter. He was debating whether to tell Hal what he intended. His
brother had an unusually penetrating mind, when he was in the mood, and he
knew Jamie Fraser quite well. On the other hand, there were things in John’s
own relationship—such as it was—with Jamie Fraser that he would just as
soon not have his brother penetrate.
“I’m meant to be meeting Prévost and his staff in half an hour, and you’re
meant to be with me. Didn’t I tell you?”
“No. Is my function purely ornamental, or shall I go armed?”
“Armed. Prévost wants to discuss bringing Maitland’s troops up from
Beaufort,” Hal said.
“You expect this discussion to be acrimonious?”“No, but I may add my own bit of acrimony to the meeting. I don’t like the
men sitting about here with nothing to occupy them save drink and the local
whores.”
“Oh.” John felt a momentary tightness in his chest at mention of whores,
but Hal’s face showed no sign that the word had brought Jane Pocock to
mind. John dug his dagger, pistol, and shot pouch out of his chest and laid
them on the bed, next to his clean white stockings. “Very well, then.”
He dressed, more or less efficiently, and handed Hal his leather stock,
turning round so his brother could fasten it at the back. His hair hadn’t yet
grown past his shoulders; Hal brushed the stubby tail that passed for a queue
irritably aside.
“Haven’t you found a new valet yet?”
“Haven’t time to train one.” He could feel Hal’s warm breath and cool
fingers on the back of his neck, and found the touch soothing.
“What’s keeping you so busy?” Hal’s voice was sharp; he 
was
 under
strain.
“Your daughter-in-law, my son, my presumed son, 
your
 son, and, you
know, minor bits of regimental business.” He turned round to face Hal,
dropping the chain of his gorget over his head. Hal had the grace to look
slightly abashed, though he snorted.
“You need a valet. I’ll find you one. Come on.”
Prévost’s headquarters were in a large mansion on the edge of St. James
Square, no more than a ten-minute walk, and the day was fine. It was warm
and sunny, with a light breeze blowing toward the sea, and it was also Market
Day. The brothers Grey made their way along Bay Street toward the City
Market, through a throng of people and the bracing smells of vegetables and
fresh fish.
“Here’s a question for you,” John said, dodging a woman with a tray of
dripping oysters suspended from her neck and a bucket of beer in each hand.
“You know Jamie Fraser. Do you think he’d be susceptible to money?”
Hal frowned.
“In what way? Everyone’s susceptible to money, under the right
circumstances. I assume you don’t mean bribery.”
“No. In fact, I’m concerned that what I’m proposing to him 
shouldn’t
strike him as bribery.”
Hal’s brows went up in surprise. “What the devil do you want him to do?”“Give his assent—and encouragement—to the idea of his daughter coming
to Savannah in order to paint a portrait. I’ve said I’d make sure she’s decently
paid for it, but I—”
“A portrait of you?” Hal gave him an amused glance. “I’d like to see it. A
present for Mother, or are you courting?”
“I hadn’t had either of those prospects in mind. The portrait isn’t to be of
me, in any case; Alfred Brumby wants a picture made of his new wife.”
Hal grinned. “The fair Angelina?”
John smiled, too. Young Mrs. Brumby 
was
 good-looking, but there was
something about her that simply made people want to laugh.
“If anyone is capable of capturing Mrs. Brumby’s ineffable nature on
canvas, it might be Brianna MacKenzie.”
“But that’s not why you want to lure the young woman out of her aerie, is
it? There must be other portrait painters in the colony of Georgia, surely?”
They were approaching Prévost’s headquarters; the shouts and measured
thuds of drilling came faintly through the morning mist from the open ground
at the end of Jones Street. Redcoats were beginning to thicken in the crowd of
people thronging up Montgomery Street.
“You mistake my purpose,” John said, turning sideways to allow a
hurrying lady with wide panniers, a parasol, two servants, and a small dog to
pass him. “Your pardon, madam … And I hope Jamie Fraser does as well.”
Hal glanced sharply at him but was prevented from speaking by the
passage of two tanner’s lads, scarves wrapped round their faces and carrying
an enormous basket between them, from which the eye-watering reek of dog
ordure emerged like an evil djinn.
Hal apparently had got a lungful of the stuff, and coughed until his eyes
watered. John eyed him; his brother was prone to attacks of wheezing and
shortness of breath. In this instance, though, he got control of himself, spat
several times, pounded his chest with a fist, and shook himself, breathing
heavily.
“What … purpose?” he said.
“I mentioned my son? Brianna Fraser is William’s half sister.”
“Oh. So she would be. I hadn’t thought of that.” Hal adjusted his hat,
disarranged by the coughing fit. “He’s not met her?”
“Briefly, a few years ago—but he had no notion who she was. I know the
young woman quite well, however, and while she is quite as obstinate as
either one of her parents, she has a kind heart. She would be curious abouther brother—and if there’s anyone who could talk sensibly to him about his
… difficulties … it would likely be her.”
“Hmph.” Hal considered that for a few steps. “Are you sure that’s wise? If
she’s Fraser’s daughter—wait, you said ‘both her parents.’ Is she also Claire
Fraser’s daughter?”
“She is,” John said, in a tone indicating that this was probably all his
brother required to know about Brianna. Apparently it was, for Hal laughed.
“She may persuade him to turn his coat and fight for the rebels, might she
not?”
“If there is one trait that Jamie Fraser has succeeded in passing to 
all
 his
offspring,” John said dryly, “it’s stubbornness. Forceful as she is, I doubt she
could persuade William of anything whatever.”
“Then—”
“I want him to stay,” John blurted. “Here. At least until he’s made up his
mind. About everything.” “Everything” encompassing William’s paternity,
his career with the army, his title, and the estates to whose control he had just
ascended, having reached his majority.
“Oh.” Hal stopped dead, looking at his brother, then glanced down the
street. Prévost’s headquarters stood at the far corner, a large gray house with
the normal trickle of officers and civilians going in and out under the eyes of
the two soldiers guarding the door.
Hal took John’s arm and pulled him into the side street, less crowded.
John’s heart was thumping. He hadn’t articulated his fears, even to
himself, but the letter to Jamie had brought them clearly to the surface of his
mind.
Hal looked at him, one dark brow arched.
John closed his eyes and took a breath deep enough to keep his voice level.
“I have dreams,” he said. “Not every night. Often, though.”
“Of William.” It wasn’t a question, but John nodded and opened his eyes.
Hal’s face was attentive, his eyes direct and bloodshot. “Dead?” Hal asked.
“Lost?”
John nodded again, wordless. He cleared his throat, though, and found a
few.
“Isobel told me that he was lost once, at Helwater, when he was three or so
—wandering alone in a fog on the fells. Sometimes I see that. Sometimes …
other things.”William had always told him stories, written him letters. Of being trapped
in Quebec during a long, cold winter. Hunting, lost overnight, feet freezing,
the eerie light of the Arctic sky thrumming overhead, falling through ice into
dark water … To William, this was mere adventure, and John enjoyed
hearing about it—but in the dark of his dreams, such things came back
twisted, cold as ghosts and filled with foreboding.
“And battle,” Hal said, almost under his breath. He was leaning back
against the brick wall of a tavern, his eyes on the polished toes of his boots.
“Yes. You see those things when you’re a father. Even when you’re not
asleep.”
John nodded but didn’t say anything. He felt a bit better, to have spoken.
Of course Hal thought such things. Henry badly wounded in battle, and
Benjamin … He thought of William, digging up a grave in the dark,
expecting to find his cousin’s body …. He’d dreamed of digging up a grave
himself, and finding William in it.
Hal heaved a sigh and straightened up.
“Tell Fraser that William is here,” he said quietly. “Just mention it,
casually. Nothing more. He’ll send the girl.”
“You think so?”
Hal glanced at him and took his elbow, steering him out of the alley.
“You think he cares less about William than you do?”42
Sasannaich Clann Na Galladh!
JAMIE READ THE LETTER through twice, his lips tightening at the same
place, halfway down the first page—and then again, at the end. It wasn’t
actually unusual for him to react to one of John’s letters that way, but when
he did, it was normally because it held unwelcome news of the war, of
William, or of some incipient action on the part of the British government
that might be about to result in Jamie’s imminent arrest or some other
domestic inconvenience.
This, however, was the first letter John had sent in nearly two years—since
before Jamie’s return from the dead to find me married to John Grey, and
before he had punched John in the eye as a result of this news and
inadvertently caused his lordship to be arrested and nearly hanged by the
American militia. Well, turnabout was fair play, I supposed ….
No point in putting it off.
“What does John have to say?” I asked, keeping my voice pleasantly
neutral. Jamie glanced up at me, snorted, and took off his spectacles.
“He wants Brianna,” he said shortly, and pushed the letter across the table
to me.
I glanced involuntarily over my shoulder, but Bree had gone to the
springhouse with a box of freshly made goat’s cheeses. I pulled my
spectacles out of my pocket.
“I take it you noticed that last bit?” I said, glancing up when I’d finished
reading.
“‘My son William has resigned his Commission and is presently staying
with me in Savannah, making use of his new-found Leisure to contemplate
his Future, as he has now attained his Majority’? Aye, I did.” He glared at the
letter, then at me. “Contemplate his future? What is there to contemplate, for
God’s sake? He’s an earl.”“Maybe he doesn’t want to be an earl,” I said mildly.
“It’s not something ye’ve got a choice about, Sassenach,” he said. “It’s like
a birthmark; ye’re born with it.”
He was frowning down at the letter, lips tight.
I gave him an exasperated look, which he sensed, for he glanced up and
raised his brows at me.
“What are ye giving me that sort of look for?” he demanded. “It’s not my f
—” He stopped, almost in time.
“Well, let’s not say ‘fault’—nobody’s blaming you, but—”
“Nobody but William. 
He’s
 blaming me.” He exhaled through his nose,
then took a breath and shook his head. “And no without reason. See, 
this
 is
why I didna want Brianna telling him! If he’d never seen me nor found out
the truth, he’d be in England right now, takin’ care of his lands and tenants,
happy as a—” He stopped, groping.
“Clam?” I suggested. “What makes you think he isn’t happy at the
moment? Perhaps he just hasn’t been able to arrange passage back to England
yet.”
“Clam?” He looked at me for an instant, brows raised, then dismissed all
clams with an abrupt gesture. “
I
 wouldna be happy in his position, and I
dinna see how an honorable man could be.”
“Well, he 
is
 very like you.” I was hoping to keep the conversation focused
on William, and avoid notice of John, but I should have known that was
futile. He snatched up the letter, crumpled it, and threw it into the fire with a
very rude Gaelic expression.
“
Mac na galladh!
 First he takes my son, then he swives my wife, and now
he’s tryin’ to suborn my daughter!”
“Oh, he is not!” I’d been keeping a lid on my own temper, but the flames
of rage curling round the edges of the room were getting too warm; I was
growing brown and crispy. “He just wants Bree to go and 
talk
 to her brother!
Can’t you see that, you bloody … Scot?”
That stopped him for an instant, and I saw a startled spark of amusement in
his eyes, though it didn’t reach his mouth. He did breathe, though, that was
an improvement.
“Talk to her brother,” he repeated. “Why? Does he think Brianna will sing
my praises to such an extent that William will forget that I’m the reason he’s
a bastard? And even if he decided to forgive me for that, it wouldna help him
settle his mind to be an earl.” He snorted. “Left to the influence of that den o’snakes, I’d no be surprised if Brianna ended up sailing off to England wi’
them to paint portraits of the Queen.”
“I have no idea what John thinks,” I said evenly. “But since he says
‘contemplate his future,’ I assume that he means William has doubts. Brianna
is an outsider in this; she’d have a different perspective on things. She could
listen without getting personally involved.”
“Ha,” he said. “That lassie is personally involved in every damned thing
she touches. She gets it from 
you,
” he added, with an accusing look at me.
“And she doesn’t give up on anything she’s made up her mind to do,” I
said, settling back in my chair and folding my hands in my lap. “She gets that
from 
you.
”
“Thank you.”
“It wasn’t necessarily a compliment.”
That did get the breath of a laugh, though he stayed on his feet. He’d gone
the color of the tomatoes in my garden at the height of his speech, but this
was fading back to his normal ruddy bronze. I relaxed a little, too, and took a
breath.
“You know one thing about John, though.”
“I ken a number of things about him—most of which I wish I didn’t.
Which one thing d’ye mean?”
“He knows your daughter loves you. And that no matter what she and
William have to say to each other, 
that
 will be part of the conversation.”
He blinked, disconcerted.
“I—well, aye, maybe … but—”
“Do you think he cares for William any less than you do?”
The atmosphere had cooled, and I could feel my heart rate slowing down.
Jamie had turned his back and was leaning on the mantelpiece, looking into
the fire. The letter had burned but was still visible, a curled black leaf on the
hearth. The fingers of his right hand tapped slowly against the stone.
At last he sighed and turned round.
“I’ll talk to Brianna,” he said.
“DID YOU TALK to Brianna yet?” I asked, the next day.
“I will,” he said, with some reluctance, “but I’m no going to tell her about
William.”I was sniffing cautiously at the stew I’d made for dinner, but desisted in
order to look sideways at him. “Why on earth not?”
“Because if I did, she’d go because she thought I wanted her to, even if she
otherwise wouldna go at all.”
That was probably true, though I personally didn’t see anything wrong
with asking her to do something Jamie wanted done. 
He
 plainly did, though,
so I nodded agreeably and held out the spoon to him.
“Taste that, will you, and tell me if you think it’s fit for human
consumption.”
He paused, spoon halfway to his mouth.
“What’s in it?”
“I was hoping you could tell me. I think it might possibly be venison, but
Mrs. MacDonald didn’t know for sure; her husband came home with it from
a trip to the Cherokee villages and it didn’t have any skin on it, and he said
he’d been too drunk when he won it in a dice game to have asked.”
Eyebrows raised as high as they’d go, he sniffed gingerly, blew on the
spoonful of hot stew, then licked up a small taste, closing his eyes like a
French 
dégustateur
 judging the virtues of a new Rhône.
“Hmm,” he said. He lapped a little more, though, which was encouraging,
and finally took a whole bite, which he chewed slowly, eyes still closed in
concentration.
Finally he swallowed, and opening his eyes said, “It needs pepper. And
maybe vinegar?”
“For taste, or disinfection?” I asked. I glanced at the pie safe, wondering
whether I could scrabble together sufficient remnants from its contents for a
substitute dinner.
“Taste,” he said, leaning past me to dip the spoon again. “It’s wholesome
enough, though. I think it’s wapiti—and meat from a verra old, tough buck. Is
it not Mrs. MacDonald who thinks you’re a witch?”
“Well, if she does, she kept it to herself when she brought me her youngest
son yesterday, with a broken leg. The older son brought the meat this
morning. It 
was
 quite a large chunk of meat, regardless of origin. I put the
rest in the smokehouse, but it smelled a little odd.”
“What smells odd?” The back door opened and Brianna came in, carrying
a small pumpkin, Roger behind her with a basket of collard greens from the
garden.I raised a brow at the pumpkin—too small for pie making, and very much
too green, and she shrugged.
“A rat or something was gnawing at it when we went into the garden.” She
turned it to display fresh tooth marks. “I knew it would go bad right away if
we left it—if the rat didn’t come right back and finish it off—so we brought it
in.”
“Well, I’ve 
heard
 of fried green pumpkin,” I said, dubiously accepting the
gift. “This is already rather an experimental meal, after all.”
Brianna looked at the hearth and took a deep, cautious sniff.
“It smells … edible,” she said.
“Aye, that’s what I said,” Jamie said, waving aside the possibility of
wholesale ptomaine poisoning with one hand. “Sit down, lass. Lord John’s
sent me a wee letter and he’s mentioning you.”
“Lord John?” One red brow arched, and her face lighted up. “What does he
want?”
Jamie stared at her.
“Why would ye think he wants something from ye?” he asked, wary but
curious.
Brianna swept her skirt to one side and sat down, pumpkin still in one
hand, and extended a hand to Jamie, palm up.
“Lend me your dirk for a minute, Da. As for Lord John, he doesn’t do
social chat. I don’t know whether he wants something 
from
 me, but I’ve read
enough of his letters to know that he doesn’t bother writing unless he’s got a
purpose.”
I snorted slightly and exchanged a look with Jamie. That was completely
true. Granted, his purpose was occasionally just to warn Jamie that he was
risking his head, his neck, or his balls in whatever rash venture John thought
he might be involved in, but it definitely 
was
 a purpose.
Bree took the proffered dirk and began to slice the small pumpkin, spilling
glistening clumps of tangled green seeds onto the table.
“So?” she said, eyes on her work.
“So,” Jamie said, and took a deep breath.
THE FRIED GREEN pumpkin was indeed edible, though I wouldn’t say
much more for it than that.
“Needs ketchup” was Jemmy’s comment.“Aye,” his grandfather agreed, chewing gingerly. “Walnut ketchup,
maybe? Or mushroom.”
“Walnut 
ketchup
?” Jemmy and Amanda burst into giggles, but Jamie
merely eyed them tolerantly.
“Aye, ye wee ignoramuses,” he said. “Ketchup’s any relish ye put on your
meat or vegetables—no just that tomato mash your mam makes for ye.”
“What does walnut ketchup taste like?” Jem demanded.
“Walnuts,” Jamie said, unhelpfully. “Wi’ vinegar and anchovies and a few
other things. Hush now; I want to be speaking wi’ your mother.”
While the children and I cleared the table, Jamie laid out Lord John’s
proposal, in detail, for Brianna. Careful, I noted, to keep his own feelings out
of the matter.
“Ye can take a bit of time to think, 
a nighean,
” he said, finishing up. “But
it’s growing late in the year for a long journey. If ye go … ye may well not be
able to come back until the spring.”
Brianna and Roger exchanged a long look, and I felt a twinge of the heart.
I hadn’t thought of that, but he was right. Snow-choked passes cut off the
high mountains from the low country as effectively as a thousand-foot stone
wall.
Brianna was nodding, though.
“We’ll do it,” she said simply.
“We?” said Roger, but he smiled.
“Are ye sure?” Jamie asked, and I saw the fingers of his right hand flutter
briefly at the edge of the table.
“If you’re going to buy a lot of guns, you probably need to get your gold
and whisky to the coast,” Bree pointed out reasonably. “Lord John’s offering
me an assured safe-conduct pass—and armed escort, if I want it, which I
don’t—to go there.” She lifted a shoulder. “What could be easier?”
Jamie lifted a brow. So did Roger.
“What?” she demanded, looking from one to the other. Jamie made a slight
Scottish noise and looked away. Roger drew a deep breath as though about to
speak, then let it out again.
“Ye’re thinking of hiding six casks of whisky and five hundred pounds in
gold in your wee box of paints?” Jamie said.
“Under the noses of your armed guards,” Roger added, “who will
presumably be British soldiers, charged, among other things, with the arrest
of, of—”“Moonshiners,” I said.
Jamie raised his other brow.
“Really,” I said. “The notion being that people with illegal stills operate
them largely at night, I suppose.”
“Well, I do have a 
plan,
” Brianna said, with some asperity. “I’m going to
take the kids with me.”
“Wow!” said Jemmy. Amanda, having no idea what was being discussed,
loyally chirped “Wow” as well, which made Fanny and Germain laugh.
Jamie said something under his breath in Gaelic. Roger didn’t say it, but
might as well have had the words “God help us all” tattooed on his forehead.
I felt similarly, but for once, I thought I’d concealed my sentiments better
than the men, who weren’t trying to conceal theirs at all. I wiped my face
with a towel, and started slicing the apple-and-raisin pie for dessert.
“Possibly there are a few refinements that could be added,” I said, as
soothingly as possible, my back safely turned. “Why don’t we talk about it
when the children are in bed.”
WE’D SHOOED ALL the children upstairs to bed and Jamie had brought
down a bottle of the JFS. Aged seven years in sherry casks, it may 
not have
been quite worth its weight in gold, but it was still an invaluable aid to
conferences with a strong potential for going sideways.
He poured each of us a large tot and, sitting down himself, raised a hand
for silence while he took a mouthful, held it for a long moment, then
swallowed and sighed.
“All right,” he said, lowering his hand. “What is it ye have in mind, then,
mo nighean ruadh
?”
Roger gave a mild snort of amusement at hearing him call Brianna “my
redhaired lass,” and I smiled into my whisky. It neatly carried the
simultaneous implications that whatever she had in mind was likely reckless
to an alarming degree—and that her propensity for such recklessness had
likely come from her redheaded sire.
Bree picked that one up, too, raised her ruddy brows, and lifted her cup to
him in toast.
“Well,” she said, having taken and savored her own first sip. “You need to
get guns and horses.”“I do,” Jamie said patiently. “The horses will be no great matter, though, so
long as we do it carefully. I can get them from the Cherokee.”
She nodded and flipped a hand in acceptance of that.
“All right. The guns—you actually have two problems there, don’t you?”
“I’d be happy if it were only two,” he said, taking another sip. “Which
problems d’ye mean, lass?”
“Buying the guns—oh, I see what you mean about more than two
problems. But putting that aside for a minute: you need to buy the guns, and
then you need to get them back here. Do you have an idea where you’re
going to get them, by the way?”
“Fergus,” Jamie said promptly.
“How?” I asked, staring at him.
“He’s in Charles Town,” he said. “The Americans hold the city, under
General Lincoln. And where there’s an army, there are guns.”
“You’re planning to steal guns from the Continental 
army
?” I blurted. “Or
make Fergus do it, which is even worse?”
“No,” he said patiently. “That would be treason, aye? I’m going to buy
them from whoever 
is
 stealing them. Someone always is. Fergus will likely
ken who the local smugglers are, already, but if not, I’ve considerable faith
that he can find out.”
“It’ll cost a pretty price,” Roger said, lifting a brow.
Jamie grimaced, nodding. “Aye. I’ve kept that gold safe all these years for
the time it should be needed for the cause of revolution—and … now it is.”
“Okay,” Bree said patiently. “Let’s say that Fergus can get hold of guns for
you, one way or another. If he 
has
 to pay for them”—here Jamie smiled,
despite the seriousness of the conversation—“then you need to get the gold to
him, and someone then needs to bring the guns back. Sooo …” She took a
deep breath and glanced at Roger, then stuck up a thumb.
“One. Now the harvest is in, we need to get Germain home to his family in
Charleston as soon as we can; he’s dying to see his mother and his new baby
brothers. Two”—the index finger rose—“Lord John wants me to come 
paint
a portrait in Savannah, for which I’ll get paid in actual money, which we
need for things like clothes and tools. And three …” She raised the middle
finger, and without looking at Roger said, “Roger needs to be ordained. The
sooner the better.”
Jamie turned his head to look at Roger, who had flushed deeply at this.“Well, you 
do,
” Bree said to him. Without waiting for an answer, she
turned back to Jamie and laid both hands flat on the table.
“So I write back to Lord John right away, and tell him I’ll do it, and I don’t
need guards, thank you, but Roger is traveling with me and we’re bringing
the kids. Because if we don’t make it back before snowfall,” she explained,
turning her face to me, “it could be five or six months before we saw them
again. And,” she added, looking squarely at Jamie, “I think they’ll be safer
going with us than staying here. What if Captain Cunningham’s friends
decide to come back and bring a militia through the Ridge, and loot and burn
this house while they’re at it?”
The blunt question gave me a shock, and clearly unsettled both Jamie and
Roger, too. Jamie cleared his throat carefully.
“Ye think I’d be taken unawares?” he asked mildly.
“No, I think you’d clean their clocks,” she said, half-smiling. “But that
doesn’t mean I want the kids in the middle of that kind of fight, especially
without me and Roger here to keep them out of the line of fire.”
Her hands were still flat on the table, and so were Jamie’s, and I saw the
echo in their flesh—his hands large and battered, the knuckles enlarged by
work and by age, one finger missing and the others scarred but still holding a
long-fingered, powerful grace—the same grace, unmarred and smooth-
skinned, but likewise powerful, in Brianna’s.
“So,” she said, taking a breath, “I tell Lord John I’ll do it but that we’ll
come through Charleston first so that Roger can check into whatever else he
needs to do for ordination and to get Germain back to his family.
“Lord John likes Germain,” she continued, smiling despite the seriousness
of the situation. “He’ll want to help. So I ask him to send me a passport or
whatever you call it these days, signed by his brother. An official letter that
gives us free passage, without interference, through roads and cities held by
the British army. We’ll be an innocent minister’s family with three kids and
traveling under the protection of the Duke of Pardloe, who’s the colonel of
whatever his regiment is. What are the odds of anybody strip-searching us?”
Jamie’s brows drew together and I could see that he was reckoning those
odds and, while still not liking them, was obliged to admit that it 
was
 a plan.
“Aye, well,” he said reluctantly. “That 
might
 work, for getting the gold to
Fergus—and I can maybe arrange something for the whisky. There’s always
sauerkraut. But I’m no having ye come back with a load of contraband
muskets in your wagon. Ordained minister or no,” he added, raising aneyebrow at Roger. “I’ve called on God for a good deal of help in my life, and
got it, but I’m no asking Him to save me—or you—from my own
foolishness.”
“I’m with ye on that one,” Roger assured him. “How long would it take,
d’ye think, to get a reply from his lordship, with the clearance papers?”
“Maybe two or three weeks, if the weather holds.”
“Then we’ll have time to think what to do with the guns, always assuming
we get them.” Roger lifted his hitherto untasted cup and clinked it against
mine. “Here’s to crime and insurrection.”
“Did you say sauerkraut?” Brianna asked.43
The Men Ye Gang Oot With
OVER THE NEXT FEW weeks, the different approaches to God on offer at
the Meeting House collected their own adherents. Many people attended
more than one service, whether from an eclectic approach to ritual,
indecision, a desire for society if not instruction—or simply because it was
more interesting to go to church than it was to sit at home piously reading the
Bible out loud to their families.
Still, each service had its own core of worshippers who came every
Sunday, plus a varying number of floaters and droppers-in. When the weather
was fine, many people remained for the day, picnicking under the trees,
comparing notes on the Methodist service versus the Presbyterian one. And—
being largely Highland Scots possessed of strong personal opinions—arguing
about everything from the message of the sermon to the state of the minister’s
shoes.
Rachel’s Meeting attracted fewer people and many fewer arguments, but
those who came to sit in silence and in company to listen to their inner light
came every week, and little by little, more came.
It wasn’t always completely silent—as Ian noted, the spirit had its own
opinions, and some meetings were 
very
 lively—but I thought that for a
number of the women, at least, the opportunity to just sit down for an hour in
a quiet place was worth more than even the most inspired preaching or
singing.
Jamie and I always attended all three services, both because the landlord
couldn’t be seen to show partiality, even if the Presbyterian minister 
was
 his
own son-in-law and the Quaker—presider? instigator? I wasn’t sure what one
might call Rachel, other than perhaps the speck of sand inside a pearl—his
niece by marriage. And because it allowed him to keep his thumb firmly on
the pulse of the Ridge.After each of the morning services, I would take up my station under a
particular huge chestnut tree and run a casual clinic for an hour or so,
dressing minor injuries, looking down throats, and offering advice along with
a surreptitious (because it 
was
 Sunday, after all) bottle of “tonic”—this being
a concoction of raw but well-watered whisky and sugar, with assorted herbal
substances added for the treatment of vitamin deficiency, alleviation of
toothache 
or indigestion, or (in cases where I suspected its need) a slug of
turpentine to kill hookworms.
Meanwhile, Jamie—often with Ian at his elbow—would wander from one
group of men to another, greeting everyone, chatting, and listening. Always
listening.
“Ye canna keep politics secret, Sassenach,” he’d told me. “Even if they
wanted to—and they mostly don’t want to—they canna hold their tongues or
disguise what they think.”
“What they think in terms of political principle, or what they think of their
neighbors’ political principles?” I asked, having caught the echoes of these
discussions from the women who formed the major part of my pastoral
Sunday surgery.
He laughed, but not with a lot of humor in it.
“If they tell ye what their neighbor thinks, Sassenach, it doesna take much
mind reading to ken what 
they
 think.”
“Do you think they know what 
you’re
 thinking?” I asked, curious. He
shrugged.
“If they don’t, they soon will.”
TWO WEEKS LATER, when Captain Cunningham had finished the final
prayer, but before he could dismiss his congregation, Jamie rose to his feet
and asked the captain’s permission to address the people.
I saw Elspeth Cunningham’s back—always straight as a pine sapling—go
rigid, the black feathers on her churchgoing hat quivering in warning. Still,
the captain didn’t have much choice, and with a fair assumption of
graciousness, he stepped back and gestured Jamie to take the floor.
“Good morn to ye all,” he said, with a bow to the congregation. “And I ask
your pardon—and Captain Cunningham’s”—another bow—“for needing to
disturb your peace of mind on a Sunday. But I’ve had a wee note this weekthat’s disturbed my own peace of mind considerably, and I hope ye’ll give
me the opportunity to share it with ye.”
A murmur of agreement, puzzlement, and interest passed through the
room. Along with a subterranean rumble, barely felt, of apprehension.
Jamie reached into his coat and removed a folded note, with a broken
candle-wax seal that had seeped grease into the paper, so that the shadows of
words showed through as he unfolded it. He put on his spectacles and read it
aloud.
“Mr. Fraser—
I take the Liberty of telling you I have had Word that General
Gates attacked the Forces of Lord Cornwallis near Camden and
suffered a Great Defeat, including the lamentable Death of Major
General De Kalb. With the retreat of Gates’s Forces, South Carolina
is abandoned to the Enemy. Meanwhile, I hear that additional Troops
are being sent North from Florida to support the Occupation of
Savannah. Such News 
is alarming, but I am alarmed further to hear
from some Friends that General Clinton plans to attack the
Backcountry by other, more insidious Means. He proposes to send
Agents among us, to solicit, enlist, and arm Loyalists and by so doing,
to raise a large Militia, supported by the regular Army, to attack and
subdue any Hint of Rebellion in the Mountains of Tennessee and the
Carolinas.
It is my firm Belief that this is no idle Rumor, and I will send you
various Proofs as they come into my hands. Therefore …”
As he read, I had the oddest feeling of 
déjà vu.
 A sinking feeling in the pit of
my stomach, and the ripple of gooseflesh up my arms. The room was hot and
moist as a Turkish bath, but I felt as though I stood in a cold, empty room,
with an icy Scottish rain beating at the window, hearing words of inescapable
doom.
“And herewith acknowledged the Support of these Divine Rights by
the Chieftains of the Highland Clans, the Jacobite Lords, and various
other such loyal Subjects of His Majesty, King James, as have
subscribed their Names upon this Bill of Association in token
thereof.”“No. Oh, God, no …” I hadn’t meant to say it aloud, but it escaped my
lips, though only in a whisper that made the people to each side of me glance
sideways, then hastily away, as though I had suddenly sprouted leprosy.
Jamie finished:
“I urge you therefore to make such Preparations as lie in your
Power, and stand ready to join us in case of urgent Need, to defend
our Lives and Liberty.”
There was a moment of ringing silence, and then Jamie folded the note and
spoke before the reaction of the crowd could erupt.
“I shallna tell ye the name of the gentleman who sent me this letter, for he
is a gentleman known to me by name and reputation and I will not endanger
him. I believe that what he says is true.”
People were stirring all around me, but I sat frozen, staring at him.
No. Not again. Please, not again …
But you knew,
 the reasonable part of my mind was saying. 
You knew it was
coming back. You knew he couldn’t get out of the way—and he wouldn’t,
even if he could …
“I ken very well that some here profess loyalty to the King. Ye’ll all ken
that I do not. Ye’ll do as your conscience bids ye—and so will I.” He met the
eyes of men here and there in the audience, but avoided looking at Captain
Cunningham, who stood, quite expressionless, to one side.
“I willna drive any man from his land for what he believes.” Jamie stopped
for a moment, took his glasses off, and looked directly from face to face to
face before continuing. I knew he was looking at the men he knew to be
professed Loyalists, and repressed the urge to look round.
“But this land and its tenants are mine to protect, and I will do that. I’ll
need help in this endeavor, and to that end, I will be raising a militia. Should
ye choose to join me, I will arm ye, feed ye on the march, and provide
mounts for those men who may not have one.”
I could feel Samuel Chisholm—aged eighteen or so—sitting next to me,
stiffen and move his feet slightly under him, plainly deciding whether to leap
to his feet and volunteer on the spot. Jamie saw him move and lifted his hand
slightly, with a brief smile.
“Those who wish to join me today—come and speak wi’ me outside.
Those who wish to think on the matter may come to my house at any time.Day or night,” he added, with a wry twist of the mouth that made a few
people titter nervously.
“Your servant, sir,” he said, turning to a stone-faced Captain Cunningham,
“and I thank ye for your courtesy.”
He walked steadily down the aisle between the benches, put down a hand
to me and pulled me up, gave me his arm, and we walked briskly out, leaving
a dropped-pin silence behind us.
HE DID THE same thing at the Presbyterian service, Roger standing gravely
behind him, eyes cast down. Here, though, the audience was prepared—
everyone had heard what had happened at the Methodist service.
No sooner had he finished speaking than Bill Amos was on his feet.
“We’ll ride with ye, 
Mac Dubh,
” he said firmly. “Me and my lads.”
Bill Amos was a handsome, black-haired, solid man, both physically and
in terms of character, and there were murmurs of agreement among the
people. Three or four more men rose on the spot to pledge themselves, and I
could feel the hum of excitement stirring the humid air.
I could feel the sense of cold dread among the women, too. Several of
them had spoken to me during my surgery between the services.
“Can ye no persuade your man otherwise?” Mairi Gordon had asked me,
low-voiced and looking round to be sure she wasn’t overheard. “I’ve only my
great-grandson, and I’ll be left alone to starve if he’s kilt.” Mairi was near my
own age and had lived through the days after Culloden. I could see the fear at
the back of her eyes, and felt it, too.
“I’ll … talk to him,” I said awkwardly. I could—and I would—try to
persuade Jamie not to take Hugh Gordon, but I knew quite well what his
answer would be.
“We won’t let you starve,” I said, with as much confidence as I could
muster. “No matter what.”
“Aye, well,” she’d muttered, and let me dress the burn on her arm in
silence.
The sense of excitement followed us out of the church. Men were
clustering around Jamie; other men were in their own clusters, under the
trees, in the shadow of the pines. I looked, but didn’t see Captain
Cunningham among them; perhaps he knew better than to declare himself
openly.Yet.
The coldness I had felt in church was a shifting weight in my belly, like a
pool of mercury. I went on talking pleasantly with the women and children—
and 
the occasional man with a crushed toe or a splinter in his eye—but I
could feel what was happening, all too clearly.
Jamie had split the Ridge, and the fracture lines were spreading.
He’d done it on purpose and from necessity, but that didn’t make the fact
of it easier to bear. In the space of three hours, we had gone from a
community—however contentious—to openly opposing camps. The
earthquake had struck and the aftershocks would continue. Neighbors would
be no longer neighbors, but stated enemies.
War had been declared.
USUALLY, PEOPLE WOULD mill slowly after church, groups forming and
splitting and re-forming as friends were greeted, news exchanged, cloths
spread, food unpacked, conversation rising under the trees like the
comforting buzz of a working hive.
Not today.
Families drew in upon themselves, friends who found themselves still on
the same side sought each other out for reassurance—but the Ridge had split,
and its shattered pieces drifted slowly away along the forest paths, leaving the
hot, thick air to settle on the vacant church, empty of peace.
My last patient, Auld Mam, who had (she said) a rheum in her back, was
led away by one of her daughters, clutching a bottle of extra-strong tonic, and
I heaved a deep, unrefreshing breath and started putting away my instruments
and supplies. Bree had taken the children home—plainly there was to be no
picnic lunch under the trees on this Sunday—but Roger was still standing
outside the church with Jamie and Ian, the three of them talking quietly.
The sight gave me some comfort. At least Jamie wasn’t alone in this.
Ian nodded to Roger and Jamie and went off toward his own house,
waving briefly to me in farewell. Jamie came down to me, still talking to
Roger.
“I’m sorry, 
a mhinistear,
” he was saying, as they came within earshot. “I
wouldna have done it in kirk, but I had to reach the Loyalists at the same time
as the rebels, ken? And most of them dinna come to Lodge anymore.”“Nay bother, man.” Roger patted him briefly on the back and smiled. It
was a slightly forced smile, but genuine for all that. “I understand.” He
nodded to me, then turned back to Jamie.
“Do you plan to go to Rachel’s Meeting, too?” He was careful to keep any
sort of edge out of his voice, but Jamie heard it anyway.
“Aye,” he said, straightening himself with a sigh. Then, seeing Roger’s
face, he made a small, wry grimace. “Not to recruit, 
a bhalaich.
 To sit in the
silence and ask forgiveness.”44
Beetles with Tiny Red Eyes
Savannah
Late August
WILLIAM HAD, OUT OF what even he would admit to himself in the
depths of his heart was simple obstinacy (though he passed it off to his
conscience as honesty and pride—of a shockingly republican nature, but still
pride), taken up residence in a small shedlike house on the edge of the
marshes with John Cinnamon. Lord John had—without comment—given him
a room at Number 12 Oglethorpe Street, though, and he often slept there
when he had come for supper. He had also continued wearing the clothes in
which he had arrived in Savannah, though Lord John’s manservant took them
away every night and brushed, laundered, or mended them before returning
them in the morning.
On this particular morning, though, William woke to the sight of a suit of
dark-gray velvet, with a waistcoat in ochre silk, tastefully embroidered with
small beetles of varying colors, each with tiny red eyes. Fresh linen and silk
stockings were laid out alongside—but his ex-army kit had disappeared, save
for the disreputable boots, which stood like a reproach beside his washstand,
their scuffs and scars blushing through fresh blacking.
He paused for a moment, then put on the banyan Papa had lent him—fine-
woven blue wool, comforting on a chilly morning as it had rained in the night
—washed his face, and went down to breakfast.
Papa and Amaranthus were at the table, both looking as though they’d
been dug up, rather than roused, from bed.
“Good morning,” William said, rather loudly, and sat down. “Where’s
Trevor?”“Somewhere with your friend Mr. Cinnamon,” Amaranthus said, blinking
sleepily. “God bless him. He came by looking for you, and as you were still
sunk in hoggish slumber, he said he would take Trevor for a walk.”
“The little fiend yowled all night long,” Lord John said, shoving a pot of
mustard in William’s direction. “Kippers coming,” he added, evidently in
explanation of the mustard. “Didn’t you hear him?”
“Unlike some people, I slept the sleep of the just,” William said, buttering
a piece of toast. “Didn’t hear a sound.”
Both relatives eyed him beadily over the toast rack.
“I’m putting him in 
your
 bed tonight,” Amaranthus said, attempting to
smooth her frowsy locks. “See how justified you feel around dawn.”
A smell of smoky-sweet bacon wafted from the back of the house, and all
three diners sat up involuntarily as the cook brought in a generous silver
platter bearing not only bacon, but also sausages, black pudding, and grilled
mushrooms.
“Elle ne fera pas çuire les tomates,”
 his lordship said, with a slight shrug.
She won’t cook tomatoes anymore. 
“Elle pense qu’elles sont toxiques.”
 She
thinks they’re poisonous.
“La facon dont elle les cuits, elle a raison,”
 Amaranthus muttered, in good
but oddly accented French. The way she cooks them, she’s right. William
saw his father raise a brow; evidently he hadn’t realized that she spoke
French at all.
“I, um, saw the garments you kindly had prepared for me,” William said,
tactfully diverting the conversation. “I’m most appreciative, of course—
though I don’t think I shall have occasion to wear them at present. Perhaps
—”
“Gray will suit you very well,” Lord John said, looking happier when
Moira came in and set down a glass of what smelled like coffee with whisky
in it next to him. He nodded toward Amaranthus, seated across from William.
“Your cousin embroidered the beetles on the waistcoat herself.”
“Oh. Thank you, cousin.” He bowed to her, smiling. “By far the most
fanciful waistcoat I’ve ever owned.”
She straightened up, looking indignant, and pulled her wrapper tight across
her bosom.
“They aren’t fanciful at all! Every single one of those beetles is to be found
in this colony, and all of them are the right colors and shapes! Well,” she
added, her indignation subsiding, “I’ll admit that the red eyes really 
were
 atouch of fancy on my part. I just thought the pattern required more red than a
single ladybird beetle would provide.”
“Entirely appropriate,” Lord John assured her. “Haven’t you ever heard of
licencia poetica,
 Willie?”
“William,” William said coolly, “and yes, I have. Thank you, coz, for my
charmingly poetical beetles—have they names?”
“Certainly,” Amaranthus said. She was perking up, under the influence of
tea and sausages; there was a tinge of pink in her cheeks. “I’ll tell you them
later, when you’re wearing it.”
A slight but unmistakable 
frisson
 went through William at that “when
you’re wearing it,” together with an instantaneous vision of her slender finger
slowly moving from beetle to beetle, over his chest. He wasn’t imagining it;
Papa had glanced sharply at Amaranthus when she said it. There was no sign
of intentional flirtation on her face, though; her eyes were fixed on the
steaming dish of kippers as it was set down before her.
William took a dollop of mustard and pushed the pot over to her.
“Beetles and finery notwithstanding,” he said, “I can’t be wearing gray
velvet breeches to clear out a shed with Cinnamon, which is my chief errand
today.”
“Actually not, 
William,
” said Lord John, lending his name the lightest
touch of irony. “Your presence is required at luncheon with General Prévost.”
William’s kipper-loaded fork stopped halfway to his mouth.
“Why?” he asked warily. “What the devil has General Prévost got to do
with me?”
“Nothing, I hope,” his father said, reaching for the mustard. “He’s a decent
soldier, but what with a heavy Swiss accent and no sense of humor, having a
conversation with him is like pushing a hogshead of tobacco uphill. However
…” Lord John added, peering over the table. “Do you see the pepper pot
anywhere? … However, he’s entertaining a party of politicals from London
at present, and a couple of Cornwallis’s senior officers have come down from
South Carolina to meet them.”
“And …?”
“Aha—got you!” Lord John said, lifting a napkin and discovering the
pepper pot under it. “And I hear that one Denys Randall—alias Denys
Randall-Isaacs—is to be one of the party. He sent me a note this morning,
saying that he understood you were staying with me, and would I be so kindas to bring you with me and Hal to lunch, he having procured an invitation
for you.”
IT WAS HOT and muggy, but clouds were gathering overhead, casting a
welcome shade.
“I doubt it will rain before teatime,” Lord John said, glancing up as they
left the house. “Do you want a cloak for the sake of your new waistcoat,
though?”
“No.” William’s mind was not on his clothes, fine as they were. Nor was it
really on Denys Randall; whatever Randall had to say, he’d hear it soon
enough. His mind was on Jane.
He’d avoided walking down Barnard Street since he and Cinnamon had
reached Savannah. The garrison headquarters was in a house on Barnard, no
more than half a mile from Number 12 Oglethorpe Street. Across the square
from headquarters was the commander’s house, a large, fine house with an
oval pane of glass set in the front door. And growing in the center of the
square was a huge live oak, bearded with moss. The gallows tree.
His father was saying something, but William wasn’t attending; he dimly
felt Lord John notice and stop talking. They walked in silence to Uncle Hal’s
house, where they found him waiting, in full dress uniform. He eyed
William’s suit and nodded in approval, but didn’t say anything beyond, “If
Prévost offers you a commission, don’t take it.”
“Why would I?” William replied shortly, to which his uncle grunted in a
way that probably indicated agreement. His father and uncle walked together
behind him, giving his longer stride room.
They hadn’t managed to hang Jane. But they’d locked her in a room in the
house with the oval window, overlooking the tree. And left her alone, to wait
out her last night on earth. She’d died by candlelight, cutting her wrists with a
broken bottle. Choosing her own fate. He could smell the beer and the blood;
saw her face in the guttering light of that candle, calm, remote—showing no
fear. She’d have been pleased to know that; she hated people to know she
was afraid.
Why couldn’t I have saved you? Didn’t you know I’d come for you?
They passed under the branches of the tree, boots shuffling through the
layers of damp leaves knocked down by the rain.
“Stercus,”
 Uncle Hal said behind him, and he turned, startled.“What?”
“What, indeed.” Uncle Hal nodded at a small group of men coming from
the other side of the square. Some of them were dressed as gentlemen—
perhaps the London politicals—but with them were several officers.
Including Colonel Archibald Campbell.
For an instant, William wished John Cinnamon was at his back, rather than
his father and uncle. On the other hand …
He heard his father snort and Uncle Hal make a grim sort of humming
noise in his throat. Smiling a little, William strode purposefully up to
Campbell, who had paused to say something to one of the gentlemen.
“Good day to you, sir,” he said to Campbell, and moved purposefully
toward the door, just close enough to Campbell to make him step back
automatically. Behind him, he heard Uncle Hal say—with exquisite
politeness—“Your servant, sir,” followed by his father’s cordial, “Such a
pleasure to see you again, Colonel. I hope we find you well?”
If there was a reply to this pleasantry, William didn’t hear it, but given the
expression on Campbell’s face—crimson-cheeked and small blueberry eyes
shooting daggers at the Grey party—he gathered there had been one.
Feeling much better, William waited for Uncle Hal to come up and manage
the introductions to General Prévost and his staff, which he did with a curt
but adequate courtesy. He gathered that there was no love lost between
Prévost and his uncle but that they acknowledged each other as professional
soldiers and would do whatever was necessary to address a military situation,
without regard to personalities.
He shook hands with Prévost, looking covertly to see if the scar was
visible. Papa had said Prévost was called “Old Bullet Head” as the result of
having his skull fractured by a bullet that struck him in the head at the Battle
of Quebec. To his gratification, he 
could
 see it: a noticeable depression of the
bone just above the temple, showing as a hollow shadow under the edge of
Prévost’s wig.
“My lord?” said a voice at his elbow as he went in to the reception room,
where the guests were assembling to be given sherry and savory biscuits to
prevent starvation before the luncheon should be served.
“Mr. Ransom,” William said firmly, turning to see Denys Randall,
uniformed and looking much more 
soigné
 in his toilet than on previous
meeting. “Your servant, sir.”He looked back and saw that Campbell’s party had come in but that Uncle
Hal and his father had in the meantime somehow contrived to flank Prévost,
behaving as though they were part of the official receiving line, greeting each
of the London politicals—several of whom Uncle Hal appeared to know—
with effusive welcome before Campbell could introduce them.
Smiling, he turned back to Denys.
“Any word of my cousin?”
“Not directly.” Randall snagged two glasses of sherry from a passing tray
and handed one to William. “But I do know the name of the British officer
who received the original letter with the news of your cousin’s death.”
“Colonel Richardson?” William asked, disappointed. “Yes, I know that.”
But Denys was shaking his head.
“No. The letter was sent 
to
 Richardson by Colonel Banastre Tarleton.”
William’s sherry went down sideways and he choked slightly.
“What? 
Tarleton
 received the letter from the Americans? How? Why?”
William’s last meeting with Ban Tarleton had ended with a pitched fight—on
the battleground at Monmouth—over Jane. William was reasonably sure he’d
won.
“I would really like to know that,” Denys replied, bowing to a gentleman
in blue velvet across the room. “And I sincerely hope you’ll find out and tell
me. Meanwhile, have you heard anything of our friend Ezekiel Richardson?”
“Yes, but probably nothing very helpful. My—father received a letter from
a sailing captain of his acquaintance, who mentioned casually that he’d seen
Richardson on the docks in Charles Town.”
“When?” Denys betrayed no open excitement at the news, but cocked his
head like a terrier wondering whether he had just heard the scrabbling of a
gopher underground.
“The letter was dated a month ago. No telling whether the captain saw the
fellow then or sometime before. No hint that Schermerhorn—that’s the
captain—knows that Ezekiel Richardson is a turncoat, by the way, so I
suppose he wasn’t in uniform. Not an American uniform, I mean.”
“Nothing else?” The terrier was disappointed, but perked up again at
William’s next bit of information.
“Apparently Richardson was with a gentleman named Haym. But he didn’t
say anything about what they were doing, or who Haym might be.”
“I know who he is.” Denys kept control of his expression, but his interest
was plain.The conversation was interrupted at this point by the banging of a small
gong and the butler’s announcement that luncheon was served, and he found
himself separated as another acquaintance hailed Denys.
“All right, Willie?” His father popped up beside him as he made his way
through the double doors of the reception room into a generous hall with a
fantastic floorcloth of painted canvas, done in simulation of the mosaic of a
Roman villa. “Has he found out anything about Ben?”
“Not much, but there may be something.” He hastily conveyed the gist of
his conversation with Randall.
“He says he knows the man Richardson was seen with in Charles Town.
Haym.”
“Haym?” Uncle Hal had caught up with them in time to hear this, and
lifted an eyebrow at the name.
“Possibly,” said William. “You know him?”
“Not to say ‘know,’” his uncle said with a shrug. “But I have heard of a
rich Polish Jew named Haym Salomon. I can’t think what the devil he’d be
doing in Charles Town, though—the last I heard of him, he’d been sentenced
to death as a spy, in New York.”
LUNCHEON 
WAS TEDIOUS, with small patches of aggravation. William
found himself seated between a Mr. Sykes-Hallett, who seemed to be a
Member of Parliament from someplace in Yorkshire, judging from his
incomprehensible accent, and a slender, stylish gentleman in a bottle-green
coat called Fungo (or possibly Fungus), who burbled about the brilliance of
the Southern Campaign (about which he plainly knew nothing, nor did he
notice the stony looks of the soldiers seated near him) and kept addressing
William as “Lord Ellesmere,” though he’d been tersely invited to stop.
William thought he caught a sympathetic look from Uncle Hal at the
adjoining table, but wasn’t sure.
“Do I understand correctly that you have resigned your commission, Lord
Ellesmere?” the green fungus asked, between nibbles of poached salmon.
“Colonel Campbell said that you had—some trouble about a girl? Mind, I
don’t blame you a bit.” He raised a hair-thin eyebrow in a knowing fashion.
“A military career is well enough for men who have capacity but no means—
but I understand that you fortunately do not require to make your way in life
at the cost—at least the potential cost—of your blood?”William had been raised to exercise courtesy even in adverse
circumstances, and thus merely took a forkful of the rabbit terrine and put it
into his mouth instead of stabbing Fungo in the throat with it.
Now, had it been Campbell … but it wasn’t really Campbell’s malice that
troubled him. He hadn’t realized how much it would bother him, not being a
soldier anymore. He felt like an imposter, an interloper, a useless and
despised lump, sitting here among soldiers in a waistcoat covered with
fucking beetles, for God’s sake!
It was a large gathering, some thirty men, two-thirds of them in uniform,
and he could feel the lines drawn between the civilians and the soldiers,
clearly. Respect, certainly—but respect with an underlying scorn—on both
sides.
“What a charming waistcoat, sir,” said the man across the table, smiling. “I
admit to a great partiality for beetles. I had an uncle who collected them—he
left his collection to the British Museum when he died.”
The man’s name was Preston, William thought—second secretary to the
undersecretary of war, or something. Still, he wasn’t either sneering or
leering; he had a strong though rather homely face, with a large, crooked nose
that bore a pair of 
pince-nez,
 and obviously intended nothing more than
friendly conversation.
“My cousin embroidered them for me, sir,” William said, with a slight
bow. “Her father is a naturalist, and she assures me that they’re completely
correct—save for the eyes, which were her particular fancy.”
“Your cousin?” Preston glanced at the next table, where Papa and Uncle
Hal were engaged in conversation with Prévost and his two principal guests,
a minor nobleman sent as a representative of Lord George Germain, the
secretary of state for the colonies, and a dressy Frenchman of some sort.
“Surely it is not the duke who is a naturalist. Oh—but of course, the uncle
must be on your mother’s side?”
“Ah. No, sir, I have misled you. She is my cousin’s widow, my uncle’s
daughter-in-law.” He tilted his head in the direction of Uncle Hal. “Her
husband died as a prisoner of war in New Jersey, and she and her young son
have taken refuge with … us.”
“My profound sympathies to the young woman, my lord,” Preston said,
looking genuinely concerned. “I suppose her husband was an officer—do you
know his regiment?”
“Yes,” William said, letting the “my lord” pass. “The Thirty-fourth. Why?”“I am a very junior under-undersecretary of the War Office, my lord,
charged with overseeing the support of our prisoners of war. Pitifully meager
support, I am afraid,” he added, with a tightening of the mouth.
“In most cases, all I can do is to solicit and organize help from churches
and compassionate Loyalists in the vicinity of the prisons. The Americans are
so straitened in their means that they can scarce afford to feed their own
troops, let alone their prisoners, and I blush to say that the same is often very
nearly true of the British army as well.”
Preston sat back as two footmen arrived with the soup. “This is not the
time or the place for such discussions,” Preston said, peering round a bowl
descending in front of him. “But if you should be at leisure later, my lord, I
should be most grateful if you would tell me what you can about your cousin
and the conditions in which he was held. If—if it is not too painful,” he added
hastily, with another glance at Uncle Hal.
“I should be happy to,” William said, taking up his silver soup spoon and
essaying the lobster bisque. “Perhaps … we might meet at the Arches this
evening? The Pink House, you know. I shouldn’t want to cause my uncle
distress.” He glanced at Uncle Hal, too—his uncle appeared to be
experiencing indigestion, whether of a physical or spiritual nature, and Papa
was regarding his soup with a very fixed expression.
“Of course.” Mr. Preston glanced quickly at the duke and lowered his
voice. “I—hesitate to ask, but do you think that your father might perhaps
accompany you later? His experience with prisoners was of course some time
ago, but—”
“Prisoners?” William felt something small and hard bob in his midsection,
as though he’d inadvertently swallowed a golf ball. “My father?”
Mr. Preston blinked, taken back.
“Forgive me, my lord. I had thought—”
“That doesn’t matter.” William waved a hand. “What did you mean,
though; his experience with prisoners?”
“Why—Lord John was the governor of a prison in Scotland, perhaps …
twenty, twenty-five, perhaps … years ago? Now, what was the name … oh,
of course. Ardsmuir. You did not know that? Dear me, I do beg your
pardon.”
“Twenty-five years ago,” William repeated. “I—suppose some of the
prisoners might have been Jacobite traitors, from the Rising?”“Oh, indeed,” Mr. Preston said, looking happier now that it seemed
William was not offended. “Most of them, as I recall. I have written one or
two small books on the subject of prison reform, and the handling of the
Jacobite prisoners comprised a significant portion of my researches. I—could
tell you a bit more about it, perhaps … this evening? Shall we say at ten
o’clock?”
“Charmed,” William said cordially, and put the spoon full of cold soup
into his mouth.45
Not 
Quite
 like Leprosy
LORD JOHN LIFTED A spoonful of hot soup and held it suspended to cool,
not removing his gaze from the gentleman sitting across the table from him,
next to Prévost. He could feel Hal vibrating next to him and wondered briefly
whether to spill the soup on Hal’s leg, as a means of getting him out of the
dining room before he said or did something injudicious.
Their erstwhile stepbrother, who had just been introduced to them as the
Cavalier Saint-Honoré, couldn’t help but be aware of their reaction to his
presence, but he preserved a perfect 
sang-froid,
 letting his gaze pass vacantly
over the brothers Grey, meeting neither one’s eyes. He was chatting to
Prévost in Parisian French, and so far as Grey could tell, was actually
pretending to be a Frenchman, damn his eyes!
Percy. You … you …
 Rather to his surprise, he was unable to apply a
suitable epithet. He neither liked nor trusted Percy—but once he had loved
the man, and he was sufficiently honest with himself as to admit it.
Percival Wainwright—his real name was Perseverance, but John was
willing to wager that he was the only person on earth who knew that—was
looking well, and well turned out, in an expensive and fashionable suit of
puce silk with a striped waistcoat in pale blue and white. He still had delicate,
attractive features with soft brown eyes, but whatever he had been doing of
recent years had given him a new firmness of expression—and new lines
bracketing his mouth.
“Monsieur,” John said to Percy directly, and bowing to him, continued in
French. “Allow me to introduce myself—I am Lord John Grey, and this”—he
nodded toward Hal, who was breathing rather noisily—“is my brother, the
Duke of Pardloe. We are honored by your company, but find ourselves
curious as to what … stroke of fortune should have brought you here.”“A votre service,”
 Percy replied, with an equally civil bow. Did John
imagine the spark in his eye? No, he did not, he concluded, and he casually
let his hand fall on his brother’s knee, squeezing in a manner intended to
suggest that one word out of Hal and he’d be limping for hours.
Hal cleared his throat in a menacing tone, but likewise bowed, not taking
his eyes off Percy as he did so.
“I am here at the invitation of Mr. Robert Boyer,” Percy said, switching to
English with a slight French accent. He tilted his head slightly, indicating a
portly gentleman at a neighboring table whose wine-colored suit was the
exact shade of the burst blood vessels in his bulbous nose. “Monsieur Boyer
owns several ships and holds contracts with both the Royal Navy and the
army, for the supplying of victuals and other necessaries. He has some
matters of importance to discuss with the major general and thought that I
might be of some small help with … details.”
The spark grew more pronounced, but Percy luckily refrained from
anything overt, given that Hal was staring holes in his striped waistcoat.
“Indeed,” John said casually, in English. “How interesting.” And with the
briefest of dismissive nods to Percy, he let go of Hal’s knee and turned to his
partner to the right, this being Mrs. Major General Prévost. Madam General
was obviously used to being the only female at military dinners and seemed
startled to be spoken to.
John engaged her in descriptions of her garden and which plants were
growing well at the moment and which ones were not. This occupied
relatively little of his attention, unfortunately; he could hear Hal, behind him,
talking to 
his
 other partner, a much-decorated but elderly and torpid colonel
of artillery, who was stone deaf. Hal’s half-shouted queries were punctuated
by small, jibing remarks under his breath, aimed at Percy, who so far had
ignored them.
Feeling his joints knot with the urgent need to do 
something,
 and unable to
kick Percy under the table or give Hal a jolt in the ribs with his elbow, John
pushed back his chair and rose abruptly.
He headed for the discreet screen in the corner of the dining room that hid
the pisspots from view, but the warm tidal reek of the urine of numerous
lobster-eaters hit him in the face and he veered away, going out through the
open French doors into the fresh air of the garden. It had been raining, but the
downpour had stopped, and water dripped from every tree and shrub.He felt as though there had been an iron band round his chest that broke as
he left the house, and he breathed deep, refreshing gulps of cool, rain-washed
air. His face felt hot, and he swiped a hand through the wet leaves of a
hydrangea bush and wiped cold water over his face.
“John,” said a voice behind him. He stiffened, but didn’t turn around.
“Go away,” he said. “I don’t want to talk to you.”
There was a faint snort in reply.
“I daresay,” said Percy, in his normal English accent. “And I can’t say I
blame you. But I’m afraid you’ll have to, you know.”
“No, I won’t.” John turned, meaning to push past Percy and go back inside,
but Percy seized his arm.
“Not so fast,” he said. “Buttercup.”
John’s spinal column reacted much faster than his conscious mind. Both
stomach and balls contracted with a force that made him gasp, before his
mind managed to inform him that the bloody man really 
had
 just used his
nom de guerre.
 The very secret code name under which he had labored—for
three mortal years—in London’s Black Chamber.
He became aware that he was staring at Percy with his mouth open, and
closed it. Percy smiled, a little tremulously. The façade of the arrogant,
elegant 
Frenchman had dropped away, and it truly was Percy. His dark curls
were hidden under the smooth, powdered wig, but the eyes were as they’d
always been—dark, soft, and holding promise. Of various kinds.
“Don’t tell me,” John said, surprised that his own voice sounded normal.
“Monsieur Citròn?”
“Yes.”
Percy’s voice was husky, though John couldn’t have said with what
emotion. Humor, fear, excitement, lust …? The last thought made him shake
off Percy’s grasp and take a step back.
“How bloody long did you know?” he demanded. “Monsieur Citròn” had
been his opposite number, in France’s equivalent to the Black Chamber. All
countries had one, though the names varied. The underground hive where
worker bees gathered the pollen of intelligence, grain by grain, and
painstakingly turned it into honey—or poison.
Percy shrugged.
“I’d been working for the Secret du Roi for about two years, before they
gave you to me. It took me another six months to discover who you really
were.”Not for the first time, John wished he had Jamie Fraser’s ability to make
glottal noises that made clear his state of mind without the nuisance of
finding words. But he was an Englishman, and therefore found some.
“Are you working for Hirondelle now?” he demanded. The Secret du Roi
—Louis XV’s private spy ring—had not quite perished with the death of the
King, but in the manner of such things had quietly been absorbed into a more
officially recognized body. He had himself escaped the clutches of Hubert
Bowles, head of London’s Black Chamber, some years ago, and had left the
world of official secrets behind with the relieved sense of one being fished
out of a noisome bog on the end of a rope.
Percy raised one shoulder briefly, smiling.
“If I were still true to La Belle France—and her masters—you couldn’t tell
whether I was telling you the truth about that or not, could you?”
John’s heart was beginning to slow down, but that 
“if”
 sped it up like a
kicked horse. He didn’t reply at once, though. He took time to look Percy up
and down, deliberately.
“It’s not 
quite
 like leprosy, you know,” Percy said, bearing this scrutiny
with visible amusement. “Treason doesn’t show that easily.”
“The devil it doesn’t,” John said, but more for something to say than
because it was true. “Are you actually telling me that you have—or are about
to,” he added, with a hard look to Percy’s very expensive Parisian finery,
“part company with your ‘special interests’ in France?” 
Including whoever
you were working for in the Black Chamber? I wonder.
“Yes. I haven’t done it quite yet, because—” He glanced involuntarily over
his shoulder, and John gave a short laugh.
“Wise of you,” he said. “So you’re wanting to prepare a soft landing on
this side before you jump. And you thought you’d start with me?” There was
enough spin on that question as to take the skin off Percy’s hand if he tried to
catch it.
He didn’t catch it and he didn’t duck, either. Just stood and let it pass,
regarding Grey with his soft, dark eyes.
“You saved my life, John,” he said quietly, looking at him. “Thank you for
that; I hadn’t the chance to say so at the time.”
John flipped a hand dismissively, though his chest had tightened at Percy’s
words. He’d suppressed everything at the time and he didn’t want it back
now, twenty years later. Any of it.“Yes. Well …” He turned slightly; Percy was standing between him and
the terrace with the French doors.
“So I thought that you might possibly be willing to do me a much less
dangerous favor.”
“Think again,” John advised him briefly, and, stepping round his erstwhile
lover, walked rapidly away.
He heard nothing behind him; no protest, no offers, no calling of his name.
At the open French doors, he glanced involuntarily behind him.
Percy was standing by the hydrangea bush. Smiling at him.46
By the Dawn’s Early Light
THE SUN WAS WELL above the horizon when William came ambling
slowly down Oglethorpe Street toward his father’s house. He’d had a long,
fascinating—and very enlightening—conversation with Christopher Preston,
about the Crown’s treatment of prisoners, prisoner-help societies, prison
hulks … and Ardsmuir Prison. In the fullness of time, he might need to have
a talk with Lord John. But not just … this … minute.
He wasn’t drunk, but wasn’t yet quite sober, either. One of his pockets
sagged heavily and jingled when he touched it. He had a vague memory of
playing cards with Preston and some friends of his—at least this experience
seemed to have ended better than the last time he’d got blind drunk, ended up
penniless, and … met Jane again.
Jane.
He hadn’t meant to call her to mind, but there she was, vivid, drawn on the
surface of his mind with a sharp-pointed quill. The first time he’d met her—
and the second. The shine of her hair and the smell of her body, close in the
dark.
He stopped and leaned heavily on the iron fence surrounding a neighbor’s
front garden. The scent of flowers and new-turned soil was fresh as the
morning air on his face, the breath of the distant river and its marshes
soothing, with its sense of flowing water, soft black silt, and lurking
alligators.
The unexpected thought of alligators made him laugh, and he rubbed a
hand over his rasping whiskers, shook his head, and turned in to Papa’s gate.
He sniffed the air expectantly, but he was early; he could smell smoke from
the kitchen fire, but no bacon. Voices, though … He wandered round the side
of the house, intending to see whether he might charm Moira the cook intogiving him a bit of toasted bread or some cheese to ease the pangs of
starvation ’til something more substantial was ready.
He found Moira in the kitchen garden, pulling onions. She was talking to
Amaranthus, who had evidently been gathering as well; she carried a trug that
held a large mound of grapes and a couple of pears from the small tree that
grew near the cookhouse. With an eye for the fruit, he strode up and bade the
women good morning. Amaranthus gave him an up-and-down glance,
inhaled as though trying to judge his state of intoxication from his aroma, and
with a faint shake of the head handed him a pear.
“Coffee?” he said hopefully to Moira.
“Well, I’ll not be saying there isn’t,” she said dubiously. “It’s left from
yesterday, though, and strong enough to take the shine off your teeth.”
“Perfect,” he assured her, and bit into the pear, closing his eyes as the
luscious juice flooded his mouth. He opened them to find Amaranthus, back
turned to him, stooping to look at something on the ground among the
radishes. She was wearing a thin wrapper over her shift, and the fabric
stretched neatly over her very round bottom.
She stood up suddenly, turning round, and he at once bent toward the
ground she’d been looking at, saying, “What 
is
 that?” though he personally
saw nothing but dirt and a lot of radish tops.
“It’s a dung beetle,” she said, looking at him closely. “Very good for the
soil. They roll up small balls of ordure and trundle them away.”
“What do they do with them? The, um, balls of ordure, I mean.”
“Eat them,” she said, with a slight shrug. “They bury the balls for
safekeeping, and then eat them as need requires—or sometimes they breed
inside the larger ones.”
“How … cozy. Have you had any breakfast?” William asked, raising one
brow.
“No, it isn’t ready yet.”
“Neither have I,” he said, getting to his feet. “Though I’m not quite as
hungry as I was before you told me that.” He glanced down at his waistcoat.
“Have I any dung beetles in this noble assemblage?”
That made her laugh.
“No, you haven’t,” she said. “Not nearly colorful enough.”
Amaranthus was suddenly standing quite close to him, though he was sure
he hadn’t seen her move. She had the odd trick of seeming to appear
suddenly out of thin air; it was disconcerting, but rather intriguing.“That bright-green one,” she said, pointing a long, delicate finger at his
middle, “is a Dogbane Leaf Beetle, 
Chrysosuchus auratus.
”
“Is it, really?”
“Yes, and this lovely creature with the long nose is a billbug.”
“A pillbug?” William squinted down his chest.
“No, a billbug,” she said, tapping the bug in question. “It’s a sort of weevil,
but it eats cattails. And young corn.”
“Rather a varied diet.”
“Well, unless you’re a dung beetle, you do have some choice in what you
eat,” she said, smiling. She touched another of the beetles, and William felt a
faint but noticeable jolt at the base of his spine. “Now here,” she said, with
small, distinct taps of her finger, “we have Ash Borer, a Festive Tiger Beetle,
and the False Potato Beetle.”
“What does a true potato beetle look like?”
“Very much the same. This one’s called a False Potato Beetle because
while it 
will
 eat potatoes in a pinch, it really prefers horse nettles.”
“Ah.” He thought he should express interest in the rest of the little red-
eyed things ornamenting his waistcoat, partially to repay her kindness in
embroidering them but more in hopes that she’d go on tapping them. He was
opening his mouth to inquire about a large cream-colored thing with horns
when she stepped back in order to look up into his face.
“I heard my father-in-law talking to Lord John about you,” she said.
“Oh? Good. I hope they’d a fine day for it,” he said, not really caring.
“Speaking of False Potato Beetles, I mean,” she said. He closed his eyes
briefly, then opened one and looked at her. She was perfectly solid, not
wavering in the slightest.
“I know I’m a trifle the worse for drink,” he said politely. “But I don’t
think
 I resemble any sort of potato beetle, regardless of my uncle’s opinion.”
She laughed, showing very white teeth. Maybe she didn’t drink coffee …
“No, you don’t,” she assured him. “The dichotomy just reminded me of
what Father Pardloe was saying—that you wanted to renounce your title, but
couldn’t.”
He felt suddenly almost sober.
“Really. Did you happen to overhear the reason?”
“No,” she said. “And it’s not my business, is it?”
“Evidently you think it is,” he said. “Or why are you mentioning it?”She bent and plucked a small bunch of grapes out of the trug, offering it to
him. Moira, he noticed, had gone about her business.
“Well, I thought that if that’s truly the case … I might be able to suggest
something.”
With an odd sense of exhilaration, he took the grapes and asked, “Such
as?”
“Well,” she said, as reasonably as though she were describing the eating
habits of a firefly, “it’s quite simple. You can’t renounce your title, but you
could
 hand it on. Abdicate in favor of your heir, I mean.”
“I haven’t an heir. Are you suggesting—”
“Yes, exactly.” She nodded approvingly at him. “You marry me and as
soon as I have a son, you can give him your title, and either retire into private
life and breed dachshunds or perhaps pretend to commit suicide and go off to
become anyone you like.”
“Leaving you—”
“Leaving me as the dowager countess of whatever your estate is called, I
forget. That might be slightly better than being the Duke of Pardloe’s
penurious daughter-in-law, mightn’t it?”
He took a deep breath. Coffee was indeed on the wind, and so was bacon,
but he’d suddenly lost interest in food. He stared at her. She cocked one
smooth blond eyebrow.
“And what if your next child is a daughter?” he said, to his own surprise.
“And the one after that? It seems to me that I should be in substantial danger
of ending with a—a—hareem of girls, all in need of dowries and marriages,
and myself still a bloody earl.”
Her brow wrinkled slightly.
“What’s a hareem?”
“It’s what Arab sheiks do to leaven the monotony of marriage, or so I’m
told. Polygamy, I mean.”
“Surely you don’t mean to imply that you think being married to me would
be 
boring,
 William.” The shadow of a dimple flickered in her cheek. “But as
for hareems, nonsense. You needn’t marry me straight off, you know. We’d
give it a go, and if the result is male, then you marry me, acknowledge the
child, and—” She gave a flick of her hand in a silent 
“voilà.”
“I don’t believe I am having this conversation,” he said, shaking his head
violently. “I really don’t. But for the sake of argument, just what the devil do
you propose doing if the result, as you so casually put it, is female?”She pursed her lips and turned her head to one side, considering.
“Oh, I can think of a dozen things at least. The simplest would be for me to
go abroad at the first suggestion of pregnancy—I should do that in any case,
as we wouldn’t be married yet—and pretend to be a wealthy widow. Then—”
William uttered a noise that he’d meant to be a laugh, and she raised a
palm to suppress him, continuing serenely, “And then, if the child were to be
a girl, I should simply come back with the little darling (for I’m sure any
child of yours would be adorable, William) and announce that a good friend
of mine had died in childbed and that I had adopted her daughter, out of
charity, of course, but also to give my darling Trevor a sister.”
She lowered the palm and widened her eyes at him.
“That’s one way. I can think of others, if you—”
“Please don’t.” He didn’t know whether to laugh, shout at her, eat a grape,
or just leave. Before he could decide, she’d done her illusion again and was
pressed lightly against him, her hands on his shoulders, face beguilingly
turned up.
“But you see,” she said reasonably, “there isn’t really any risk. To you, I
mean. And you might”—her hand cupped his cheek, brief and cool as rain,
and her forefinger traced his lips—“just possibly enjoy it.”47
Tace
 Is the Latin for a Candle
JOHN HAD KNOWN THEY’D have to talk about Percy, but he’d succeeded
in avoiding Hal until the next day, by the simple expedient of leaving his coat
and gorget with Prévost’s cook and going down to the harbor while Hal was
still talking to Old Bullet Head. There he hired a boat to take him fishing in
the marshes. His guide, a local by the name of Lapolla, was very
knowledgable, and John came in after dark, smelling of mud and marsh grass,
with a sack full of redfish and a large, horrible thing called a horseshoe crab,
which they had discovered—fortunately dead—on a tiny islet composed
entirely of oyster shells.
He had eaten some of his fish, broiled over a fire on the beach and utterly
delicious. Then, slightly drunk, he had stolen into Hal’s room around
midnight and left the dead crab on the bedside table beside his sleeping
brother, as a symbolic comment on the situation.
What with one thing and another, though, he didn’t encounter a conscious
Hal until late the next afternoon, following a harrowing tea party at the home
of a Mrs. Tina Anderson, who, while herself a tall, statuesque blond beauty
possessed of great charm, was also possessed of a horde of chattering friends
who had descended on him 
en masse,
 affectionately clinging to his sleeve or
fingering his gold braid while expressing their gratitude for the army’s
presence and their admiration of the courageous soldiers who were saving
them—apparently—from mass rapine.
“It was like being pecked to death by a flock of small parrots,” he told Hal.
“Screeching, and feathers everywhere.”
“Never mind parrots,” Hal said shortly. He’d been out himself, to a more
formal—and doubtless less noisy—gathering at the home of a Mrs. Roma
Sars, where he’d talked to some of the politicals who’d been at Prévost’s
luncheon.“I was hoping to talk to Monsieur Soissons and find out how the devil
bloody Percy comes to be here, when he’s supposed to be dead—or at least
decently pretending to be—but Soissons wasn’t in the way,” Hal replied
shortly. He’d got his stock off, and the dark-red mark across his neck
suggested that he’d been choking back words of one kind and another all
afternoon. “Where was it you said you’d met the fellow last?”
John undid his own leather stock and closed his eyes, sighing with relief.
“I met him at the American camp in a place called Coryell’s Ferry, just
before Monmouth. I told you about that.”
Hal wiped his face with a discarded towel, evidently used previously for
blacking boots, and tossed it into the corner.
“And how the devil did he come to be 
there,
 for that matter?”
John shook his head. What did it matter now, after all? Still, he wasn’t
going to explain just how it was that Percy had escaped being hanged for the
crime of sodomy; he’d rather Hal didn’t expire of apoplexy 
just
 yet.
“About how you got yourself arrested by the Americans, escaped, and
showed up after the battle in camp with a homicidal Mohawk Indian
purporting to be James Fraser’s nephew? More or less,” Hal said, and a
corner of his mouth twitched. “Mostly less, I imagine. You didn’t mention
Percy, at any rate.”
John blinked in a noncommittal sort of way and tilted his head toward the
door. Brisk footsteps were coming down the corridor; doubtless Hal’s valet,
coming to extract Hal from the bondage of his dress uniform.
To his surprise, however, the footsteps belonged to William, mildly
disheveled but evidently sober.
“I need to find Banastre Tarleton,” he said, without preamble. “How do
you suggest I do that?”
“What d’you want him for?” Hal inquired, sitting down in a wooden chair.
“And if you want help, turnabout’s fair play—help me get these bloody boots
off. They’re John’s, and they’re killing me.”
“It’s not my fault you’ve got bunions,” John said. “Totally fitting for an
infantry commander, though, you’ll admit. No one can say you don’t do your
job thoroughly.”
Hal gave him a mildly evil look, then put his hands on William’s head to
brace himself as William wrestled one boot loose.
“Do you know where Tarleton is?” he asked John, who shook his head.“Neither do I,” Hal said, addressing the cowlick on top of William’s head,
which swirled neatly clockwise before sticking up. 
Just like his father’s,
 John
thought.
“Clinton’s chief clerk would know,” Grey said, and cleared his throat. “His
name’s Ronson—Captain Geoffrey Ronson, if you please.”
“Fine.” William jerked the boot off and nearly shot backward off the
campaign chest he was sitting on. He tossed the muddy boot on the hearth rug
and inspected his chest, to be sure his beetles had suffered no damage.
“Where the devil is Sir Henry keeping himself these days?”
“New York, for the moment,” Hal said, sticking out his other foot. “I’d bet
reasonable money that Tarleton is still with him. Tarleton’s cavalry riders
were Clinton’s new toy at Monmouth, and I doubt he’s had all his fun with
them yet.”
William grunted as the second boot came off, and laid it with its fellow on
the rug.
“So, shall I write to Tarleton directly, care of Sir Henry?”
John and Hal exchanged glances.
“I think I would,” Hal said, with a slight shrug. “Just don’t put anything in
the letter that you don’t want the world to know about. Some clerks are
discreet and a hell of a lot of them aren’t.”
“Speaking of which,” John said, eyeing his son. “Would it be indiscreet of
us to ask why you want to find Banastre Tarleton?”
William shook his head, then smoothed the dislodged cowlick back into
the dark mass of his hair.
“Denys Randall told me at the luncheon yesterday that it was Ban Tarleton
who first got the letter from Middlebrook Encampment about Ben dying
there. He evidently gave it to Ezekiel Richardson, and thus—” He made a
spiraling gesture indicating the letter’s eventual arrival to Hal’s hand. “So I
want to know why Tarleton got it, and how.”
“Very reasonable,” Hal agreed. “But I doubt it’ll be that easy.” He lowered
his brows and stared at William, very directly. “What I tell you goes no
further, William. Not to your Indian friend, your lover—if you have one, and
no, I don’t want to know—or anyone else.”
William refrained from rolling his eyes, but only just. John looked down to
hide a smile.
“
Tace
 is the Latin for a candle,” William said obligingly, and laid a hand
over his mouth. “My lips are sealed.”Hal snorted, but nodded.
“Right. Sir Henry is tired of making feints at the Americans around New
York and Virginia. He wants a bold stroke, and he’s got his eye upon Charles
Town. If he hasn’t already left New York to go take it from the Americans,
he will, within the next few months.”
“Who told you that?” John asked, surprised.
“Three different men at luncheon, all of whom begged me to keep it quiet.”
“I see what you mean about discretion, Uncle,” William said, openly
amused.
“I,” said Hal coldly, “am the Colonel of His Majesty’s Forty-sixth
Regiment of Foot. 
You
 are …” His voice trailed off as he gazed at William,
bareheaded and slightly rumpled in his civilian finery, but still with the
straight-backed bearing of a soldier.
I don’t suppose that will ever leave him,
 John thought. 
It hasn’t left his
father.
“… not a serving officer at the moment,” Hal finished, choosing to be
tactful for once.
William nodded agreeably.
“That’s fortunate, isn’t it?” he said. “As you aren’t my commanding
officer, you can’t forbid me to go look for Tarleton if I like.”48
A Face in the Water
“FANNY AND CYRUS SITTING in a tree, k-i-s-s-i-n-g,” Roger said as he
came into the surgery. I laughed, but looked guiltily over my shoulder.
“They’d better not be. Jamie’s roaming about like a wolf, seeking whom
he may devour.” Cyrus was a very tall, very thin lad from one of the fisher-
folk families, though I didn’t know which one. He’d sat down next to Fanny
at church one Sunday and had been appearing now and then near her like a
tall, bashful ghost. I’d never heard him speak and wondered whether he had
any English. Fanny’s Gaelic was so far limited to commonplaces like, “Pass
me a bannock, please,” and the Lord’s Prayer, but I supposed they might be
of an age where young people are naturally tongue-tied in each other’s
presence.
“They’re not,” Roger assured me. “I just saw them on the creek bank,
sitting a decorous two feet apart, Cyrus with his hands folded so tight in his
lap that he must be cutting off the circulation. Who’s Jamie seeking to
devour, and why?”
“He got a letter from Benjamin Cleveland, signed by two other landowners
over the mountain in Tennessee County, as well. They’re pestering Jamie to
commit his militia and come join them in ‘rooting out the vile root of
tyranny’—which I take to mean going round the neighbors and, if they’re
Loyalists, hauling them out and beating them, taking their stock, burning
their buildings, hanging them, or doing other antisocial things to discourage
them.”
Roger’s laughter disappeared.
“Mr. Cleveland’s prose style leaves a bit to be desired,” he said. “‘Rooting
out the root,’ I mean—but at least he’s clear about it.”
“So is Jamie,” I said, and resumed pounding the roots in my mortar with
somewhat more force than necessary. “Meaning he’s damned if he’ll do it buthe can’t just tell them to go directly to hell without passing Go. If he did, the
only thing stopping them from adding the Ridge to their visiting list would be
distance.”
“How far is it from here to Tennessee County?” Roger asked, uneasy.
“Some way, surely?”
I stopped pounding long enough to shrug and wipe the forming sweat off
my forehead with my sleeve.
“Roughly three or four days’ ride. With good weather,” I added, with a
glance at the window, which showed sunshine streaming over the blooming
grass.
“And, um … there’s Captain Cunningham and his Loyalist friends to be
considered, too, I suppose?”
“Oh, God,” I said. “Yes, rather the local worm in the apple, isn’t he? On
the other hand,” I added judiciously, “he’s probably Jamie’s best excuse for
not joining our friend Benjamin on his bloodthirsty rounds—the notion that
Jamie has to stay here on the Ridge in order to keep his own Loyalists in line.
Which might actually be true, come to think of it.”
“I suppose so. What is that?” he asked, nodding at the mortar, purely for
distraction.
“Echinacea,” I said. “It’s a bit early, but I need it. You dig the roots in
autumn, because that’s when the plant starts storing its energy in the root; it
doesn’t need to keep flowers and leaves going.
“You realize,” I added, pausing for breath, “that distance notwithstanding,
the only things keeping Nicodemus Partland’s thugs—I mean, it must be him,
mustn’t it?—from going through the Ridge like a dose of salts are you and
Jamie?”
Roger looked as though he wasn’t surprised to hear that but was still
discomfited.
“Aye,” he said slowly. “Ye can see it in Lodge. Ye know it’s not done to
talk politics or religion there? Equality, Fraternity, et cetera?”
“So I’ve heard.” I’d slowed down a little in my pounding, and gave him a
wry smile. “I always assumed that was a custom more honored in the breach,
though. Um … knowing what people are like, I mean.” 
Men,
 I meant, and he
noticed, giving me back the wry smile. He tilted a hand to and fro in
equivocation.
“The Lodge members mostly keep to the letter of the law there—but what
happens in practice is that some men just stop coming, if they’ve gotsubstantial differences.”
I stopped pounding and looked at him. “That’s why Jamie always goes on
Tuesdays—he’s staked the Lodge out as his territory?”
“Yes and no. He’s modest about it, but he 
is
 the Worshipful Master. And
frankly, any place with him in it tends to be his territory.”
That made me laugh, and I picked up a bottle of beer from the counter,
took a swig, and offered it to him.
“But?” I said.
He nodded and took the bottle.
“But. He encourages everyone to come, regardless, and he keeps the peace
—in Lodge, where he can do it without it being overtly about politics. But as
ye say … in the breach. Men do talk, and even if they’re not talking 
about
politics, it’s easy enough to tell who’s who. And after a point—most of the
committed Loyalists stopped coming.”
“They’re gathering at the captain’s house?” I guessed, and he nodded. That
gave me a qualm.
“How many?”
“Twenty or so. Most of the Ridge folk are on our side, though the larger
part of them would really just rather be left alone and no be bothered.”
“I can’t say I blame them,” I said dryly. A high, thin scream came from the
window and I turned sharply but relaxed again almost at once.
“Mandy and Orrie Higgins are collecting leeches for me, with Fanny,” I
said, waving at the window. “They keep putting them on each other.
Speaking 
of that—” I leaned back a little, looking him over. “Were you
looking for Jamie, or do you need medical attention?”
He smiled, recalled to his mission.
“The latter—but it’s no for me. I was just visiting the Chisholms and as I
was leaving, I stopped to talk to Auld Mam—she was sitting on a bench
outside smoking her pipe, so I sat down and chatted a bit.”
“That must have been fun.”
“Well, up to a point. But then she told me that whenever she goes to the
privy, her womb falls out into her hand, and would I ask ye if there’s
anything to be done about it.”
He flushed a little and I stifled a laugh.
“Let me think that one over. I’ll go up and talk to her tomorrow.
Meanwhile, would you go fish Mandy and Orrie out of the creek, and find
out if Cyrus is staying for supper?”AS HE WALKED down toward the creek, he saw Jem, Germain, Aidan, and
a few of the other boys from uphill, carousing through the woods,
brandishing sticks at each other, slashing them like swords and pretending to
fire them as muskets, shouting “Bang!” at random intervals.
“It’s all fun and games until somebody loses an eye,” he murmured,
hearing Mrs. Graham’s admonition from his youth. No point in rounding up
that lot and lecturing them, though. Beyond the fact that they were boys,
there was a colder fact, too: said boys were only a few years away from being
able to ride with a militia or join the army.
And the bloody war was heading in their direction, fast.
“Seventeen eighty-one, though,” he said, and crossed his fingers.
“Yorktown happens in October of 1781. Two bloody years. But 
only
 two
bloody years.” Surely they could make it that far?
The sight of Mandy and Orrie in the creek, sopping wet, covered with mud
and waterweed, and chattering happily as a pair of titmice, eased his mind a
bit—and so did the sight of Fanny and Cyrus, who had now moved closer
together.
Cyrus, more than a foot taller than Fanny, was doing his best to arch over
and look at what she was showing him without accidentally touching her.
Roger cleared his throat, not wanting to startle them, and Cyrus snapped
rigidly upright.
“It’s all right, 
a charaid,
” Fanny told him, pronouncing 
“a charaid”
 very
carefully—and very wrongly. Roger smiled, and saw Cyrus do so, too,
though he tried to hide it. “It’s only Roger Mac.”
“True,” Roger said amiably, smiling down at them. “Mrs. Claire only
wants to know will ye stay to dinner, 
a bhalaich
?”
Cyrus had gone pink in the ears at being discovered so close to Fanny, and
had in consequence lost all his English, but replied in Gaelic that he thanked
the mistress and would like nothing better, but that his brother Hiram had told
him to be back before nightfall, and it was a long walk.
“Aye, then. 
Oidhche mhath.
”
He noticed, as he turned away, that Fanny had brought out her small roll 
of
personal treasures to show Cyrus; his eye caught the gleam of a pendant in
the grass, and Fanny had her hand half shielding an unfolded paper with
some sort of drawing, as though to keep it from 
his
 eyes. Ah, must be thepicture of her dead sister; Bree had described it to him. Cyrus must be well in
with a chance, then, if Fanny was sharing 
that
 with the lad.
“Godspeed, 
a bhalaich,
” he said, mostly to himself, and smiled.
Smiled not only out of a general benevolence toward the young lovers, but
because Fanny’s drawing had reminded him of the reason for that
benevolence.
Roger touched the pocket of his breeches, feeling the crackle of paper and
the small hardness of the broken wax seal. It wasn’t that he didn’t believe it.
He had, after all, been expecting it—or something like it. But there’s a
difference between thinking you understand something, and then holding the
reality in your hand and realizing that maybe you don’t. But realizing also
that what you don’t yet understand may be the most important thing you ever
do.
A faint sound of screeching made him turn his head, fatherly instincts at
once focused—but Mandy’s piercing complaint left off almost at once, as she
pushed Orrie, who fell backward into the water—not for the first time.
Well, maybe the second most important thing,
 he thought, smiling a little.
His adoptive father—who had been, in fact, his great-uncle—had been a
Presbyterian minister, and had never married—though ministers were
allowed to marry, and generally encouraged to do so, as their wives could be
a help on the organizing side of a congregation.
He’d never asked the Reverend why he hadn’t married—nor had he ever
wondered, until now. Maybe it had been as simple as not meeting the right
person and being unwilling to settle for simple companionship. Maybe as
simple as a feeling that it would be difficult to balance a commitment to God
with the commitment to a wife and children.
Ye gave me the wife and children first,
 he thought in the general direction
of God. 
So I’m thinking Ye maybe don’t want me to ditch them in order to do
whatever else Ye’ve got in mind.
Whatever else. That was the reality he had in his pocket, still hidden for
the moment. A letter from the Reverend David Caldwell—a friend and a very
senior Presbyterian elder. He had performed the marriage ceremony for
Roger and Bree and helped a great deal in preparing Roger for his first go at
ordination. It was both a comfort and a joy to know that Davy Caldwell still
thought he could do it.There is a Presbytery set for a General Assembly in Charles Town,
to take place in May of next Year. I will of course speak in your
Behalf, as regards Acceptance of your Seminary Record and previous
Qualification for Ordination. It would be as well, though, were you to
form some Connection with a Few of the Elders who will take part in
the Presbytery before you meet them more formally in Charles Town
—as a man might use both Buttons and Belt to keep his Breeches up.
The Reverend Caldwell’s words still made him smile. But under the humor
and the sense of gratitude to Davy Caldwell was a sense of … what? He’d no
notion what to call it, this strange flutter in his chest, a not unpleasant
hollowness in the belly—anticipation, but worse, as though he were standing
on the edge of a precipice, about to jump, without knowing whether he’d soar
or crash on the rocks below. He was under no illusions about the rocks. But
he had dreams of flying.
… And, while with silent, lifting mind I’ve trod
the high untrespassed sanctity of space,
put out my hand and touched the face of God.
The Reverend had had a yellowed copy of that poem pinned to the huge
corkboard in his office for as long as Roger could remember—and for the
first time, it now occurred to him that perhaps the Reverend had kept it in
memory of Roger’s father, who’d died, like the poet, flying a Spitfire in the
war. Or so he’d thought.
He touched his pocket again, with a brief prayer for his father’s soul—
wherever it was—and another for the Reverend Caldwell and his kindness.
Bobby Higgins had brought him Caldwell’s letter, having picked it up in
Cross Creek, and he’d tucked it in his pocket and gone to do chores, wanting
to be alone when he read it, which he did in the company of Clarence the
mule and two inquisitive horses.
Roger knew about the Presbytery of Charles Town. He’d written to
Caldwell about his prospects of ordination some time ago and had mentioned
casually that he and his family would be stopping in Charles Town in a
month or so, to return Germain to the bosom of his family. He 
hadn’t
mentioned the need to get their hands on guns for Jamie. He was still trying
not to think about that.He thought maybe he’d walk up to the Meeting House in order to sit and
think about the other prospect before him, but that seemed still too public,
and instead he crossed the creek at the stepping-stones and turned up the hill
behind the house, meaning to climb up to the Green Spring. But Claire’s
garden was at hand, and on impulse he opened the gate and, finding no one
there, walked in.
He seldom came to the garden and was struck at once by the early-autumn
scent of it, so different from the pure tang of the woods. The air smelled of
fresh-dug earth and composted manure, the bitter scent of turnip tops and
cabbages and pungent onions, with through it all a wafting smell of late
flowers, stronger than the sweet, heady scents of high summer, with faint
odors of resin and anise.
Claire had planted sunflowers, thick against one wall of the palisades, and
at the sunflowers’ feet, coneflowers—he could tell those, they stuck up in the
middle—and goldenrod, and a lot of other flowers he couldn’t name, but
liked. There were pretty purple ones he thought were cosmos, with tiny
white-and-yellow butterflies flitting through them, and some that were red
and yellow; he’d have to ask her.
“For the bees,” she’d said, telling everyone about them at dinner.
The bees were enjoying themselves now among the flowers; he could hear
their hum, like the vibration of a loose, plucked string.
“Hey,” he said to them, suddenly but softly. “I’ve had a letter from Davy
Caldwell. I think it’s on. I think—I hope—I’m going to be ordained. A
Minister of Word and Sacrament, that’s what they—we—call it.
Presbyterians, I mean,” he added, assuming that these might be Catholic bees
and thus unfamiliar.
He didn’t suppose that “ordained” meant anything to a bee. They all
hatched out of their wax cells with an unshakable sense of their purpose in
life, after all; no need of decision or ceremony. It felt good to say it out loud,
though.
“Ordained,” he repeated. “I’ll be going to Charles Town, to ease the way.
Ye like to know things like that, Claire says. Brianna and the kids are going,
too; they’d like to see the ocean, walk barefoot on the beach.” 
If there aren’t
a lot of British warships floating in the water …
 “And then we’ll go on to
Savannah. Brianna’s going to paint someone’s portrait.”
The sound of children yelling and laughing down by the creek came to him
faintly, as soothing as the hum of the bees, and he felt as though he couldstand here forever, in a state of happy peace.
Then there was a sudden, much louder screech, and he forgot peace
instantly. He leapt to his feet, searching for the direction of the scream, heard
it again, and shot out of the garden as though the sound had been a fork
jabbed into his back.
He saw it at once as he burst through the trees onto the creek bank—a
square of white, floating, swirling, in the middle of the creek. The wind had
maybe taken it—
But before he could reach the edge of the stream, Cyrus’s long body
launched itself from the opposite shore and crashed into the water, arm
outstretched, and he saw Cyrus’s enormous hand close on the sodden paper in
the instant before both were submerged.
“No!”
 Fanny was screaming. “No! No! 
No!
” She had blundered into the
stream, too, and was trying vainly to reach Cyrus and the paper, but the water
was deeper here and was pulling at her skirts and she was staggering, shoes
slipping in the mud and slime of the streambed.
Roger kicked off his own shoes, waded out, and grabbed Fanny around the
waist.
“It’s all right,” he was saying urgently, dragging the girl through the
current toward shore. “It will be all right!” But Fanny, who knew perfectly
well that it wouldn’t be, went on shrieking, struggling mindlessly to reach the
last remnant of her sister.
Dear Lord, show me what to do …
 What 
was
 there to do? he wondered. He
set Fanny down, and the girl sank to her knees, curled up like a dying leaf,
and went dead silent, bar great shuddering gasps for air.
“Daddy, Daddy!” Mandy, who was strictly forbidden to cross the creek
alone, had just skipped over the stones like a cricket and now grabbed
Roger’s leg, whimpering in panic.
Voices from uphill. The boys had heard the screaming and were running
through the—oh, bloody hell—
“Get out of the garden!”
 Roger bellowed. The crunching noises of feet
through turnips ceased instantly, and he dismissed the potential damage from
his mind, needing all his attention to detach Mandy from his soggy leg while
trying to say comforting things to Fanny.
Fanny was breathing like a winded horse. Worried that she might
hyperventilate and pass out, Roger squatted down next to her and laid a hand
on her narrow, heaving back.“Fanny,” he said gently, “you’re soakin’ wet. Come inside. We’ll get ye
some dry clothes and something hot to drink.” He put an urging hand under
Fanny’s elbow, trying to get her to rise, but Fanny pressed her crossed arms
tighter against her curled body and shook her head. The deep gasping had
lessened, though, beginning to give way to sobs.
Squelching noises announced the hesitant approach of Cyrus, and Roger
looked up at him, tall, gangly, and dripping, his face dead white.
“Mistress …” he said, and swallowed, having no idea how to go on.
“It’s no your fault, 
a bhalaich,
” Roger began, but Cyrus shook off the
halting words and collapsed to his knees in front of Fanny.
“Mistress …” he said again, tentative. Fanny ignored him completely, but
he reached out his closed hand and opened it slowly under her nose.
The paper was little more than a soggy, crumpled ball in his palm. Roger
heard him swallow again.
Fanny made a sound as though he’d driven a spike into her belly, snatched
the remnant of paper from him, and cradled it against her chest, sobbing as
though her heart would break.
I suppose it already
 is 
broken, poor little thing …
“Mo chridhe bristeadh,”
 Cyrus whispered, his face crumpled with misery.
“B’fhearr gu robh mi air bathadh mus do thachair an cron tha seo ort.”
Shattering is my heart. I would that I had drowned before I allowed such evil
to come upon you.
Fanny made no answer and wouldn’t move. Roger exchanged a helpless
look with Cyrus, but before he could try again to move Fanny, the boys had
arrived, full of shocked questions. Germain had the flannel cloth with the rest
of Fanny’s treasures, picked up from the creek bank and bundled in his hand.
“Cousin …?” he said tentatively, his hand with the bundle hovering
between Fanny and Roger. Fanny didn’t move to take it, so Roger nodded at
him.
“Thanks, Germain. Take it to the house, will ye?” He rose, his knees stiff,
cold wet stockings puddling round his ankles. “Jem? Take Mandy and the
boys and go along to the house with Germain. We’ll … be up directly.”
The boys all nodded, round-eyed with concern, and left with Mandy,
glancing over their shoulders and beginning to murmur to one another.
Cyrus was beginning to shiver, the cold wind passing through the wet thin
cloth of his shirt and breeks. Roger put a hand on his bent head—even
kneeling, his head reached well above Roger’s waist.“It will be all right,” he said in Gaelic. “You did no wrong. Go home now.”
Cyrus looked up at Roger, then helplessly at Fanny’s bowed head. After a
moment, he nodded jerkily, got up, and bowed to her before turning and
walking slowly away, glancing back, his face full of trouble.
Roger sighed, and after a moment’s hesitation, he sat down on the ground
and gathered Fanny into his arms. He rocked the girl slowly, patting her back
as though she were a small child. He felt like a bystander in a place where a
bomb has just exploded, and neither ambulance nor police have yet arrived.
Ambulance and police … aye, that would be Claire and Jamie, he thought
with a tinge of wry amusement. Calling for one or the other of the Frasers
had in fact been his first impulse, once he got Fanny out of the creek. But
Jamie had gone to Salem, and Claire had said she was going to look at a case
of what might be chicken pox at the MacNeills’. And if you came right down
to it … neither of them could really help in this situation. Whereas, maybe …
just
 maybe …
He took a deep breath, hugged Fanny tight, then set her down and stood
up. Fanny was shivering by this time, hard enough that the sobs had stopped,
though tears were still flowing and her eyes were swollen.
“Come with me,” Roger said firmly, reaching for her hand. “Brianna can
maybe fix this.”
ROGER’S ONLY THOUGHT when he’d said “fix this” was a fuzzy notion
of Sellotape, this succeeded by a dubious notion of drying the paper and
stitching the drawing together like a sampler. Brianna, luckily, had a better
idea.
“It’s a nice, heavy rag paper,” she observed, laying the still-damp pieces of
the drawing on the kitchen table and smoothing them. “Must have been, to
last so long. How long do you think Fanny’s had it?”
“Two years, maybe?” Roger hazarded a guess. “Her sister was seventeen
or so when she died, and Fanny says this was done when she was ten, so Jane
would have been maybe fifteen. Can you copy it, do ye think?”
“Yes, and I will. But Fanny will want the original, too. For emotional
reasons.”
Roger nodded. “Aye. What can you do about it, then?”
“Oh, just mend the tear.”
“Ye really are going to sew it together? I thought of that, but—”“Well, that’s actually not a bad idea,” she said, looking as though she
wanted to laugh but refraining from doing it out of politeness. “But I’m pretty
sure Fanny wouldn’t want her poor sister to look like Frankenstein’s monster,
even if she doesn’t know what that is.”
“What 
is
 that?” Fanny hovered in the doorway, looking uneasy. She’d been
stripped, dried, and dressed in a fresh shift and stockings and, with her
flushed cheeks and wavy, drying dark hair, looked like a small, disheveled
angel recently rescued from badgers.
“It’s just a novel,” Bree said, and smiled. “I’ll tell you the story later, if
you want. Here, come and look.”
Fanny came to the table, her head turned half away, not really wanting to
see the ruined drawing. Then she saw the paper screen that Bree had fetched
from the pantry—a rectangular wooden frame, with a very fine screen made
of muslin from which threads had been pulled to create a grid, this tacked to
the sides of the frame—and curiosity overcame her reluctance.
“It’s a clean tear—that’s lucky.” Brianna touched the torn edge of one half
with a gentle finger. “See how it’s frayed along the edge? Paper is made of
fibers, and if you were to soak a sheet of paper in water for a long time, do
you know what you’d get?”
“A handful of soggy fibers?” Roger guessed.
“Pretty much. So—” She’d brought in a box of her paper-making supplies
and now took from this a large cloth bag, bulging with …
“Is that cotton?” Fanny asked, fascinated by the fuzzy white blobs that
poked out of the small heap of fabric scraps and something that looked—to
Roger’s jaundiced eye—like handfuls of scraggy blond hair pulled out of
someone’s head.
“Some of it. And flax that’s been hatcheled. And some paper scraps and
bits of decayed rag. So we start with a handful of fibers, finely ground.” She
laid her paper-making screen on the table, took up a small corked bottle, and
carefully spread a line of what looked like carpet sweepings across the middle
of the screen. “That’s going to be my patch. Now we lay the pieces down on
top of that …”
One by one, Roger handed her the halves of the drawing and she carefully
fitted the torn edges as closely together as she could manage.
“It’s a good thing it was drawn with a graphite pencil,” she observed. “Ink
or charcoal or watercolor, and we’d be out of luck. As it is …” She’d brought
down something that looked like a photographer’s finishing tray as well: ashallow box with raised sides, the seams sealed with pitch. Holding her
breath, she lifted the paper screen and slowly lowered it into the tray.
“Water, please, nurse,” she murmured, reaching out a hand toward the big
mulberry-colored pitcher that sat on the sideboard, always full of clean water.
Roger edged off the bench—leaving a small puddle on the floor, he saw—
and fetched it.
She sprinkled water carefully over the drawing until it was quite saturated
—“So it will stick to the screen and not float,” she explained—and then
poured more water into the tray, letting it rise until it just covered the sheet of
paper.
“All right.” She set down the heavy pitcher with a small sigh of relief.
“Now we let it soak for … oh, twenty-four hours should be plenty. That will
dissolve the fiber of the drawing paper, which will then bond with the fiber of
the patch—while not disturbing the lines of the drawing.” Roger saw her
cross her fingers briefly behind her back. She smiled at Fanny.
“So then we press it, dry it, and we’ll essentially have a new sheet of paper
—but with your drawing just like it is.”
Fanny had been watching the pouring with the hypnotized gaze of a frozen
rabbit watching a fox, but with Brianna’s words, she looked up and let her
breath out in a huge “Ohhhhh!”
“Oh, 
thank
 you! Thank you 
so
 much!” She pressed her palms against her
cheeks, gazing at the drawing as though it had suddenly come to life.
And Roger had the sudden feeling that it 
had.
 To this point, he’d seen it
purely as something Fanny valued, without really noticing the drawing itself.
Now he saw it.
Whoever had drawn it had been a talented artist—but the girl on the page
had been something special in herself. Beautiful, yes, but with a sense of …
what? Vitality, attraction—but she also gave off an air of challenge, he
thought. And while the beautiful mouth and sidelong glance offered a
seductive half smile, they communicated also determination—and a sense of
simmering rage that raised the hairs on Roger’s nape.
He remembered that this girl had killed a man with her own hands, and
with premeditation.
To save her little sister from a fate she knew too well.
He wondered briefly whether the man who had drawn her that night at the
brothel had then taken her, knowing what he was buying, and perhapsrelishing it. He instantly suppressed the visions conjured up by the thought,
though there was no suppressing the thought itself.
Fanny was standing next to him, still looking at the last physical remnant
of her sister. He put an arm around her shoulders, gently, and thought to the
girl whose face glimmered in the water, her memory surviving wreck and
dissolution, 
Don’t worry. We’ll see that she’s safe, no matter what. I promise
you.49
Your Friend, Always
From Brianna Fraser MacKenzie (Mrs.)
Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina
To Lord John Grey, c/o Harold, Duke of Pardloe, Colonel of His
Majesty’s Forty-sixth Regiment of Foot, Savannah, Georgia
Dear Lord John—
I received your very gracious offer of a commission to paint the
portrait of Mrs. Brumby, and I accept with great pleasure!
Thanks also for your offer of safe-conduct, which I also accept with
gratitude for your thoughtfulness, as my husband and children will
accompany me. My husband has important business to conduct in
Charles Town, so we’ll proceed there first—though briefly!—and then
come on to Savannah, reaching you, God willing and the creek don’t
rise, as people say hereabouts (I’m told the saying was originally to
do with the Creek tribe of Indians, who were rather belligerent, and
who could blame them, but given the weather in the mountains, I think
water is a much more likely impediment to travel), before the end of
September.
That being the case, perhaps it would expedite matters if you were
to send whatever we require in the way of a safe-conduct in care of
Mr. William Davies of Charlotte, North Carolina. We’ll pass through
Charlotte on our way to Charles Town (which, as I’m sure you know,
is presently in the hands of the Americans). Mr. Davies is a friend of
my father’s and will keep the documents safely for our arrival.
I can’t wait to see you again!
Your Friend, Always—
Brianna50
Sunday Dinner in Salem
ROGER WAS STRUGGLING TO fit an iron hoop around the top of a large,
potbellied, elderly keg that had been rebuilt, evidently having exploded at
some time in the recent past from the internal pressure of decaying penguins,
judging by the faint but evil smell that seeped from the stained wood. The
weather was cool, but the sun was high and sweat was collecting in his eye
sockets and prickling his scalp.
It was nearly lunchtime, but he had no appetite. He was getting dizzy from
holding his breath. Nonetheless, he looked up hopefully when he heard
footsteps coming down the trail from the springhouse. It wasn’t Bree or
Fanny with a welcome sandwich and bottle of ale, though. It was his father-
in-law, two large stoneware crocks clasped in his arms.
“They’ll smell ye comin’ a mile away,” Jamie remarked with approval,
sniffing. He set down the crocks, from which a strong smell of sauerkraut
was rising like some powerful Germanic genie, and glanced at the recalcitrant
hoop. He squatted by the barrel, embraced it gingerly, and, turning his face
away, squeezed as hard as he could, pressing the aged staves inward enough
that the hoop could be hastily pressed down into place.
“Heugh!” he said, gasping as he stood up. “Spoilt fish?”
“At least.” Roger rose to his feet and stretched his back, groaning. “I don’t
suppose that’s going to improve the smell much,” he said, nodding at the new
keg.
“Well, it will still smell like sauerkraut,” Jamie said, unlidding one of the
crocks. “But cabbage will mostly damp other smells, so the fish—or
whatever it was—willna be so bad. Besides, Claire says your nose gets used
to anything and then ye willna be bothered about it.”
“Oh, does she?” Roger muttered. His mother-in-law was not the one who
was going to travel three hundred miles with a wagonload of reeking barrelsand three children shouting, “Pee-
yew
!” all the way to the coast.
“Ronnie says the other two barrels were used for salt pork and blood
sausage, he thinks. Ye’ll just smell like Sunday dinner in Salem,” his father-
in-law said callously. “Is this one ready?”
“Aye.” Roger picked at a splinter in his thumb, watching covertly as Jamie
peered into the depths of the barrel. He was rather proud of his work—and
work it had been, too: fitting a false second bottom to the barrel, with just
enough space for a thin—but rich—layer of gold underneath, and fitting it
closely enough that it was unlikely to come loose if someone threw it on the
ground.
“Oh, that’s braw!” Still peering inside, Jamie picked the barrel up, weighed
it in his hands, and dropped it experimentally. It landed with a solid thud,
upright. Jamie looked inside, looked up, and smiled. “Sound as a nut, Roger
Mac.”
“Aye, well, Brianna helped me—with the template, I mean. And Tom
MacLeod gave her the wood.”
“She didna tell him what for, I hope,” Jamie said, but with no real fear that
she might have.
“She said she told him she thought of making a cradle for the Ogilvys.”
Young Angus and his wife were expecting their first child, and thus were
now the recipients of outgrown baby smocks, spare clouts, dummies,
suckling bottles, and any amount of probably unwanted advice.
Jamie nodded in approval, and without further ado poured a pale-green
cascade of fragrant sauerkraut into the barrel.
“Ye’ll need to be moving it to and fro, when ye travel,” he said, in answer
to Roger’s unspoken thought that Jamie might have waited until the barrel
was loaded onto the wagon before adding twenty pounds of fermented
cabbage to the weight. “Best to try it whilst ye’re alone, in case anything’s
like to come loose, aye?”
Another voluminous splash, and the sauerkraut oscillated gently three
inches below the wood scar that showed where the lid would fit.
They stood looking thoughtfully into the aromatic mass, and the same
notion occurred to both. He felt Jamie twitch, just as he himself thought that
they’d best check to see if the false bottom had come loose under the force of
the deluge. Jamie was already reaching for a suitable stick, which he handed
Roger.Roger probed the depths of the barrel, smiling a bit. It always gave him a
wee sense of warmth when he suddenly shared an unspoken thought with
someone. It happened now and then with Bree, once in a while with Claire—
but surprisingly often with Jamie. Perhaps it was just that they’d worked
often together, knew each other’s physical ways.
“Right, then. All sound.” Roger threw away the wet stick, picked up the lid
and pressed it down into place, banged it tight with a mallet, and they
finished the job with a final hoop. Crude, but effective.
Jamie stood back, nodding as he rolled down his shirtsleeves.
“Ken, if there’s the slightest danger, leave the barrels and run for it,” he
said. “Ye’ll not have any trouble on the way—bar bandits,” he added as an
afterthought. “Lord John’s wee pass should see ye safe through anything else.
But when ye get to Charles Town …” He lifted one shoulder, and Roger’s
stomach tightened.
Aye, Charles Town. Jamie had written—in a cipher that fascinated Roger
—to Fergus, who would have something planned by the time they arrived—
but what?
Jamie wasn’t concerned with Charles Town, though.
“See what Fergus has in mind; he’s a daring wee snipe, but he’s a father of
five now, so he’s no as reckless as he used to be. But when ye come to
Savannah,” he began, but then stopped, frowning. Whatever he was thinking,
though, Roger wasn’t divining it.
“There’s a soldier called Francis Marion,” Jamie said abruptly. “A
Continental officer. Claire said he’s known in—your time. The Swamp Fox,
she said. He’s no called that just now,” he added hastily, “but if ye might
have heard of him?”
“I have,” Roger said slowly. “But that name is virtually all I know. Is he in
Savannah?”
Jamie nodded, looking easier.
“I had a letter last week, from a man I know. News, aye? And he told about
the British garrison in Savannah—I’d asked, since the lass means to go there
—and he said that this Marion had mentioned to him that Benjamin Lincoln
had it in mind to come down from Charles Town and make a try at taking
Savannah. And, ehm …” Jamie’s eyes were firmly fixed on a puddle of
sauerkraut juice. Oh, so here was the slippery bit. It came out in a rush.
“Yon Randall said in his book that the Americans would attack Savannah
in October—this year,” he added, with a direct look at Roger. “TheAmericans willna succeed, but Marion will be there.”
“And … you want me to talk to him?” The sweat was drying now, and the
wind was cold through his shirt.
“If ye would. The thing is, Marion’s had a great deal of experience wi’
militias.”
“Like you haven’t?” Roger said.
Amusement flickered across Jamie’s face, but he shook his head. “I havena
had any experience in lending a militia I’ve gathered and command to the
Continental army. Marion’s done that several times, from what the letter
says, and I want to ken if he has any sage advice wi’ regard to dealing with
… certain officers.”
“Who’s a bastard and who’s not, ye mean? That 
would
 be a help—but will
ye likely have a choice?”
“All officers are bastards,” Jamie said dryly. “They have to be. So am I.
Some ye can trust, though, and some ye can’t. From what I hear, Marion
might be one to trust.”
“I see.” 
And you want a friend in the army before you go to them. A man to
help you test the waters before you commit yourself. Or, maybe, to warn you
off.
“That’s your choice, isn’t it?” Roger continued. “Whether to commit your
—our—militia to fight with the army—or go it alone, like Cleveland and
Shelby.”
“They’re not alone,” Jamie corrected. “The Overmountain men have each
other to call upon in case of need. But each man keeps his own command.
That’s no the way of it in the army.”
Jamie’s hair had come loose on one side; he pulled off the lacing and retied
it, squinting his eyes against the wind. There was a late summer storm
coming; you could see one approaching for miles, here in the mountains, and
the dark clouds were massing fast over Roan Mountain.
“The choice,” Jamie said, still looking at the oncoming weather, “is
whether to keep the militia close, to protect the Ridge—so far as that’s
possible—or to go out, to seek battle wi’ the British. If we do that, then we
can decide how best to go about it.”
Roger contemplated that one for a few moments.
“‘To be, or not to be?’” he asked. “‘Whether ’tis nobler in the mind,’ and
all that? Because that’s what you—we—are doing, no? We act or we don’t.”
He glanced at Jamie, who was giving a good impression of a coiled spring,and smiled. “Get on wi’ ye; you couldna stay out of a fight if someone paid
ye to do it.”
Jamie had the grace to laugh at that, though he looked self-conscious.
“Aye. But there 
is
 Captain Cunningham. He might get his guns one of
these days, and then what?”
“Well, it wouldna be 
good,
” Roger admitted. “But he’s not going to attack
the Ridge and start burning down his neighbors’ cabins, is he? I mean … he
lives here.”
“True.”
“So the Americans are going to what—lay siege to Savannah?”
“So he says. Randall. But they willna succeed.” There was something odd
in Jamie’s voice every time he said that name. No wonder if there was, but
Roger couldn’t say exactly 
what
 it was: not doubt, not hate, not—not quite—
fear …
“Ye think it’s safe, though, for Bree and the kids to be in Savannah while
this is going on?”
Jamie shrugged and picked up his discarded jacket.
“The Americans willna take the town, and Brianna will be under Lord John
Grey’s protection inside it.”
“And ye trust him. Lord John, I mean.”
It wasn’t a question and Jamie didn’t answer it, but asked another.
“Do ye trust Randall?”
Roger drew in air between his teeth, but nodded.
“About the battles and so on? Aye, I do. I mean—to him it was history; it
happened. And to everyone else in the time he published that book. He
couldna very well say, 
‘This battle happened on this date,’
 when it really
happened on 
that
 date—or didna happen at all. Because there’d be a great
many other historians—and publishers, for that matter—who knew that it did.
If the book was full of … misinformation, let us say, it would never have got
published. I mean—academic publishers check the manuscripts of books they
publish.”
They stood a little in silence, watching the storm come in. Roger would
find Francis Marion, and, God willing, Fergus would find guns. But Roger
found his thoughts sliding away from hard decisions and slippery realities
toward his own more imminent personal prospects.
He was wondering whether Bree might possibly be pregnant, and if so,
how she might respond to the smell of Sunday dinner in Salem.51
Wheels within Wheels
“WHAT WAS IT YOUR mam said to your da about this expedition?” Roger
rolled up his breeches to mid-thigh, eyeing the wagon wheel whose rim
protruded from the burbling middle of a small creek.
“It’s too deep,” Brianna said, frowning at the rushing brown water. “You’d
better take your breeches off. And maybe your shirt, too.”
“
That’s
 what she said? Though she’s likely right about it being too deep
…”
Brianna made a small, amused snort. He’d taken off his shoes, stockings,
coat, waistcoat, and neckcloth, and looked like a man stripped to fight a
serious duel.
“The good news is that with a current like that, you won’t get leeches.
What she said to Da—or what she quoted herself as 
having
 said, which isn’t
necessarily the same thing—was: ‘You’re telling me that you mean to turn a
perfectly respectable Presbyterian minister into a gunrunner, and send him in
a wagon full of dodgy gold and illegal whisky to buy a load of guns from an
unknown smuggler, in company with your daughter and three of your
grandchildren?’”
“Aye, that’s the bit. I was expecting it to be more fun …” Reluctantly, he
shucked his breeks, tossing them onto the shoes and stockings. “Maybe I
shouldn’t have brought you and the kids. Germain and I would have had a
great adventure by ourselves.”
“Yes, that’s what I was afraid of.” She looked over her shoulder, up the
steep bank that the wagon had nearly fallen over when the wheel came off. It
was much too close to the edge for comfort, and she’d sent the kids off to the
other side of the road to collect firewood, in hopes that that would keep them
off the wagon and out of trouble.She had one eye on Roger and one ear out for cries of alarm from above;
part of her mind was calculating how long it might take her to fix the wheel,
if it came out of the creek intact—if it wasn’t, they’d be here overnight—and
a few brain cells were idly listing what food they had, just in case. But the
major part of her attention was focused on her chest.
Flutter.
Thump … thump … thump … thump
Flutter
Not now!
 she thought fiercely. “I do 
not
 have time for this.”
“Time for what?” Roger looked over his shoulder, one foot in the rushing
water and his shirt fluttering coquettishly in the breeze, affording her brief
but entertaining glimpses of his bottom.
“
All
 of this,” she said, rolling her eyes and gesturing up at the half-
collapsed wagon on the road and the voices of children, then down at the
small box of tools at her feet. “Go on, you’ll freeze standing there.”
“Oh, and I won’t, submerged in the nice warm water …” He squared his
shoulders and edged into the creek, feeling his way over the stony bottom, the
water rising past his knees.
Flutter. Flutterflutterflutterflutter
Thump.
She sat down suddenly, put her head on her knees, and breathed, long,
forceful breaths. Vagal maneuvers, try that. What was it called …? Valsalva
maneuver, that was it. She held the last breath and pushed down with her
abdominal muscles, as hard as she could, and held it to the count of ten,
feeling her heart slow and thump harder.
Good …
Thump. Thump. Thump. Thump. Thump …
Roger had reached the wheel and was gripping the rim, half-squatting to
get a good purchase. This improved the view, and she sat back, breathing
gingerly. Listening.
I’m so tired of listening. Just … just
 quit it, 
will you?
The wheel lifted suddenly from its rocky bed and Roger slipped amid the
stones and fell to one knee, whooping as the water surged up to his chest.
“Jesus Effing Christ on bread!”
“Oh, no!” But she was laughing, though trying not to, and hastily kicking
off her own shoes and stockings, she kirtled up her skirts and waded in to
help. The water 
was
 cold, but luckily the wheel was intact, and Roger wasable to turn and thrust it far enough toward her that she could get a one-
handed hold and keep it from getting away while he stood up and got a better
grip from his side.
The wheel was a full three feet in diameter, heavy and awkward, but the
iron tyre-rim had kept the wheel from shattering.
“One 
huge
 blessing!” she said, raising her voice over the sound of the
water. “It’s not broken!”
He nodded, still breathless, and grabbing the rim with both hands took the
wheel from her and waded ashore, dragging it up the bank. He dropped it and
sat down, breathing hard. So did she.
Flutterflutterflutterflutterflutterflutter …
She gasped for breath, and floating spots flashed in the corners of her eyes.
“Jesus, Bree—are ye all right?” His hand was gripping her wrist; she
turned her own hand and grabbed his tight.
Flutterflutterflutterflutter …
“I—oh … yes, I’m—I’m fine.” She forced herself to take a deep breath
and pushed down. And once more, her heart stopped fluttering, though the
slower beat was still ragged.
Thump. Thump-thump-bump. Thump.
 Pause. 
Thump-thump.
“Like hell ye are. Ye’re white as milk. Here, put your head between your
knees.”
She resisted his push on the back of her neck, waving him off.
“No. No, it’s okay. Just—felt a little faint for a minute. Probably low blood
sugar, we haven’t eaten anything since breakfast.”
He took his hand away, slowly, looking at her with intense concern. And
suddenly she realized that she’d have to tell him. It wasn’t going away, and
she didn’t want him worrying every time it happened.
The cool wind on her face was reviving her, and she turned to him,
brushing wisps of hair out of her mouth.
“Roger. I—I have to tell you something.”
He stared at her, frowning a little, and then suddenly his face changed. A
light came into his eyes, a dawning sense of eagerness.
“You’re pregnant? God, Bree, that’s wonderful!”
THE MOMENTARY SHOCK rendered her speechless for a second. Then it
exploded in her chest, in a burst of fury that drowned any thought of herheart.
“You—you—how fucking 
dare
 you?” Some vestigial thought of the kids
above kept her from shrieking, and the words emerged in a strangled snarl.
Her intent showed clearly; Roger’s eyes sprang wide and he grabbed her arm.
“I’m sorry,” he said, low-voiced and even. “Tell me what’s wrong.”
She struggled for a moment, wanting the simple relief of violence, but he
wouldn’t let go, and she stopped and sat there, tears spurting as the only
means of releasing the pressure.
He let go of her arm and put his own around her shoulders. She felt the
cold of his wet shirt and skin, the sogginess of her own hems, but the heat of
fear and frustration rose in her like steam.
She clung to Roger’s arm as though it were a handy tree root in a flood.
She was sobbing and urgently trying not to at the same time, afraid the clench
of emotion would seize her heart and throw it into commotion again, but
unable to hold out anymore against the need to let go, to tell him everything.
“I’m s-sorry,” she kept gasping, and he clutched her tighter to him, rocking
her a little, rubbing her back with his free hand.
“No, I’m sorry,” he said into her hair. “Bree, forgive me. I didn’t mean to
—I 
really
 didn’t mean—”
“Doh,” she said thickly, and sat back a little from him, wiping her knuckles
under her streaming nose. “You don’t—it’s nod you. I know you want
another baby, but—”
“Not if you don’t,” he assured her, though she could hear the longing in his
voice. “I wouldn’t risk you, Bree. If you’re afraid, if you—”
“Oh, God.” She waved a hand to stop him. She’d stopped sobbing and was
just huddled in his arms, breathing. Her heart was beating. Normally.
“Lub-dub,” she said. “Lub-dub, lub-dub … that’s what textbooks say a
heartbeat sounds like. But it doesn’t, really.”
Momentary silence. He stroked her hair, cautiously.
“No?”
“No.” She took a deep, free breath, feeling it go all the way to her
fingertips. “And no, I’m not crazy, either.”
“I’ll take your word for it.” He released her gently and looked searchingly
into her face. “Are ye all right, Bree?” He looked so anxious that she nearly
started crying again, out of remorse.
“Sort of …” She gulped, sniffed, and made a huge effort to sit up straight
and get hold of herself. At this point, she realized that Roger was sittingbeside her in nothing but his wet-tailed shirt and she started to laugh, but
caught herself, fearing that it might all too easily become hysterics.
“Put on your pants and I’ll tell you everything,” she said, straightening her
shoulders.
“Mummeeeeeee!” Mandy was calling from the edge of the roadway above,
waving her arms. “Mummy, we’re 
hunnnnngry
!”
“I’ll get them something,” Roger said, hastily reassuming his breeches.
“You wash your face and … drink water. Take it easy and I’ll be right back.”
He scrambled up the bank, calling for Jem and Germain, and after a
minute, she’d pulled herself together enough to do as he’d said—wash and
have a drink of water. The water from the stream was good: cold and fresh,
with a faint spicy taste of watercress, and having something—even water—in
her stomach seemed to settle her.
Thump. Thump. Thump.
 True, there was a lesser 
thump
 following the main
one, but it was the solid, reassuring rhythm of the 
thump
 that gave her—well,
gave her heart. She smiled at the thought and wiped her wet hands through
her hair, which had come loose from its ribbon.
She was kneeling on the grass beside the wheel when Roger came down
again, bearing gifts in the form of two boiled eggs, a chunk of dry bread
rubbed with olive oil and garlic, and a bottle of ale. She started with the ale.
“It’s not so bad,” she said, nodding at the wheel. “One of the sawed felloes
came loose, but it’s not broken. I can fit it back and put a wire screw in—”
“To hell with the wheel,” he said, though mildly. “Eat an egg and tell me
what’s going on.” His face showed nothing but concern, but the set of his
shoulders said he wouldn’t leave it.
She took a long drink of ale for fortitude, stifled a belch, and told him.
“I keep thinking that it will just go away. That once it stops, it won’t
happen again. But I keep listening for it, on edge … and then it 
doesn’t
happen for a week, two weeks, three … and I’ve started to relax and then
wham!
 There it is again.” She looked up at him apologetically. “I’m sorry I
fell apart. But you know, it’s kind of 
like
 pregnancy—there’s this thing inside
you, 
part
 of you, but you can’t control it and it just takes your body and …
does things with it.” She glanced down and began picking fragments of
eggshell out of the grass.
“And it might kill you,” she said, very softly. “Though Mama says it’s not
life threatening—except for the maybe-giving-you-a-stroke thing.”“Leave those—eggshells are part of the landscape.” He took her
unresisting hand and kissed it gently. “Do you have willow bark with you?”
“Yes. Mama made up a kit for me.” She smiled a little, despite the
situation, and gestured up the hill, toward the lopsided wagon. “In my bag.
Twenty-four packets of willow bark, each good for a three-cup brew. She
thought that would last me until we got to Charleston.
“One more thing,” she said, and took a deep, snuffling breath. Her nose
was beginning to clear and she could breathe again.
“Aye?”
“Pregnancy and this—heart thing. Mama says that it’s like a lot of other
things—pregnancy 
might
 make it go away, either temporarily or even
permanently. But it might also make it a lot worse.” She blew her nose on a
wet handkerchief. “And she didn’t say this, but I thought of it later—what if
it’s something … I mean, Mandy’s heart. Did I—give that to her?”
“No,” he said firmly. “No, we know that’s a common birth defect. Patent
ductus arteriosus, your mum said. You didn’t cause it. Though …”
She wanted to believe him, but the doubts and thoughts she’d been
suppressing for the last few months were all bubbling out.
“Your great-whatever-grandfather. Buck. He had something wrong with
his heart, didn’t he?”
Roger’s face went momentarily blank.
“Aye, he did,” he said slowly. “But it—I mean, it seemed to be an effect of
coming through the stones.” His hand went to his own chest, unconsciously,
and he rubbed it slowly. “He was having an … attack, a seizure … right when
we came through. But then it got better—and then it got much worse later.
That’s when we met Hector McEwan.”
Her breathing was a lot easier. There was something about logical thought
that short-circuited emotion. Maybe that’s why people said you should count
to ten when you were upset …
“I wish I’d asked him more about it,” she said. “But”—she touched her
own chest, where her twitchy heart was presently beating quietly—“I wasn’t
having anything like this at the time.”
She could see that he didn’t want to say it, but she could tell what he was
thinking, because it was the logical conclusion and she was thinking it, too.
“Maybe it—the damage, if that’s what it is—gets worse, the more often
you do it? Travel, I mean?”“God, I don’t know.” He glanced up the hill. The kids’ voices were fainter;
they were off in the woods on the other side of the road. “It doesn’t seem to
have hurt Jem, or … or me. Or your mother. But—it only just occurred to
me: your mother traveled through the stones while she was pregnant with
you. Maybe that …?” He touched her chest, gently.
“Too small a sample size.” She laughed, shakily. “And I didn’t travel with
Mandy. Don’t worry. Mama said the odds of someone my age and my state
of health having a stroke were infinitesimal. As for pregnancy …”
“Bree.” He stood and pulled her to her feet, facing him. “I meant it,
m’aoibhneas.
 I’d never risk your life, your health—or your happiness.” He
tilted his head so they were forehead-to-forehead, eye-to-eye, and he felt her
smile. “D’ye not know how much you mean to me?” he said. “Let alone the
kids. For that matter … do ye really think I’d risk you dying on me and
leaving
 me wi’ those wee fiends?”
She laughed, though he could see the tears still glimmering at the corners
of her eyes. She squeezed his hands, hard, then let go and dug for a
handkerchief in her pocket.
“‘
M’aoibhneas
’?” she asked, shaking the handkerchief out and wiping her
nose with it. “I don’t know that one. What does it mean?”
“Joy,” he said gruffly, and cleared his throat. “My joy.” He nodded at the
wheel and its sprung tyre. “What is it they say? Happiness is someone who
can mend ye when you’re broken?”
IT TOOK LESS than an hour to mend the wheel—so far as she could do that.
“It really needs a blacksmith to put fresh rivets in the tyre,” she said, rising
from a squat by the freshly attached wheel. “All I had was flat-headed tacks
for the felloes and a couple of really crude screws and some wire, but—”
“We’ll drive slowly,” Roger said. He shaded his eyes, judging the height of
the sun. “There’s a good three hours of daylight left. And I think there’s a
place called Bartholomew, or Yamville, or something like that on this road.
Might be big enough to boast a blacksmith.”
The kids had exhausted themselves running up and down the trace, playing
tag and hide-and-seek while she was mending the wheel. A solid lunch of
cold boiled potatoes (remarkably good with a little salt and vinegar) and eggs,
with a good dollop of sauerkraut for vitamin C, and apples to finish off—they
had a bag of small greenish-yellow apples, sweet but tart—and Mandy wasout cold, curled up in the wagon bed with her head on a sack of oats, and Jem
and Germain yawning beside her but determined not to fall asleep and miss
anything.
Roger felt much the same. The trace had widened into an actual road, but
there was no one on it; they hadn’t passed or met anyone in the last two
hours, and the horses had slowed, so the forest passed quietly, tree by tree,
rather than the jolting green blur of the earlier part of the journey. It was
soothing, hypno … hyp—
“Hey!” Brianna grabbed his arm, startling him back into wakefulness. By
reflex, he hauled back on the reins and the horses stopped, snorting, their
sides slicked with sweat.
“You’d be dead on your feet, if you were standing up,” she said, smiling.
“You crawl in back with Mandy for a while. I’ll drive.”
“Nah, I’m fine.” He resisted her attempt to take the reins from him, but in
the process he lost control of his face and yawned so widely that his ears
roared with the sound of distant surf and his eyes watered.
“Go,” she said, gathering the reins up neatly and twitching them across the
horses’ backs, clicking her tongue before he could argue. “I’m fine. Really,”
she added more softly, looking at him.
“Aye. Well … maybe just for a bit.” He couldn’t bring himself to leave her
alone on the bench, though, and groped under it for the big canteen. He
splashed water into his face, drank a little, and put the plug back in, feeling
slightly more alert.
“What else have ye got in your magic bag?” he asked, having spotted the
canvas rucksack under the bench next to the canteen. “Besides your tea?”
“Some of my small tools,” she replied, glancing at the bag. “And a good
thing, too. A few books—presents, and a few toys for Mandy, and the Grinch
book I made for her. She wanted to bring 
Green Eggs and Ham,
 but 
that
wouldn’t do.”
Roger smiled at the thought of the Brumbys and their society friends
spotting 
the big bright-orange book. Bree was slowly working on handmade
approximations of some of the other Dr. Seuss books, with her own
whimsical versions of the drawings and as much of the original verse as she
and Claire could remember between them. They were by no means as eye-
catching as the real thing, but also much less likely to cause more than a
smile or a puzzled frown, should anyone look through one.“And what if you meet a printer in Savannah, who catches sight of it and
wants to publish the book?” he asked, trying to sound no more than mildly
curious. He’d almost got over worrying about exposing bits of future culture
to the eighteenth century, but it still gave him an uneasy feeling at the back of
his neck, as though the Time Police might be lying in wait to spot 
Horton
Hears a Who!
 and denounce them. To whom? he wondered.
“I guess it would depend how much he offered me,” she said lightly. She
felt his resistance, though, and transferred the reins to her left hand in order to
pat his.
“Historical friction,” she said. “There are all kinds of things—ideas,
machines, tools, whatever—that were—are, I mean—discovered more than
once. Mama said the hypodermic needle was independently invented by at
least three different people, all around the same time, in different countries.
But other things are invented or discovered and they just … sit. No one uses
them. Or they’re lost, and then found again. For years—centuries, sometimes
—until 
something
 happens, and suddenly it’s the right time, and whatever it
is comes suddenly into its own, and spreads, and it’s common knowledge.
“Besides,” she added practically, nudging the bag with her foot, “what
harm could it do to loose a bastardized version of 
The Cat in the Hat
 on the
eighteenth century?”
He laughed in spite of his uneasiness.
“Nobody would print that one. A story showing children being deliberately
disobedient to their mother? And 
not
 suffering Dire Consequences for doing
it?”
“Like I said. Not the right time for a book like that,” she said. “It wouldn’t
… stick.”
She’d got over the emotional breakdown altogether now—or at least that’s
what she looked like. Long red hair spilling loose down her back, face
animated but not troubled, her eyes on the road and the horses’ bobbing
heads.
“And then I have Jane,” she said, nodding at the bag and lowering her
voice. “Speaking of dire consequences, poor girl.”
“Ja—oh, Fanny’s sister?”
“I mended the drawing, but I promised Fanny that I’d paint Jane, too,”
Bree said, and frowned a little. “Make her more permanent. And Lord John
says Mr. Brumby is providing me with the best painting supplies that money
and a solid Tory reputation can buy in Savannah. I couldn’t persuade Fannyto let me take her drawing, but she did let me copy it so I’d have something
to work from.”
“Poor girl. Girls, I should say.” Claire had told Brianna, after the uproar
over Fanny’s getting her monthly, what had happened to Jane, and Bree had
told him.
“Yes. And poor Willie, too. I don’t know if he was in love with Jane or just
felt responsible for her, but Mama said he showed up at her funeral in
Savannah, looking awful, with that huge horse. He gave Da the horse, for
Fanny—he’d already given Fanny to him, to take care of—and then he just
… left. They haven’t heard anything about him since.”
Roger nodded, but there wasn’t much to say. He’d met William, Ninth Earl
of Ellesmere, once, several years before, for roughly three minutes, on a quay
in Wilmington. A teenager then, tall and thin as a rail—and with a striking
resemblance to Bree, though he was dark-haired—but with a lot more
confidence and bearing than he’d have expected from someone that age. He
supposed that was one of the perquisites of being born (at least theoretically)
to the hereditary aristocracy. You really did think the world—or a good part
of it—belonged to you.
“Do you know where she was buried? Jane?” he asked.
She shook her head. “In a private cemetery on an estate outside the city, is
all. Why?”
He lifted one shoulder, briefly. “I thought I’d maybe pay my respects. So I
could tell Fanny I’d gone and said a prayer for her sister.”
She glanced at him, soft-eyed.
“That’s a really good thought. I tell you what: I’ll ask Lord John where it is
—Mama said he arranged for Jane to be buried, so he’ll know where. Then
you and I can go together. Do you think Fanny would like it if I made a
sketch of the grave? Or would that be too—upsetting?”
“I think she’d like it.” He touched her shoulder, then smoothed the hair
back from her face and bound it with his handkerchief. “You wouldn’t have
anything edible in that bag, would you?”52
Ripe for the Harvest
From Colonel Benjamin Cleveland
To Colonel Fraser, Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina, Colonel John
Sevier, Colonel Isaac Shelby, etc ….
Dear Sirs:
This is to inform you that as of the 14th proximo, I shall be riding
with my Militia through the Farms and Settlements that lie between
the lower Bend of the Nolichucky and the hot springs, with the intent
of harassing and dislodging such Men as be of a Loyalist Disposition
living therein and I invite you to join me in this Undertaking.
If you are of like Mind with me in appreciating the Threat we
harbor in our Busom and the Necessity of Exturpating it, bring your
Men prepared with their Arms and join me at Sycamore Shoals upon
the 14th.
Yr. Srv.
B. Cleveland
“WHAT ARE OUR CHOICES?” I asked, trying to sound calmly objective.
Jamie sighed and set down the ledger.
“I can ignore Cleveland’s letter—including his spelling. Like the last one.
Nobody kens I’ve had it but you and Roger Mac and the tinker who brought
it. Fat Benjie willna wait long for my answer; he’ll have his harvest in soon,
and he’s hot to be about his hunting before the weather turns.”
“That would buy us a little time, at least.”
One corner of his mouth turned up.
“I like the way ye say ‘us,’ Sassenach.”I flushed a little. “I’m sorry. I know it’s you that has to do the dirty work.
But—”
“I wasna joking, Sassenach,” he said softly, and smiled at me. “If I get torn
limb from limb doin’ this, who’s going to stitch me back together, if not
you?”
“Don’t even joke about being torn limb from limb.”
He looked at me quizzically, then nodded, accepting it.
“Or … I can send back an answer tellin’ him I have my hands full wi’ the
local Loyalists and I daren’t leave them loose to cause mischief on the Ridge.
And that, Sassenach, is more than halfway true, but I dinna think I want
either to say such a thing to Cleveland—nor do I want to put my name to
such a thing on paper. Say I did write that—and that someone amongst
Cleveland’s acquaintance then takes it into his head to send my wee note to
the newspapers in Cross Creek?”
That was a good point, and my stomach curled a little. Putting his name to
any sort of political document these days could be essentially painting a
target on his back. On all our backs.
“Still … it’s not as though anyone in western North Carolina has any
doubts as to your loyalties,” I objected. “I mean, you 
were
 one of
Washington’s field generals.”
“Aye, I was,” he said cynically. “‘Were’ being the significant word. Half
the folk who ken I was a general—for the span of a month or so—also think
that I’m a traitorous poltroon who abandoned my men on the battlefield.
Which I did. It wouldna surprise any of them to hear I’d turned my coat red.”
And joining the Overmountain men to harass and murder Loyalists would
go some way toward restoring his reputation as a dyed-in-the-wool patriot, I
supposed.
“Oh, nonsense.” I got up and came behind him, putting my hands on his
shoulders and squeezing. “No one who knows you would think that for a
moment, and I’d be willing to bet that most people in North Carolina never
heard of Monmouth and haven’t got even the slightest idea that you fought
there—let alone what really happened.”
What really happened.
 True, he technically had deserted his men on the
field in order to keep me from bleeding to death—even though the battle had
ended, and the men in question were all county militias whose enlistment was
already up or due to be up the next day. Only the fact that he had formally
resigned his commission—in writing, such as it was—at that point had kepthim from being court-martialed. That, and the fact that George Washington
was so furious with Charles Lee’s behavior on the field at Monmouth that he
was unlikely to turn on Jamie Fraser—a man who had followed him through
those fields and fought alongside his men with courage and gallantry.
“Take three deep breaths and let them go; your shoulders are hard as
rocks.”
He obediently complied with this instruction, and after the third breath
bent his head so I could knead the back of his neck, as well as his shoulders.
His flesh was warm, and touching him gave me a reassuring sense of solidity.
“But what I likely 
will
 do,” he said into his chest, “is to send Cleveland and
the others each a bottle o’ the two-year-old whisky, along wi’ a letter saying
that my barley’s just been cut and I canna leave it to rot, or there’ll be no
whisky next year.”
That made me feel considerably better. The Overmountain men were
rebels, and some—like Cleveland—might be bloodthirsty fanatics, but I was
sure that all of them had their priorities straight when it came to whisky.
“Excellent thought,” I said, and kissed the back of his neck. “And with
luck, we’ll have an early winter with a lot of snow.”
That made him laugh, and the tightness in my lower back relaxed, though
my hands felt empty when I took them away.
“Be careful what ye wish for, Sassenach.”
The light of the setting sun was behind him now, his profile black in
silhouette. I caught the glint of light on the bridge of his long, straight nose as
he turned his head, and the graceful curve of his skull—but what caught at
my heart was the back of his neck.
He ran a hand beneath the tail of his hair, lifting it casually as he scratched
his head, and the sun shone pure and white as bone through the tiny hidden
hairs that ran down the ridge of muscle there.
Only an instant, and he pulled loose his ribbon and shook out his hair over
his shoulders, a fading, still-dark mass of bronze and silver, sparking in the
sun, and it was gone.
JAMIE’S 
NOLLE PROSEQUI
 to Benjamin Cleveland’s cordial invitation to
come hunt Loyalists was evidently acceptable, for no further missives
followed—and no one came by to set fire to our crops, either. That was justas well, as Jamie’s statement that his barley had been cut was anticipating the
reality by a couple of weeks.
Now, though, the barley lay in sheaves in the fields and was being stuffed
into sacks and hauled away for threshing and winnowing as fast as the
available 
field hands—Jamie, me, Young Ian, Jenny and Rachel, and Bobby
Higgins and his stepson Aidan—could manage. After a grueling day of
working the harvest, we would stagger back to the house, eat whatever I had
managed to put together in the morning—generally a stew made of greasy
beans, rice, and anything else I could find in the bleary gray light of dawn—
and fall into bed. Except Jamie.
He would eat, lie down before the hearth for one hour, then get up, dash
cold water in his face, pull on the least filthy of his two work shirts, and go
out to meet the militia in the big clearing below the house. He would set
Bobby to drilling whoever had shown up, while he talked with the
newcomers, persuading them to join, sealing their engagement with a silver
shilling (he had sixteen left, hidden in the heel of one of his dress boots) and
the promise of a mount and a decent gun. Then he would take over the
drilling, as the light gradually seeped out of the land, drawn up into the last
brilliance of the sky, and when the sun finally disappeared he would stagger
up to bed and—with luck—get his boots off before collapsing facedown
beside me.
Other men needed to tend to their harvest and butchering as well, though,
so the attendance was spotty—and would be, he’d told me, until mid-
October.
“By which time, I might possibly have a few horses and rifles in hand to
give them.”
“I hope Mr. Cleveland’s friends all have harvests to look after, too,” I said,
crossing the fingers of both hands.
He laughed and poured a ewer of water over his head, then set it down and
stood for a moment, hands braced on the washstand, head down, dripping
into the basin—and all over the floor.
“Aye,” he said, into the dark cavern of his long, wet hair. “Aye, they do.”
He didn’t straighten up immediately, and I could see the depth of each slow
breath as it swelled his back. Finally, he stood up straight and, shaking his
head like a wet dog, took the linen towel I offered him and wiped his face.
“Cleveland’s rich,” he said. “He’s got servants to mind his fields and his
stock and let him play hangman. I dinna have that luxury, thank God.”53
First Foot
ON SEPTEMBER 16, OUR front door closed for the first time. It was a thing
of beauty, solid oak, planed and sanded smooth as glass. Jamie and Bobby
Higgins had put in the hinges and hung the door before lunch, and had
finished installing the knob, lock, and mortise plate (the lock purchased at
hideous expense from a locksmith in Cross Creek) just before sunset. Jamie
swung the door closed with an impressive 
thud
 and threw the bolt with a
ceremonious flourish, to the applause of the assembled family—which at the
moment included Bobby and his three sons, invited to share supper with us
and provide a little company for Fanny, as she missed Germain, Jem, and
Mandy cruelly.
We’d laid wagers over supper as to who might be the first person to knock
at our new front door, with guesses ranging from Aodh MacLennan (who
spent more time with us than with his own family—“Why would he bother to
knock, Sassenach?”) to Pastor Gottfried—an outsider at twenty to one, as he
lived in Salem. At dawn the next morning, Jamie had drawn the bolt and
gone out to tend the stock, but now we were finishing our noon meal, and no
strange step had ventured yet upon our virgin threshold.
I was peering into the depths of my cauldron to see how much soup was
left, repressing an urge to declaim the witches’ speech from 
Macbeth
—
largely because I couldn’t remember any more of it than “Double, Double,
toil and trouble,” with scanty additional recollections of eyes of newt and toes
of frog—when suddenly a measured 
bam-bam-bam
 echoed through the
house.
“Eee!” Orrie leapt up—spilling his soup—but Aidan, Rob, and Fanny were
all faster, and hit the hall at a dead heat, squabbling over who should answer
the door.“The manners of you, ye wee gomerels,” Jamie said mildly, coming up
behind them. He grabbed both boys by the shoulders and pushed them aside.
“And you, too, Frances, what are ye thinking, scrabbling wi’ the lads?”
Fanny blushed and gave way, allowing him the honor of answering his own
front door.
I’d come out into the hall, curious to see who our caller was. Jamie was so
tall that I couldn’t see past him, but I heard him greet whoever it was in
Gaelic, with a formal honorific. He sounded surprised.
I was surprised, too, when he stepped back and gestured Hiram Crombie
into the hall.
Hiram lived toward the west end of the cove, well down the slope, and
usually ventured away from his own neck of the woods only to come to
church of a Sunday. I didn’t think he’d ever come to the house before.
A spare, dour-looking man, he was the 
de facto
 headman of the village of
fisher-folk who had emigrated, 
en masse,
 from the far north near Thurso, to
settle at the Ridge. I looked automatically over my shoulder for Roger; the
fisher-folk were all rock-ribbed Presbyterians, who tended to keep to
themselves; Roger was probably the only person in the household who could
be thought of as being on truly cordial terms with Hiram—though Mr.
Crombie would at least speak to me, after the events surrounding his mother-
in-law’s funeral.
Roger was gone, though. And it appeared that, in fact, Hiram had things
other than religion on his mind.
He’d doffed his hat—his good hat, I saw—when he came in, and gave me
a small nod of acknowledgment, then cast a glance at the knot of children,
blinked without changing expression, and turned to Jamie.
“A word with ye, 
a mhaighister
?”
“Oh. Aye, of course, Mr. Crombie.” He stepped back and gestured toward
the door of his study—known to all and sundry as the speak-a-word room. 
He
met my eyes as he followed Hiram into the study, and gave me a wide-eyed
shrug in response to my questioning look. 
Hell if I know,
 it said.
I SHOOED THE children off to the creek to look for crawdads, leeches,
cress, and anything else that seemed useful, and retired into my surgery,
seizing the rare moment of leisure to ramble through the pages of myprecious new 
Merck Manual,
 keeping one ear out in case Jamie wanted
anything for Hiram.
One of the unusual accoutrements of my new surgery was a cane-bottomed
rocking chair. Jamie had made it for me—in the evenings, over a period of
months—from ashwood, with rockers of rock maple, and got Graham Harris,
the local expert, to cane the bottom, assuring me that the chair would outlast
me and any number of subsequent generations, rock maple being called that
because it was hard as stone. The chair was remarkably helpful for soothing
babies or small, wiggly children that I wanted to examine—and just as
helpful for calming my own mind when I had to retreat from the stresses of
daily life, in order to avoid throttling people.
At the moment, though, I was content in mind and body, and absorbed in
finding out what the modern treatment for interstitial cystitis might be.
Lifestyle adjustment
Up to 90% of patients improve with treatment, but cure is rare.
Treatment should involve encouraging awareness and avoidance of
potential triggers, such as tobacco, alcohol, foods with high
potassium content, and spicy foods.
Drug therapies …
Granted, there was nothing I could actually 
do
 with much of the information
—no one on the Ridge ate spicy food to start with, but my chances of talking
any of them out of using tobacco, alcohol, or raisins were low. As for drugs,
the only applicable substance I had was my reliable willow-bark tea. Beyond
curiosity, though, there was somehow a great comfort in the sense of
authority in the book; the feeling that there was someone—many someones—
who had blazed a trail for me; I wasn’t completely alone in the daily struggle
between life and death.
I’d felt such reassurance for the first time when I, a fledgling nurse, was
given a copy of the U.S. Army’s 
Handbook for the Sanitary Troops
 by a
Yank medic I’d met during my first posting during the War. 
My
 War, as I
always thought of it.
That’s what the Yanks called us—the enlisted medical support—the
sanitary troops. After the first week in a field hospital, I wanted to laugh
(when I wasn’t crying with my head under a pillow) at the name, but itwasn’t wrong. We were fighting with everything we had, and cleanliness was
not the least of our tools.
Nor was it now the least of mine.
The amount of water needed by the average man daily for drinking
purposes varies according to the amount of exercise he takes and the
temperature of the atmosphere; a fair average is three or four pints in
addition to that which he takes in food. On the march the amount is
limited by the capacity of the canteen to about one quart, and this
quantity should be very carefully husbanded.
A water is said to be potable when it is fit to drink. A potable water
is an uncontaminated water; no matter how clear, bright, and
sparkling a water may be, it is not potable if it is so situated that it
can be fouled by fecal matter, urine, or the drainage from manured
lands. There is a very common error that all spring water is pure;
many springs, especially those which are not constantly flowing, draw
their water from surface sources.
I should copy that out in my own casebook, I thought, glancing toward the
big black book on the shelf above the leech jars. It was a comforting thought,
that someday that casebook, too, might give a sense of authority to another
physician, arming them with the gift of my own experience, my own
knowledge.
I flipped Merck’s pages slowly, and paused, my eye caught by the heading
Malaria.
 Was there anything new in the treatment of malaria? I’d seen Lizzie
Beardsley two weeks ago, and she’d assured me that she’d taken the Jesuit
bark that Mrs. Cunningham had given me … but she was pale and her hands
trembled when she changed the diaper on little Hubertus, and when I pressed
her, she’d admitted to feeling “a bit dizzy, now and then.”
“Small wonder,” I muttered to myself. The eldest of her four children was
not quite five, and while one of the Beardsley boys—well, one of her
husbands, why not be blunt about it?—was usually at home to be doing the
outside chores while the other hunted or fished or ran traplines, Lizzie did
virtually all of the heavy household work, alone, while nursing a new infant
and feeding and minding the others.
“Enough to make anyone dizzy,” I said out loud. Being in the Beardsley
cabin for more than a few minutes made 
me
 dizzy.I could hear noises, voices in the hallway. Mr. Crombie had done his
business with Jamie, then. They sounded cordial enough …
Who 
would
 read my writings? I wondered. Not only the casebook, but the
small book of domestic medicine that I’d had published in Edinburgh two
years before? That one had a number of helpful remarks on the importance of
handwashing and cooking one’s food thoroughly—but the casebook had
more valuable things: my notes on the production of penicillin (crude as my
efforts were), drawings of bacteria and pathogenic microorganisms with a
brief exegesis on Germ Theory, the administration of ether as an anesthetic
(rather than an internally applied remedy for seasickness, its principal use at
the moment), and …
“Oh, 
there
 ye are, Sassenach.” Jamie’s head poked into the surgery,
wearing an expression that made me shut Merck abruptly and sit up.
“What on earth’s happened?” I said. “Is something wrong with one of the
Crombies?” I was making a quick mental inventory of my first-aid kit as I got
to my feet, but Jamie shook his head. He came all the way in and shut the
door carefully behind him.
“The Crombies are thriving,” he assured me. “And so are all the Wilsons
and the Baikies. And the Greigs, too.”
“Oh, good.” I sank back into my rocking chair. “What did Hiram want,
then?”
“Well,” he said, with a resumption of the odd expression, “Frances.”
“SHE’S 
TWELVE,
 FOR God’s sake!” I said. “What do you mean, he wants
permission for his brother to court her? What brother, for that matter? I didn’t
think he had one.”
“Oh, aye. Half brother, I should ha’ said. Cyrus. The tall one that looks like
a stem of barley gone to seed. They call him 
a’ Chraobh Ard.
 D’ye not have
anything drinkable in here, Sassenach?”
“That one,” I said, pointing at a black bottle with a menacing skull-and-
crossbones marked in white chalk. “It’s rhubarb gin. 
A’ Chraobh Ard
?” I
smiled, despite the situation. The young man in question—and he was a 
very
young man; I didn’t think he could be more than fifteen himself—was indeed
very tall; he topped Jamie by an inch or two—but spindly as a willow shoot.
“What can Hiram be thinking?” I asked. “His brother surely isn’t old
enough to marry anybody, even if Fanny was, which she isn’t.”“Aye.” He picked up a cup from the counter, looked suspiciously into it,
and smelled it before putting it down and pouring a measure of gin into it.
“He admits as much. He says that Cyrus saw the lassie at kirk and would like
to come a-visiting—in an official way, ken?—but Hiram doesna want his
attention to be misunderstood or taken for disrespect.”
“Oh, yes?” I got up and poured a small splash of gin for myself. It had a
lovely fragrance to match its flavor—sweet but with a noticeably tart edge.
“What does he 
really
 have in mind?”
Jamie smiled at me and clicked the rim of his wooden cup with mine.
“The militia. Other things, too, but it’s mostly that.”
That was a surprise. While Hiram was, like every other fisherman I had
known, tough as nails, I’d never known him or any other of the Thurso men
to take up arms, beyond occasionally shooting game. As for riding horses …
“See, Captain Cunningham has been preaching about the war again, and
he’s makin’ Hiram uneasy in his mind.”
“Has he, indeed?” What with one thing and another, I hadn’t gone to the
captain’s Sunday services of late. But I knew he was a Loyalist—and there
was that man, Partland, who had tried to bring him rifles. “Do you think he’s
planning to raise his own militia? 
Here?
” That would be more than awkward.
“I don’t think so,” Jamie said slowly, frowning into his gin. “The captain
has his limits, but I think he’s wise enough to ken that he 
does
 have them.
But yon friends of his … Granger and Partland. If they had it in mind to raise
a unit of Loyalist militia—and they do—he’d likely support them. Tell his
congregation about it, I mean, and urge the suitable men to turn out.”
It was odd, I thought, that while whisky warmed the body, gin seemed to
cool it. Or perhaps it was the talk of militias that was giving me a chilly
feeling on the back of the neck.
“But surely Hiram’s not going to listen to Captain Cunningham, is he? I
mean, the captain isn’t strictly speaking a Papist, but from Hiram’s point of
view, Methodists likely aren’t that much better.”
“True.” Jamie licked the corner of his mouth. “And I doubt he’s gone to
many of Cunningham’s sermons himself. But a few of the Thurso folk do, of
course.”
“For entertainment?” I smiled. While both Roger and the captain had small
but devoted congregations, there were not a few of the Ridge inhabitants who
would come to listen to anyone willing to get up and talk, and who satthrough all of the Sunday services, including Rachel’s meetings, later
comparing critical opinions of each preacher’s remarks.
“Aye, mostly. The captain’s no so good as a Punch-and-Judy show—or
even as good as Roger Mac—but he’s something to listen to and talk about.
And Hiram’s cousins have been talking. He doesna like it.”
“And so … he wants his half brother to court Fanny?” I shook my head.
Even with a solid half ounce of rhubarb gin under my belt, I didn’t see the
connection.
“Well, it’s no really about Frances, ken.” He picked up the gin bottle and
smelled it thoughtfully. “Rhubarb, ye say. If I drink more of this, will it give
me the shits?”
“I don’t know. Try it and see,” I advised him, holding out my own cup for
more. “What 
is
 it about, then, and why is Fanny involved?”
“Well, it’s a tie—no a formal one, of course—but a link betwixt Hiram and
me. He sees well enough where things are going, and it will be easier, when
the time comes, for him to go with me, and bring some of his men along, if
there’s a … friendly feeling between the families, aye?”
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.” I took a minute to contemplate that. “You
can’t really be considering marrying Fanny off to the Crombies! It may be
war, but it isn’t the War of the bloody Roses, with dynastic marriages right
and left. I mean, I’d hate to see you end up in a butt of malmsey with a red-
hot poker up your arse, like the Duke of Clarence.”
That made him laugh, and the knot forming under the gin in my stomach
relaxed a little.
“Not yet, Sassenach. No, and I willna let Cyrus trouble Fanny—or even
talk to her formally, if she mislikes the notion. But if the lassie doesna mind
him visiting—and he is a sweet-tempered lad—then … aye, it might help
Hiram when I need to ask him to ride with me and bring his men.”
I tried to envision Hiram Crombie riding into battle at Jamie’s side—and
surprisingly, found it not all that far-fetched. Bar the riding part … the
Thurso people did of course have the occasional mule or nag for transport,
but on the whole, they were deeply suspicious of horses and preferred to
walk. I supposed they could be infantry …
“But I dinna mean Frances to be made uneasy,” he said. “I’ll talk to her—
and you should, too, like women, ken?”
“Like women, forsooth,” I murmured. But he was right. Fanny knew
much, much more of the risks of being a woman than the average twelve-year-old did, and while I doubted that Cyrus would be any sort of threat to
her, I must reassure her that this proposition was entirely hers to decline.
“All right,” I said, still a bit reluctant. “Do you know anything about
Cyrus, other than his being tall?”
“Hiram spoke well of the lad. Paid him what I think was a verra high
compliment.”
“What’s that?”
Jamie tossed off the rest of his gin, belched slightly, and set down his cup.
“He says Cyrus thinks like a fish.”
RATHER TO MY surprise, Fanny didn’t seem averse to Cyrus visiting more
formally, when I carefully broached the subject with her.
“He doesn’t really speak any English, though,” she said thoughtfully. “A
lot of the people up at that end of the cove don’t, Germain told me.”
Germain was right; many of the fisher-folk spoke only Gaelic; it was one
reason why they remained as a tight-knit group, somewhat separate from the
other residents of the Ridge.
“I’m learning the 
Gàidhlig,
” she assured me, pronouncing it correctly.
“And I suppose I’d learn more from Cyrus.”
“Why?” I asked, rather astonished. “I mean—what makes you want to
learn Gaelic?”
She flushed a little but didn’t look away or down. That strong sense of self-
possession was one of the things that occasionally made Fanny a little
unnerving.
“I heard them singing,” she said. “In the church, with Roger Mac. Some of
the Wilsons and Mr. Greig and his brother came down to listen to him preach
—I think you were gone that day, so you wouldn’t have heard them—but
after the sermon, Roger Mac asked Mr. Greig if he knew …” She shook her
head. “I can’t even say the name, but it was a song in Gaelic, and they sang it,
all of them, and they were beating their hands on the benches like drums and
—the whole church … it was …” She looked at me, helpless to explain, but I
could see the light in her face. “Alive.”
“Oh,” I said. “I’m sorry I missed that.”
“If Cyrus comes to visit me, maybe some of his family will come down
and sing again,” she said. “Besides,” she added, a slight shadow crossing herface, “with Germain and Jemmy gone, Cyrus will be somebody to talk to,
whether he understands me or not.”
HER MENTION OF Germain made me slightly wary, and I went to find
Jamie, who was repairing the barn wall where Clarence, in a fit of pique, had
kicked it and broken one of the boards.
“Do you think maybe you should talk to Hiram before Cyrus comes?” I
said. “I mean, naturally, we don’t want to tell anyone about … where Fanny
came from. But if Cyrus were to—er—make any, um, inappropriate moves
toward her … she might—feel obliged to respond?”
He’d sat back on his heels to listen to me, and at this, he laughed and stood
up, shaking his head.
“Nay bother, Sassenach,” he said. “He’ll not lay a finger on the lass, or
Hiram will break his neck, and Hiram will ha’ told him so.”
“Well, that’s reassuring. Do you think perhaps you should drop a word in
his ear yourself? As Fanny’s 
loco parentis,
 I mean?”
“Locum,”
 he said, “and no. I’ll just bid him welcome and terrify him wi’
my presence. He won’t dare breathe on her, Sassenach.”
“All right,” I said, still a little dubious. “I 
think
 she believed us—believed
you
—when we told her we didn’t expect her to become a whore, but … she
spent half her life in a brothel, Jamie. Even if she wasn’t … participating, her
sister 
was,
 and Fanny surely knew everything that was going on. That sort of
experience leaves a mark.”
He paused, head bent, looking down at the ground, where a small pile of
fresh mule apples marked Clarence’s mood.
“Ye healed me of something a good deal worse, Sassenach,” he said, and
touched my hand gently. He’d touched me with his right hand, the maimed
one.
“I didn’t,” I protested. “You did that yourself—you had to. All I did was
… er …”
“Drug me wi’ opium and fornicate me back to life? Aye, that.”
“It wasn’t fornication,” I said, rather primly—though my hand turned, my
fingers lacing tight with his. “We were married.”
“Aye, it was,” he said, and his mouth tightened, as well as his grip. “It
wasna only you I was swiving, and ye ken that as well as I do.”If I did, it wasn’t anything I was ever going to admit, let alone discuss, and
I let it lie.
“But I grant ye, neither of us could do the like for Frances. Maybe Cyrus
can—by not touchin’ her.” He kissed my hand, let it go, and bent to pick up
his hammer.
OF COURSE I had seen Cyrus Crombie before, at church, but beyond a
second glance at his height hadn’t really taken notice of him. Jamie had
arranged for him to come to the house later in the week with a couple of
cousins, to help with the framing for the third story—and be formally
presented to Fanny.
And so it was that two days later, I climbed to the precarious top of the
house, where the third floor was slowly taking shape amid the creaking and
flapping of rope, wood, and canvas.
“I’m amazed that you aren’t seasick,” I said, finding Jamie in the act of
measuring along one edge of the lofty platform that would someday be an
attic, making chalk marks that were probably less random than they looked.
“I likely would be, if I thought about it,” he said absently. “What brings ye
up here, Sassenach? It’s early for dinner.”
“True. I did bring you food, though.” I dug in my pocket and brought out a
bread roll stuffed with cheese and pickle. “You need to eat more. I can see all
your ribs,” I added disapprovingly.
I could, too; he’d taken off his shirt to work, and the shadows of his ribs
showed clearly in his back, beneath the faded network of his scars.
He merely grinned at me, but rose and took the roll, taking a large bite of it
in the same movement.
“Taing,”
 he said, swallowing, and nodded to the air behind me. “There he
is.”
I turned to look. Sure enough, Cyrus Crombie was coming down the path
behind the house. Tall Tree, forsooth. He had an explosion of light-brown
curls that hung to his shoulders, and an apprehensive expression.
“Aren’t some more of the Crombies meant to come, too?” I asked.
“Aye, they will. I imagine he’s come a wee bit early, in order to have a
word in—well, not quite private, but without Hiram breathin’ down his neck
—with Fanny. Brave of him,” he added with approval.“Should I go down? To chaperone?” I asked, watching the boy. He’d
paused by the well and was taking a roll of cloth from the bag at his belt.
“Nay, Sassenach. I told my sister what was a-do; she’ll keep an eye on
them without scarin’ the shit out of Cyrus.”
“You think 
I
 would?”
He laughed and popped the last bite of roll into his mouth, chewed and
swallowed. I caught a waft of piccalilli and cheese, and my own stomach
gurgled in anticipation.
“I do. D’ye not ken that all the fisher-folk still think ye’re next door to a
witch, if not a 
bean-sithe
 outright? Even Hiram makes the horns behind your
back when he comes near ye.”
I wasn’t at all sure how I felt about that. It was true that I had inadvertently
raised Hiram’s mother-in-law from the dead at her funeral; though she’d died
more permanently a few minutes later, she’d had time to denounce Hiram for
not paying for a sufficiently lavish funeral—but I’d thought the effect might
have worn off by now.
“Who was it who tried to build a tower to heaven and came to a bad end?”
I asked, dismissing the matter of my public image for the moment and
peering over the edge of the platform.
“The men of Babel,” he said, rummaging in his pocket for a scrap of paper
and a pencil. “I dinna think they were expecting company, though. Just
showin’ off for the sake of it. That sort of thing always gets ye in trouble.”
“If we have enough company to justify 
this
”
—
I waved at the long expanse
of rough flooring—“we’ll already 
be
 in trouble.”
He paused and looked at me. He was thin and worn, his skin reddened and
burnt across forearms and shoulders, wisps of ruddy hair flying in the wind,
and his eyes very blue.
“Aye,” he said mildly. “We will be.”
The gurgling in my stomach changed its tune slightly. The third floor was
meant to be attics—in part, for storage, or to provide rooms for a
housekeeper, should I ever find one again—but also to provide a place of
refuge for tenants who might need it. In case …
Jamie’s attention had shifted, though, and he was craning his neck to look
over the edge. He beckoned to me, and I crossed to him. Below, Cyrus
Crombie had opened the roll of fabric and had laid out his tools—mallet,
chisel, and knife—on the rim of the well. He’d drawn up the bucket and now
dipped his fingers into the water and sprinkled it on the tools. I could see thathe was saying something, but he wasn’t speaking loudly, and I couldn’t hear
above the whine of the wind.
“He’s blessing his tools?” I asked, looking at Jamie, who nodded.
“Aye, of course.” He seemed pleased. “Presbyterians may be heretics,
Sassenach, but they still believe in God. I’d best go down now, and bid him
welcome.”54
Moonrise
I WAS STARTLED FROM a solid sleep by Jamie exploding out of bed
beside me. This wasn’t an uncommon occurrence, but as usual, it left me
sitting bolt upright amid the quilts, dry-mouthed and completely dazed, heart
hammering like a drill press.
He was already down the stairs; I heard the thump of his bare feet on the
last few treads—and above that sound, frenzied pounding on the front door.
I shook my head violently and flung off the covers. 
Him or me?
 was the
first coherent thought that formed out of the fog drifting through my brain.
Night alarms like this might be news of violence or misadventure, and
sometimes of a nature that required all hands, like a house fire or someone
having unexpectedly met with a hunting panther at a spring. More often,
though …
I heard Jamie’s voice, and the panic left me. It was low, questioning, with
a cadence that meant he was soothing someone. Someone else was talking, in
high-pitched agitation, but it wasn’t the sound of disaster.
Me, then. Childbirth or accident?
 My mind had suddenly resurfaced and
was working clearly, even while my body fumbled to and fro, trying to recall
what I had done with my grubby stockings. 
Probably birth, in the middle of
the night …
 But the uneasy thought of fire still lurked on the edge of my
thoughts.
There was an obituary with my name on it, and Jamie’s, claiming that we
had perished in a fire that consumed our house. The house had burned, and
we hadn’t, but any hint of fire raised the hairs on my scalp.
I had a clear picture in my mind of my emergency kit and was grateful that
I’d thought to refurbish it just before supper. It was sitting ready on the
corner of my surgery table. My mind was less clear about other things; I’d
put my stays on backward. I yanked them off, flung them on the bed, andwent to splash water on my face, thinking a lot of things I couldn’t say out
loud, as I could hear Fanny’s feet now scampering across the landing.
I reached the bottom of the stairs belatedly, to find Fanny with Jamie, who
was talking with a young girl not much more than Fanny’s age, standing
barefoot, distraught, and wearing nothing more than a threadbare shift. I
didn’t recognize her.
“Ach, here’s Herself now,” Jamie said, glancing over his shoulder. He had
a hand on the girl’s shoulder, as though to keep her from flying away. She
looked as if she might: thin as a broomstraw, with baby-fine blond hair
tangled by the wind, and eyes looking anxiously in every direction for
possible help.
“This is Agnes Cloudtree, Claire,” he said, nodding toward the girl.
“Frances, will ye find a shawl or something to lend the lass, so she doesna
freeze?”
“I don’t n-need—” the girl began, but her arms were wrapped around
herself and she was shivering so hard that her words shook.
“Her mother’s with child,” Jamie interrupted her, looking at me. “And may
be having a bit of trouble with the birth.”
“We c-can’t p-pay—”
“Don’t worry about that,” I said, and, nodding to Jamie, took her in my
arms. She was small and bony and very cold, like a half-feathered nestling
fallen from a tree.
“It will be all right,” I said softly to her, and smoothed down her hair.
“We’ll go to your mother at once. Where do you live?”
She gulped and wouldn’t look up, but was so cold she clung to me for
warmth.
“I don’t know. I m-mean—I don’t know how to say. Just—if you can come
with me, I can take you back?” She wasn’t Scottish.
I looked at Jamie for information—I’d not heard of the Cloudtrees; they
must be recent settlers—but he shook his head, one brow raised. He didn’t
know them, either.
“Did ye come afoot, lassie?” he asked, and when she nodded, asked, “Was
the sun still up when ye left your home?”
She shook her head. “No, sir. ’Twas well dark, we’d all gone to bed. Then
my mother’s pains came on sudden, and …” She gulped again, tears welling
in her eyes.“And the moon?” Jamie asked, as though nothing were amiss. “Was it up
when ye set out?”
His matter-of-fact tone eased her a little, and she took an audible breath,
swallowed, and nodded.
“Well up, sir. Two handbreadths above the edge of the earth.”
“What a very poetic turn of phrase,” I said, smiling at her. Fanny had come
with my old gardening shawl—it was ratty and had holes, but had been made
of thick new wool to start with. I took it from Fanny with a nod of thanks and
wrapped it round the girl’s shoulders.
Jamie had stepped out onto the porch, presumably to see where the moon
now was. He stepped back in and nodded to me.
“The brave wee lass has been abroad in the night alone for about three
hours, Sassenach. Miss Agnes—is there a decent trail that leads to your
father’s place?”
Her soft brow scrunched in concern—she wasn’t sure what “decent” might
mean in this context—but she nodded uncertainly.
“There’s a trail,” she said, looking from Jamie to me in hopes that this
might be enough.
“Take Clarence,” he said to me, over her head. “The moon’s bright
enough. I’ll go with ye.” 
And I think we’d best hurry,
 his expression added. I
rather thought he was right.
CLARENCE WAS NOT enthused at being rousted from his sleep, nor about
carrying two people, even if one was a starveling girl. He kept huffing and
snorting irascibly, walking slowly and blowing out his sides every time I tried
to nudge him into speed with my heels. Jamie had taken Fanny’s enormous
mare, Miranda, she being of a stolid, amiable temperament and stout enough
to bear his weight. She wasn’t all that pleased by the nocturnal expedition,
either, but plodded obligingly through the groves of aspen and larch, poplar
and fir, up the steep, narrow trail that led toward the top of the Ridge.
Clarence followed her rather than be left behind, but he wasn’t in any
hurry about it and I kept losing sight of the shadowy mass of horse and man
—and with them, any notion of where the trail was. I wondered how on earth
the girl had found her way to us through dark and bramble; her legs and arms
were scratched and there were leaves and pine needles in her hair; she
smelled of the forest.The moon was well up the sky by now, a lopsided, tricky lump of a moon
that made it just possible to perceive deceptive openings in the forest, without
actually being bright enough to see anything more than three feet away.
I had Agnes perched in front of me, her shift rucked up and pale white legs
like mushroom stems dangling in the darkness to either side. I wondered
whether she had left home in a panic—or whether perhaps the grubby shift
was her only garment. It smelled faintly of cooking grease and singed
cabbage.
“Tell me about your mother, Agnes,” I said, giving Clarence a solid kick in
the ribs. He twitched his ears in annoyance, and I desisted. He was a good
mule, but not above decanting a rider who aggravated him. “When—about—
did her pains begin?”
She was a little less frightened, now that she had obtained the help she
sought, and gradually grew calmer as she answered my questions.
Mrs. Cloudtree (was there a Mr. Cloudtree in residence? Yes, there was,
though her body stiffened when she mentioned him) was near to her time
(good, not a premature birth), though she’d thought it might be as much as
another two or three weeks (maybe a little early, then … but even so, the
baby should have a reasonable chance …).
Her mother’s pains had come on about midday, Agnes said, and her
mother hadn’t thought it would take long: Agnes had come within four hours
of the waters breaking, and each of her little brothers even faster. (Good, Mrs.
Cloudtree was a multigravida. But in that case, she 
should
 have delivered
fairly quickly and without complications … and plainly she hadn’t …)
Agnes couldn’t explain quite what the trouble was, other than a longer-
than-usual labor. But she knew there 
was
 trouble, and that interested me.
“It’s not …,” she said, pulling the old shawl tighter round her shoulders
and turning her head in an effort to see my face, make me understand.
“Something’s different.”
“Something feels wrong to you?” I asked, interested.
She shook her head dubiously. “I don’t know. I helped, last time, when
Georgie was born. And I was there when Billy came …. I was too little to
help, then, but I could see everything. This is just … different.” I heard her
swallow, and patted her shoulder.
“We’ll be there soon,” I said. I wanted to assure her that everything would
be all right, but she knew better, or she wouldn’t have come running throughthe dark, looking for help. I could only hope that nothing irretrievable had
happened at the Cloudtrees’ cabin in the meantime.
I glanced up, looking for the moon. I’d never managed to shift my sense of
time to stars and planets, rather than the clock, and so was obliged to
calculate time, rather than know it, as Jamie did. 
The moon was a ghostly
galleon …
 drifted through my head. 
Could be,
 I thought, spotting it
momentarily through a break in the dark, fragrant firs surrounding us. 
And a
highwayman came riding … came riding …
I knew all I could know at this point; it was time to stop thinking. Every
birth was different. 
And every death.
 The thought spoke itself inside my mind
before I could stop it, and a shiver ran through me.
I asked a few questions about Agnes’s family, but she had withdrawn into
her own anxiety and wasn’t disposed to talk much further. Beyond the
information that they had built their present cabin in the early summer, I
gained little knowledge of the Cloudtrees beyond their names: Aaron,
Susannah, Agnes, William, and George.
At the top of the Ridge, Jamie halted at the edge of the Bald, as folk called
the high, treeless meadows on the upper slopes of the mountain. As usual,
there was a stiff wind blowing on the Bald, and the shawl I’d pulled over my
head was snatched back and my hair with it, whipping free in the breeze.
Jamie dropped Miranda’s reins, and she immediately lowered her head and
began to munch grass.
Jamie dismounted and came to take Clarence’s bridle. Out from under the
trees now, I could see him plainly by the moonlight; he was smiling up at me,
watching as my hair was lifted straight up off my scalp.
“Dinna take flight just yet, Sassenach. I’ll need Miss Agnes to guide us
from here,” he said, and reached up a hand to her. “Will ye come over to me,
lass?”
I felt her stiffen, but after a moment’s hesitation she nodded and slid off
Clarence. Clarence grunted and turned smartly round, obviously thinking that
now we’d got rid of the girl, it was time to go home.
“Think again,” I told him, reining his head hard round. A short battle of
wills followed, this resolved by Miranda and her riders moving off with the
slow implacability of a steamroller. Clarence snorted and brayed after her,
but she didn’t turn back, and after a moment’s fuming, he snapped into a
tooth-jarring trot and plunged after her. A quarter of an hour later, we crossedthe Cherokee Line. A white blaze, briefly showing by moonlight, marked one
of the witness trees that marked the Treaty Line.
The moon was high overhead, and the trees open enough for me to see
Jamie glance back over his shoulder. I raised my hand in a small wave of
acknowledgment; I’d noticed. A premature birth might not be all Agnes’s
family was risking, settling on Indian land. I was glad that Jamie had insisted
on coming; he spoke enough Cherokee to get along, if that should become
necessary.
The journey took no little time, as Agnes needed to come out into the open
now and again to get her bearings—she could read stars, she said matter-of-
factly—but within an hour, we saw the dim glow of a cabin’s windows,
covered by oiled hide.
I slid off Clarence and pulled down the bag that held my kit.
“I’ll mind the horses,” Jamie said, coming up to take Clarence’s reins.
“Ye’ll need to hurry, I expect?”
Agnes was already at the door, fluttering like a frantic moth, and even from
where we stood, I could hear the deep, guttural noises of a woman deep in
labor.
The door opened suddenly inward, and Agnes fell over the threshold. A
tall, dark figure yanked her to her feet and slapped her across the face.
“Where the hell you 
been,
 girl!”
Clarence’s ears went straight up at the gunshot sound, and when this was
succeeded at once by the high-pitched shrieking of small children, he turned
around and trotted off into the forest.
“You bloody idiot!” I shouted at him. “Come back here!”
“Ifrinn!”
 Jamie dived past me and ran after the mule, saving the rest of his
breath for the chase.
“Who the damnation are 
you
?”
I turned to see a young Cherokee man standing in the flickering light of the
doorway, glaring at me. He was leaning on the doorframe, his long hair
disheveled and blood on his shirt.
I took a deep breath, straightened my spine, and walked up to him.
“I, sir,” I said, “am the midwife. Do please go and sit down.” I didn’t wait
to see if he obeyed this injunction; I had work to do.
My patient was sitting on a crudely made birthing chair near the hearth,
collapsed forward, arms dangling and her dark-blond hair nearly black at the
roots with sweat, the ends dripping over her immense belly. Two little boys,of perhaps five and three, clung to one of her legs, howling. Her legs and feet
were grossly swollen.
“Come here, Billy.” Agnes, her face dead white save for the scarlet palm
print on her cheek and her voice no more than a squeak, took the bigger of
the boys by his collar and pulled him away. “Georgie, you come, too—
come,
I said!” The fright in her voice stirred them, and they turned and clung to her,
whimpering. Agnes looked at me, her eyes huge in mute appeal.
“It will be all right,” I said to her, softly, and squeezed her arm. “Take care
of the little ones. I’ll see to your mama.”
I knelt down and looked up into the woman’s face. A bloodshot blue eye
stared back at me through the snarled wet hair. An eye glazed with
exhaustion—but still an intelligent, conscious eye; she saw me.
“My name is Claire,” I said, and laid a hand on her belly. She was wearing
a filthy shift, so transparent with sweat that her protuberant navel showed
through it. “I’m a midwife. I’ll help you.”
“Jesus,” she whispered, whether in prayer or from simple astonishment, I
couldn’t tell. Then her face clenched into a knot and she curled over her belly
with a bestial noise.
I kept my hand on her, but bent down to one side and peered up through
the hollow of the birthing stool. A narrow slice of pale crown showed for an
instant as she pushed, then disappeared.
I felt the spurt of excitement that always came with imminent birth, and my
hand tightened on her belly. Another spurt came, this one of sudden fear.
Something bloody 
was
 wrong. I couldn’t tell what, but something was very
wrong. I straightened up, and as the pain released its grip, I rose and took the
woman by her shoulders, helping her to sit up. There were no towels to hand;
I lifted my skirt and wiped her face with my petticoat.
“How long have you been pushing?” I asked.
“Too long,” she said tersely, and grimaced. I bent and looked again, and
without her shadow obstructing the situation, I saw that she was dead right.
The perineum was nearly purple and very swollen. That was it: the child was
stuck, the crown of its head battering with each spasm, but not able to come
further.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said, and both her eyes popped open in
astonishment. “Never mind,” I said. “When it lets go”—for the next pain was
coming, I could see it in her face—“lean back against the wall.”Her husband—I assumed that must be the man who’d slapped Agnes—
seemed to have gone outside and was apostrophizing the night in an
incoherent mix of Cherokee and English.
“Right,” I said, as calmly as possible, and put off my cloak and shawl.
“Let’s just see what we have here, shall we, Susannah?”
There were splashes of blood on the dirt floor, but it was dark, with large,
visible clots—just bloody show. She wasn’t hemorrhaging, though there was
a slick of blood on her thighs. Her waters had broken some time earlier; it
was hot and the small room smelled like a Jurassic swamp, fecund and
reeking.
The contractions were coming every minute, powerful ones. I had only
moments between them in which her belly relaxed enough for me to palpate
it, but on the second try I thought I felt … the muscles of her belly tightened
like an iron band, and I counted under my breath, hands still on her.
Relaxation … I 
knew
 where the head was, was the child facing backward? I
pressed hard on the relaxed belly, trying to find the curve of the spine …
“Ngg!”
“It will be all right. Count with me, Susannah … one, two …”
“Rrrrggh!”
I counted silently. Twenty-two seconds and the contraction eased. Spine …
there was the blunt point of an elbow, and there, a curve that had to be the
child’s spine … only it wasn’t.
“Bloody fucking hell,” I said, and Susannah made a noise that might have
been a groan or an exhausted laugh. The rest of my attention was focused on
the thing under my hand. It wasn’t the curve of a spine, nor yet of buttocks. It
was the curve of another head.
It vanished with a new contraction, but I kept my hand doggedly on the
spot, and as soon as the spasm waned, I felt frantically, to and fro. My first
panicked thought—a memory of a double-headed infant, seen in a jar of
spirits of wine—disappeared, succeeded by something that was partly relief,
partly new alarm.
“It’s twins,” I said to Susannah. “Did you know that?”
She shook her head to and fro, slow as an ox.
“Thought … maybe. You … sure?”
“
Oh,
 yes,” I said, in a tone that made her laugh again, though the sound
was cut off abruptly by the next contraction.The relief caused by the thought that we probably weren’t dealing with a
gross deformity was fading fast, replaced by the next thought—if the first
baby wasn’t moving, it was perhaps caught in an umbilical cord, possibly
dead, or entangled with its twin in some fashion.
Further palpations, pushing when I thought I had an idea what I was
pushing on, groping for a mental picture of what might be going on inside …
but even the best midwife can tell only so much, and the only thing I was
reasonably sure about was that the placenta—
one placenta, or two? If it was
one, it might rip loose with the first birth and then we’ll have an abruption
that will kill the mother
—hadn’t yet detached, though given the position of
the baby’s head, there could easily be gallons of blood backed up behind the
infant …. No. I looked up at Susannah’s face. No, if she were hemorrhaging,
she’d be white and losing consciousness. As it was, she was bright red and
clearly still fighting.
But we didn’t have much time. Two umbilical cords, either of which could
be wrapped around a neck, or slip down between the child and the pelvic
bones and be crushed with a contraction, starving one child of oxygen … and
that was the least of it …
My mind ran rapidly down the list of potential problems—some I could
dismiss on the grounds of what I could see and feel, some (like the faint
horror of its being conjoined twins) I could dismiss on grounds of high odds
against, others, on grounds that I couldn’t do a thing about them, even if I
knew what was going on. That still left a few to be worried about.
And the child was not moving. It was alive; I could feel a pulse when I got
my fingertips briefly on the head. And it was oriented properly, facedown; I
could feel the biparietal sutures in the skull. But it wasn’t moving!
My shoulders ached, and so did my hips and knees, from kneeling on the
dirt floor so long, but I felt it dimly, an irrelevant observation. I had one hand
in her vagina, the other on her belly, probing through the wall of skin and
muscle, feeling for some pattern in the tangle of tiny limbs. Susannah’s sweat
was slick and hot under my hands—that was good, the wetness helped me
feel movements …. The contraction came on with a force that smashed my
fingers between skull and pelvis and made Susannah scream and me bite my
lip not to.
Such force, in a woman who’d already given birth three times, should have
shot the baby out like a greased pig. It hadn’t, and now I was sure what was
wrong.“The twins are tangled together,” I said, as calmly as I could. I pressed her
stomach and felt movement—one twin, at least, was still alive. I was
drenched with sweat and my mouth was dry. Someone had set a cup of water
near me; I hadn’t noticed. I picked it up and drank, to get enough moisture to
say what had to be said next.
“Susannah,” I said, leaning forward to look into her eyes. “The babies
can’t get out. I can’t 
get
 them out. If we keep doing this, they’ll die—and you
might die, too.” Easily. I took a deep breath; her hand had come down to rest
on mine, atop her rigid belly.
“Wait,” she whispered, and clenched my hand as we all rode the next
contraction. When it relaxed, she was panting, but squeezed my hand lightly
and let go. “What … else?” she said, between gasps.
“I can cut you open and take the babies out,” I said. “It will be awful and it
will be painful, but—”
“It can’t be worse’n 
this,
” she said, and then did laugh, hoarse as a crow. I
lowered my head and rested my forehead for a moment against her belly,
controlling my own emotions, preparing myself. “Will I die, then?” she said,
her voice quite matter-of-fact.
“Very likely,” I said, straightening up and matching her tone. I wiped a
sleeve across my face and shoved the loose hair out of my eyes. “But it might
save the babies. I’ll do my best.”
She nodded, and clutched my shoulder fiercely as the next contraction
came on.
“Save ’em,” she said, as soon as it passed, and dropped her head, breathing
like a winded horse.
The energy of emergency flooded me and I stood up, looking about the
cabin for the first time. It was tiny and sparsely furnished, with one bedstead
and a pallet rolled up at the foot. A table and benches—and a cauldron on the
fire, steaming, thank God. And much to my surprise, Jamie, calmly unrolling
the bundle that held my surgical knives on the table.
“Where did you come from?” I said. And added, glancing round the cabin,
“Where’s Mr. Cloudtree?”
“Cold as a dead trout,” he said, nodding toward the half-open door.
“Drunk, I mean.” I caught a glimpse of a small white face through the gap—
Agnes, eyes huge with fear. “Mind your brothers, lass,” he said calmly to her.
“It will be all right.”I made what I hoped was a smile toward Agnes and stepped closer to the
table. I started pulling things out of my kit as fast as I could.
“Did you hear what I said to her?” I asked, low-voiced, with a nod at Mrs.
Cloudtree’s grunting form.
“I did,” he said, equally low-voiced, “and so did the wee lass.” He glanced
at the door; Agnes was still there. When she saw me looking, she sidled in.
“The boys are asleep with Pa in the shed,” she said in a rush. “I can help,
please let me help!”
“Agnes?” said Susannah faintly, raising her head. Before I could say
anything, Agnes had shot to her mother’s side and was hugging her round the
shoulders. Tears were pouring down her face, but she was saying, “It’ll be all
right, Ma, Mr. Fraser says so.”
Susannah raised one arm as though it weighed a ton and slowly pushed
back her sopping hair with her wrist to fix an eye on Jamie.
“You say so, Mr …. Fraser?”
“Aye, I do,” he said.
She went purple and bit her lip, breathing heavily through her nose, head
hanging. When the pain let go, she raised it as though it were as heavy as the
big iron cauldron.
“Your wife says … I’m gonna die.”
“Aye, well, I’ve got more faith in her than she does, but I suppose it’s your
choice who to believe.” He glanced at me, hands half-curled for action.
“What d’ye want to do, Sassenach?”
“She needs to be lying down.” My mind was made up and I already had
what I needed laid out on the bench. “Can you get her onto the bed?
Quickly.”
Susannah had been panting, eyes closed. At this, her eyes sprang open and
she straightened, clutching her belly.
“Not the bed! You ain’t gonna spoil my good featherbed! 
Gaaaarrg!
” She
curled up like a shrimp again. Agnes was breathing so hard I thought she
might faint, but no time to worry about it.
“The floor, then,” I said briefly. “Hurry. Stand back, Agnes!”
Between us, Jamie and I heaved her up, turned her, and laid her down as
carefully as we could. She was tremendously heavy, very ungainly, and slick
with sweat, though, and came down on the pounded dirt with a solid bump, at
which she uttered a wild cry and Jamie said something very blasphemous in
Gaelic.“Bloody hell,” I said, under my breath, and reaching for the bottle of dilute
alcohol, I pushed the soggy folds of her shift up and sloshed it over the huge
belly, fish white and striped with purple-red stretch marks.
“All right,” I said, and snatched the heaviest of my surgical scalpels.
“Jamie, hold her—oh, you’ve got her, good.” Muttering “Jesus, Mary, and
Bride, bloody 
help
 me …” I laid the blade at the base of her navel.
But before I could make the incision, she screamed as though the touch of
cold metal had been a cattle prod, jerked her knees up, then drove her heels
down into the dirt, arched her back, thumped down again, and …
“What the devil’s 
that
?” Jamie said, trying to look over the obstruction of
Mrs. Cloudtree’s belly.
“It’s a head,” I said. “Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ. 
Push,
 Susannah!”
She hadn’t waited for instructions. With a ferocious noise, she pushed, and
the baby 
did
 shoot out like a greased pig. I caught him—was it a him? Yes, it
was—in my apron. I thumbed his nose and mouth clear, turned him over, and
thumped his wet back lightly. The tiny buttocks squeezed together in protest,
relaxed and let out a small spurt of dark fecal matter, but he was making
regular huffing noises, sounding much like his mother, though not nearly as
loud.
“Agnes!” I shouted. She was already at my shoulder as I turned and I
detached my apron, wrapped it hastily round the infant, and thrust him into
her arms.
“Shall I cut the cord, Sassenach?” Jamie was squatting by my other side,
sgian dubh
 in hand.
“Yes,” I said breathlessly, and forgot about it, thrusting my hand into the
birth canal, hoping for another head.
No such luck. Limbs everywhere, in the tight, slippery dark. I closed my
eyes to see better, feeling urgently for a foot. 
Just one,
 I prayed. 
Just one foot
…
 And then a powerful contraction came on, quite different, like an ocean
wave rolling through Susannah’s body, but slowly enough that I managed to
get my hand out of the way. And there it was. A tiny foot, its limp toes tinged
with unearthly blue.
“Bloody, bloody, bloody …” I realized that I was muttering senseless
things and clamped my jaw tight. I knew it was too late, but there was
nothing else to be done. Once more I reached up, fumbling into the dark, and
this time found the other foot without trouble. Without trouble because the
baby wasn’t moving.A sense of remoteness came over me, and I closed my eyes and swallowed,
feeling the solid stillness of a tiny body come into my hands. They call it
stillbirth because it is. Not because the child is dead, but because everything
—everything—goes quiet. A tiny, still girl. I knew she was gone, but
stubbornness made me lift her and try to push breath into the still lungs, my
fingers on the tiny chest, hoping against hope … but she was gone.
And yet the vivid joy of the first birth was still fizzing through my body—I
could hear the baby yelling his indignation, and Susannah’s breath, a deep,
slow panting, low voices and the crackle of the fire, the bubbling of water in
the cauldron—but all of it was wrapped in silence, the beating of my own
heart all I felt. It was peace, a deep peace, not yet sorrow, and I held the tiny
body, and used my hem to wipe her—yes, her—tiny face, eyes closed, never
to open. A moment longer, and then I placed her on a clout that Agnes had
brought, and turned to take care of her mother.
“You have a son, Susannah,” I said softly. “Agnes—bring him, will you?”
She did, biting her lip in concentration, not to drop him. He was a good size,
considering his prematurity and the fact that he was a twin, but still weighed
less than five pounds. I set him on Susannah’s chest and her arm came slowly
up to hold him, cupping his head.
“It’ll be all right, darlin’,” she said to him, her voice ragged and deep from
screaming. “Don’t take on, now.” Her eyes were closed, but she spoke to me.
“The other one?”
“I’m sorry,” I said softly, and squeezed her hand. “You have a son.”
She drew a breath that went all the way down to her ravaged womb.
“Thank you, ma’am,” she whispered.
The little boy was still making noises like an angry hornet, but she moved
him to her breast and thumbed the nipple into his mouth, and the noise
stopped abruptly.
Sweat was stinging my eyes, running down my neck. I sat back on my
heels and wiped my face on my skirt. Susannah made a deep gasping sound
and the swollen leg pressing against my shoulder stiffened. The afterbirth
was coming; I took hold of the umbilical cord, this still attached to the still
body 
on the hearth, and the placenta, quite large, tumbled out like a deer’s
liver, dark and bloody. Susannah grunted again, and the second placenta
slithered out.
“All right,” I said, gathering myself. “Agnes—put a quilt over your
mother. Susannah, I’m going to knead your belly, to help your womb contractand make the bleeding stop. It—” I had turned to find a menstrual cloth from
my kit, and as I turned back, I saw Jamie. He was on his knees on the hearth,
looking down at the dead little girl, with an expression on his face that
stopped my heart.
He looked up, feeling my glance, and we read the name in each other’s
face.
Faith.
 I nodded, my throat closing with a grief as sharp as it had been when
I lost her. Jamie bowed his head, and reaching out, touched the tiny, wrinkled
body, his hand nearly covering her. A tear fell and glistened on the back of
his hand, another on the curve of her forehead, red in the firelight.
Moved by the deepest of memories, I leaned over and picked her up,
holding her against my breast, tiny head cupped in my hand. In an instant, I
was holding my lost daughter, grief knifing through me. I closed my eyes,
knowing I had to put her down, had to go about my job, but unable to let her
go, feeling the slow beating of my heart against the fading warmth of her
fragile skin.
I couldn’t let her go. I couldn’t let Faith go; they had taken her from my
arms, finally. Left me empty, alone, in that place of cold stone.
Snot was running down my face, tickling my lip, and I rubbed at it with my
sleeve, still holding the child to my breast, listening to my heart break again.
“Let me take her, Sassenach,” Jamie whispered, and held out his hands.
I swallowed hard. I had to let her go.
“I can’t,” I said. “I can’t.” And bowed my head over the little girl I’d lost,
rocking back and forth on my knees, feeling my heart beat, in chest and ears
and fingertips, trying to make up for the heart that would never beat again.
I didn’t know how long it was that I stayed there, curled around the child,
trying futilely to give her my heat, my life. There was nothing sudden, no
sound, no movement. But in the midst of the searing grief, I slowly realized
… something. It didn’t 
happen;
 it was already there. But I hadn’t felt it and
now I did.
“Claire?” Jamie’s hand touched my shoulder and I seized it with my free
hand and held on. Warmth, strength.
“Stay,” I said, to him and to her, breathless. “Stay.”
My heart. I was still feeling it, distinctly, slow and regular. I let go of
Jamie’s hand, but he didn’t take it away. Holding the baby in one arm, I laid
my other hand on her back, feeling. No sensation, nothing I could really say I
felt—but there was something there.I pressed lightly on her back, waited for the space of a breath, pressed
again. And again. Hearing my own heartbeat in my ears, in the pulse of my
blood. Pressed my heartbeat into her back, into her chest where it pressed
against me.
Push.
My fingers were warm, and so was the child. 
The fire,
 I thought dimly.
Crackle of fire and the sound of my heart. Thup-tup, thup-tup, thup-tup …
And suddenly I heard Roger, telling me what Dr. McEwan had done, a hand
on Buck’s breast, tapping slowly and patiently, over and over, in the rhythm
of a beating heart.
Thup-tup … thup-tup … thup-tup …
There were more sounds in the room now, soft voices, the spitting of a
cracking log, the wind under the eaves of the roof, the rushing sound of pines
and the sloshing of water. Movement, warmth, life. Jamie’s hand, solid on
my shoulder. I heard it all, I felt it all, but it was removed from me,
happening in another world. All I was, was the sound of a heartbeat.
And in some enormity of time, I knew that there were two of us in that
sound, a sharing of the beat of a heart, the knowledge of life. My finger
tapping, slow and sure.
Thup-tup … thup-tup …
Malva
 … I saw her in my mind’s eye, dead in the garden, and the smell of
blood and the scent of birth. The tiny boy I’d taken from her body, barely
alive. A blue spark in my hands, that dwindled and died.
A blue spark. I saw it, saw it and looked deep into it, willing it to stay,
holding it safe in the palms of my hands.
Thup … My finger stilled, and the small sound answered.
Tup.
I gradually became aware of my own breath, and after that, felt the
solidness of Jamie and realized that he was holding me upright, an arm
around my middle, his other hand on my breast, above the baby’s head. I
lifted my own head, nearly blind from the brilliant darkness I’d been in, and
saw the silhouette of a girl against the fire, her body dark and thin through the
white of her shift.
“I cut the cord for you, Mrs. Fraser,” Agnes said. “And I kneaded Mam’s
belly like she told me. Do you want a cup of cider? Pa drank all the beer.”
“She would, lass,” Jamie said, and gently let me go. “But first bring a wee
blanket for your sister, aye?”IT WAS DARK outside; the moon had set and dawn was some way off. It
was cold, but the cold didn’t touch me.
I’d let him take the baby, at last. Felt his hands on mine as he took her,
warm and sure, his face filled with light. He’d knelt carefully and given the
baby to Susannah, placing his hand on the child in benediction.
Then he’d stood and wrapped me in my cloak and walked me outside. I
couldn’t feel the ground beneath my feet, or see the forest, but the cold air
smelled of pine and lay like a balm on my heated skin.
“All right, Sassenach?” he whispered. I seemed to be leaning against him,
though I didn’t remember doing it. I’d lost track of where my body began and
ended; the pieces seemed to be floating about in a loose sort of cloud of
exaltation.
I felt Jamie’s hands tremble a little as he touched my face. From
exhaustion, 
I thought. The same small, constant quiver seemed to be running
through me from crown to sole, like a low-voltage current of electricity.
In fact, I’d passed clear through exhaustion and out the other side, as one
does sometimes in moments of great effort. You know that your bodily
energy has been used up, and yet there’s a supernatural sense of mental
clarity and a strange capacity to keep moving, but at the same time, you see it
all simultaneously, from outside yourself and from your deepest core—the
usual intervening layers of flesh and thought have become transparent.
“I’m fine,” I said, and I laughed. Let my forehead fall against his chest and
breathed for a moment, feeling all my pieces come to rest, whole again, as the
enchantment of the last hour faded into peace.
“Jamie,” I said, a few moments later, raising my head. “What color is my
hair?”
This was an absurd question; it was the depth of the night and we were
standing in a pitch-black forest. But he made a small noise of appraisal and
lifted my chin to look.
“All the colors o’ the earth,” he said, and smoothed the hair from my face.
“But here, all about your face—it’s the color of moonlight, 
mo ghràidh.
”55
The Venom of the North Wind
RACHEL WOKE SUDDENLY, COMPLETELY alert but with no idea what
had woken her. She moved, turning her head to see if Ian was awake. He
was; his hand clamped across her mouth and she froze. It was dark in the
cabin, but there was light enough from the banked fire for her to see his face,
eyes dark with warning.
She blinked, once, and with a tiny nod he removed his hand. He lay quite
still and so did she, though her heart thumped hard enough that she thought it
would wake Oggy, snuggled between them.
Thumping hard enough that she couldn’t hear anything, either—Ian was
listening, though. His long body hadn’t moved, and yet he seemed to have
coiled up, somehow, like a snake gathering itself. She shut her eyes,
concentrating.
There had been wind all night; berries from the big red cedar that guarded
the house had been thumping on the roof at intervals. But Ian would have
recognized that sound …
Suddenly Ian moved, rising onto one elbow; she heard him breathe in,
sharply, and by reflex did the same. 
Tobacco.
 In the next instant, he’d slid out
of bed and padded naked to the door.
She let out her breath with a sense of relief; a friend, then. Soft voices on
the porch, then Ian stuck his head back in, smiled briefly at her, and snatching
a folded blanket from the top of the chest closed the door behind him.
Oggy, disturbed by the sense of movement, stirred and made snuffling
noises. She rose with haste in order to make use of the chamber pot before he
roused all the way; he wasn’t a patient child.
Her shawl round her shoulders and the baby at her breast, she stole up to
the window by the door. It was covered with an oiled hide, tacked downagainst drafts, so she couldn’t see anything, but sounds came through from
the porch fairly well.
Not that it did her much good. The visitors—she made out at least two
different voices, besides Ian’s—were Indians, and speaking in their own
language. Perhaps Standing Heron Bradshaw and a friend from the Cherokee
villages, come to help hunt the catamount that had been seen near the creek.
That was a merciful thought; the more men there were, the safer they’d be.
Presumably.
She was just about to go and check the porridge in the pot, in case the
visitors needed breakfast, when she heard a word that froze her in her tracks
and made her squeeze Oggy so hard that he emitted a small, surprised 
hoof!
and stopped feeding for an instant.
He latched on to her breast again with instant ferocity, but she barely
noticed. Not Cherokee. Not at all. They were Mohawk, and the word that had
caught her ear was 
“Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa.”
SHE DIDN’T WAIT to put the child down or dress. When she stepped out
onto the porch, the boards were icy under her bare feet, and the light was just
beginning to fade into view. So were the interested faces of not two but three
Mohawks, all of whom looked at her and nodded politely.
One of them said something that made Ian cough and glance sideways at
her. He was wearing the blanket wrapped about his waist, and the sight of his
bare chest, the nipples gone small and hard with cold, made her own nipples
do something in sympathy that made Oggy choke and cough, spluttering milk
all down the front of her shift. The Indians looked away as though nothing
had happened.
“Thy friends are welcome, Ian,” she said, trying not to grit her teeth. She
smiled at them. “Will they eat with us?”
They understood English, for all three at once went into the cabin. Ian
made to follow them, and she grabbed his arm with her free hand.
“What’s happened?” she said, low-voiced.
“A massacre,” he said, and she saw now that he was upset, his face tight
with worry. “There was an attack on a settlement—only a few houses, but all
Whigs. It was Joseph Brant and some of his men. But then some fighters
from Burk Hollow made a raid on a Mohawk settlement. In revenge.” Hetried to turn toward the door, but she tightened her grip enough to stay him,
not caring if she bruised him.
“Thy wife?” she said. “I see they came to give thee news of her. Was she
in that settlement? Does she live?”
He didn’t want to answer, but to his credit, he did.
“I dinna ken. She was alive, when Looks at the Moon saw her—but that
was near five months ago.” His eyes shifted past her and she knew he was
looking toward the peak of the distant mountain, where a faint dusting of
snow had appeared a week before. Works With Her Hands—and her children
—were far to the north. 
How far?
 she wondered, and drew the shawl over
Oggy’s round, bare head.
LOOKS AT THE MOON swallowed the last of his turkey hash and gave a
loud belch of appreciation in Rachel’s direction, then handed her his plate
before resuming the story he had been telling between bites. Fortunately, it
was mostly in Mohawk, as the parts that had been in English appeared to deal
with one of his cousins who had suffered following an encounter with an
enraged moose.
Rachel took the plate and refilled it, envisioning the light of Christ glowing
within their guests. Owing to an orphaned and penurious childhood, she had
had considerable practice in such discernment and was able to smile
pleasantly at Moon as she placed the newly filled plate at his feet, not to
interrupt his gesticulations.
On the good side, she reflected, glancing into the cradle, the men’s
conversation had lulled Oggy into a stupor. With a glance that caught Ian’s
eye, and a nod toward the cradle, she went out to enjoy a mother’s rarest
pleasure: ten minutes alone in the privy.
Emerging relaxed in body and mind, she was disinclined to go back into
the cabin. She thought briefly of walking down to the Big House to visit
Claire, but Jenny had gone down herself when it had become apparent that
the newly arrived Mohawks would spend the night at the Murrays’ cabin.
Rachel was very fond of her mother-in-law, but then she adored Oggy and
loved Ian madly—and she really didn’t want the company of any of them just
now.
THE EVENING WAS cold, but not bitter, and she had a thick woolen shawl.
A gibbous moon was rising amid a field of glorious stars, and the peace of
heaven seemed to breathe from the autumn forest, pungent with conifers and
the softer scent of dying leaves. She made her way carefully up the path that
led to the well, paused for a drink of cold water, and then went on, coming
out a quarter hour later on the edge of a rocky outcrop that gave a view of
endless mountains and valleys, by day. By night, it was like sitting on the
edge of eternity.
Peace seeped into her soul with the chill of the night, and she sought it,
welcomed it. But there was still an unquiet part of her mind, and a burning in
her heart, at odds with the vast quiet that surrounded her.
Ian would never lie to her. He’d said so, and she believed him. But she
wasn’t fool enough to think that meant he told her everything she might want
to know. And she very much wanted to know more about
Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa, the Mohawk woman Ian had called Emily … and
loved.
So now she was perhaps alive, perhaps not. If she did live … what might
be her circumstances?
For the first time, it occurred to her to wonder how old Emily might be,
and what she looked like. Ian hadn’t ever said; she hadn’t ever asked. It
hadn’t seemed important, but now …
Well. When she found him alone, she would ask, that’s all. And with
determination, she turned her face to the moon and her heart to her inner light
and prepared to wait.
IT WAS MAYBE an hour later when the darkness near her moved and Ian
was suddenly there beside her, a warm spot in the night.
“Is Oggy awake?” she asked, drawing her shawl around her.
“Nay, lass, he’s sleeping like a stone.”
“And thy friends?”
“Much the same. I gave them a bit of Uncle Jamie’s whisky.”
“How very hospitable of thee, Ian.”
“That wasna exactly my intention, but I suppose I should take credit for it,
if it makes ye think more highly of me.”
He brushed the hair behind her ear, bent his head, and kissed the side of
her neck, making his intention clear. She hesitated for the briefest instant, butthen ran her hand up under his shirt and gave herself over, lying back on her
shawl beneath the star-strewn sky.
Let it be just us, once more,
 she thought. 
If he thinks of her, let him not do
it now.
And so it was that she didn’t ask what Emily looked like, until the
Mohawks finally left, three days later.
IAN DIDN’T PRETEND not to know why she asked.
“Small,” he said, holding his hand about three inches above his elbow.
Four inches shorter than I …
 “Neat, with a—a pretty face.”
“If she is beautiful, Ian, thee may say so,” Rachel said dryly. “I am a
Friend; we aren’t given to vanity.”
He looked at her, his lips twitching a little. Then he thought better of
whatever he’d been about to say. He closed his eyes for an instant, then
opened them and answered her honestly.
“She was lovely. I met her by the water—a pool in the river, where the
water spreads out and there’s not even a ripple on the surface, but ye feel the
spirit of the river moving through it just the same.” He’d seen her standing
thigh-deep in the water, clothed but with her shirt drawn up and tied round
her waist with a red scarf, holding a thin spear of sharpened wood and
watching for fish.
“I canna think of her in—in her parts,” he said, his voice a little husky.
“What her eyes looked like, her face …” He made an odd, graceful little
gesture with his hand, as though he cupped Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa’s cheek,
then traveled the line of her neck and shoulder. “I only—when I think of her
—” He glanced at her and made a 
hem
 noise in his throat. “Aye. Well. Aye, 
I
think of her now and then. Not often. But when I do, I only think of her as all
of a piece, and I canna tell ye in words what that looks like.”
“Why should thee not think of her?” Rachel said, as gently as she could.
“She was thy wife, the mother of—of your children.”
“Aye,” he said softly, and bent his head. Emily had borne him one stillborn
daughter and miscarried two more babes. Rachel thought she might have
chosen her place better; they were in the shed that served as a small barn and
there was a farrowing sow in a pen right in front of them, a dozen fat piglets
thrusting and grunting at her teats, a testament to fecundity.
“I need to tell ye something, Rachel,” he said, raising his head abruptly.“Thee knows thee can tell me anything, Ian,” she said, and meant it, but
her heart meant something different and began to beat faster.
“The—her—Emily’s children. I told ye I’d met them when I saw her last.
The two young ones—she had those by Sun Elk, but the eldest, the boy …”
He hesitated. “She asked me to name the baby—that’s a great honor,” he
explained, “but something made me name the boy, instead. I called him
Swiftest of Lizards—he was catching lizards when I met him, catching them
in his hand. We—got on,” he said, and smiled briefly at the memory.
“I’m sorry, Rachel, I ken ye’ll think that’s wrong, but I’m no sorry I did
it.”
“I see …” she said slowly, though she didn’t. She was beginning to have a
hollow feeling in her middle, though. “So what thee is telling me is—”
“I think he’s maybe mine,” Ian blurted. “The boy. He would ha’ been born
about the right time, after I left. The thing is … ken, I told ye the Mohawk
say that when a man lies with a woman, his spirit fights with hers?”
“I wouldn’t say they’re wrong, but—” She flapped a hand, interrupting
herself. “Go on.”
“And if his spirit conquers hers, she’ll get wi’ child.” He put his arm round
her, his hand big and warm on her elbow. “So maybe Auntie Claire was
wrong about the things in the blood—I mean, our wee man is fine. Maybe it
was Emily’s blood that … aye, well …” He bent his head and rested it on
hers, so they stood forehead-to-forehead, eye-to-eye.
“I dinna ken, Rachel,” he said quietly. “But—”
“We have to go,” she said, though her heart had gone so small she could
barely feel its beating. “Of course we must go.”56
Thee Would Make a Good Friend
“THEE WOULD MAKE A good Friend, thee knows,” Rachel remarked,
holding back a laurel branch for her mother-in-law, who was burdened by a
large basket of quilting. Rachel herself was burdened with Oggy, who had
fallen asleep in the sling she carried him in.
Janet Murray gave her a sharp look and made what Claire had privately
described to Rachel as a Scottish noise, this being a mingled snort and
gargling sound that might indicate anything from mild amusement or
approval to contempt, derision, or impending forcible action. At the moment,
Rachel thought her mother-in-law was amused, and smiled herself.
“Thee is forthright and direct,” Rachel pointed out. “And honest. Or at
least I suppose thee to be,” she added, slightly teasing. “I can’t say I have
ever caught thee in a lie.”
“Wait ’til ye’ve kent me a bit longer, lass, before ye make judgments like
that,” Jenny advised her. “I’m a fine wee liar, when the need arises. What
else, though?” Her dark-blue eyes creased a little—definitely amusement.
Rachel smiled back and thought for a moment, threading her way over a
steep patch of gravel where the trail had washed out, then reaching back to
take the basket.
“Thee is compassionate. Kind. And fearless,” she said, watching Jenny
come down, half-sliding and grabbing branches to keep erect.
Her mother-in-law’s head turned sharply, eyes wide.
“Fearless?” she said, incredulous. 
“Me?”
 She made a noise that Rachel
would have spelled as “Psssht.” “I’ve been scairt to the bone since I was ten
years old, 
a leannan
. But ye get used to it, ken?” She took back the basket,
and Rachel hoisted Oggy, whose weight had doubled the moment he fell
asleep, into a more secure position.
“What happened when thee was ten?” she asked, curious.“My mother died,” Jenny answered. Her expression and voice were both
matter-of-fact, but Rachel could hear bereavement in it, plain as the high, thin
call of a hermit thrush.
“Mine died when I was born,” Rachel said, after a long pause. “I can’t say
that I miss her, as I never knew her—though of course …”
“They say ye canna miss what ye never had, but they’re wrong about that
one,” Jenny said, and touched Rachel’s cheek with the palm of her hand,
small and warm. “Watch where ye’re walkin’, lass. It’s slick underfoot.”
“Yes.” Rachel kept her eyes on the ground, striding wide to avoid a muddy
patch where a tiny spring bubbled up. “I dream, sometimes. There’s a
woman, but I don’t know who she is. Perhaps it’s my mother. She seems
kind, but she doesn’t say much. She just looks at me.”
“Does she look 
like
 ye, lass?”
Rachel shrugged, balancing Oggy with a hand under his bottom.
“She has dark hair, but I can’t ever remember her face when I wake up.”
“And ye wouldna ken what she looked like, alive.” Jenny nodded, looking
at something behind her own eyes. “I kent mine—and if ye ever want to
know what 
she
 looked like, just go and have a keek at Brianna, for she’s
Ellen MacKenzie Fraser to the life—though a wee bit bigger.”
“I’ll do that,” Rachel assured her. She found her new cousin-in-law slightly
intimidating, though Ian clearly loved her. “Scared, though—and thee said
thee has been frightened ever since?” She didn’t think she’d ever met
someone less frightened than Janet Murray, whom she’d seen only yesterday
face down a huge raccoon on the cabin’s porch, driving it off with a broom
and a Scottish execration, in spite of the animal’s enormous claws and
menacing aspect.
Jenny glanced at her, surprised, and changed the heavy basket from one
arm to the other with a small grunt as the trail narrowed.
“Oh, no scairt for myself, 
a nighean,
 I dinna think I’ve ever worrit about
bein’ killed or the like. No, scairt for 
them.
 Scairt I wouldna be able to
manage, to take care o’ them.”
“Them?”
“Jamie and Da,” Jenny said, frowning a little at the squashy ground under
her feet. It had rained hard the night before, and even the open ground was
muddy. “I didna ken how to take care of them. I kent well I couldna fill my
mother’s place for either one. See, I thought they’d die wi’out her.”And you’d be left entirely alone,
 Rachel thought. 
Wanting to die, too, and
not knowing how. It does seem much easier for men; I wonder why? Do they
not think anyone needs them?
“Thee managed, though,” she said, and Jenny shrugged.
“I put on her apron and made their supper. That was all I kent to do. Feed
them.”
“I’d suppose that was the most important thing.” She bent her head and
brushed the top of Oggy’s cap with her lips. His mere presence made her
breasts tingle and ache. Jenny saw that, and smiled, in a rueful sort of way.
“Aye. When ye ha’ bairns, there’s that wee time when ye really 
are
 all they
need. And then they leave your arms and ye’re scairt all over again, because
now ye ken all the things that could harm them, and you not able to keep
them from it.”
Rachel nodded, and they made their way in silence—though a close,
listening sort of silence—through the little oak wood and round the edge of
the smaller hayfield, to the growth of aspens where the cabin stood.
She had thought she’d leave it to Ian to tell his mother, but the mood
between them was one of love, and the spirit moved her to speak now.
“Ian means to go to New York,” she said. Oggy was stirring, and she
hoisted him to her shoulder, patting his firm little back. “To satisfy himself
regarding the welfare of—the … er … his …”
“The Indian woman he was wed to?” Jenny said bluntly. “Aye, I thought
he’d want to, when I heard about the massacre.”
Rachel didn’t waste time asking how Jenny 
had
 heard about it. The
Mohawks had stayed three days, and news of any kind seeped through the
Ridge like indigo dye through a wet cloth.
“I will go with him,” she said.
Jenny made a noise that might be spelled 
glarmph,
 but nodded.
“Aye. I thought ye might.”
“You did?” Rachel was surprised—and perhaps a little affronted. She had
expected shock and argument, attempted dissuasion.
“He’s told ye about his dead bairns by her, I expect?”
“He did, yes, before we wed.” Oggy’s live weight in her arms was a double
blessing; she knew how much Ian had feared never being able to sire a live
child.
Jenny nodded.“He’s an honest man. And kind, to boot, but I doubt he’ll ever make a
decent Friend.”
“Well, so do I,” Rachel admitted. “And yet miracles happen.”
That made Jenny laugh. She stopped at the edge of the porch and put down
her basket in order to scrape the mud from the soles of her shoes, then held
Rachel’s elbow to balance her while she did the same.
“Fearless, ye said,” Jenny said, meditatively. “Friends are fearless, are
they?”
“We don’t fear death, because we think our lives are lived only in
preparation for eternal life with God,” Rachel explained.
“Well, if the worst thing that can happen to ye is death, and ye’re no afraid
of 
that …
 well, then.” Jenny shrugged. “I suppose ye’re right.” Her face
crinkled suddenly and she laughed. “Fearless. I’ll need to think on that one
for a bit—get used to it, ken. Still—” She lifted her chin, indicating Oggy,
who had roused at the scent of home and was rooting sleepily at Rachel’s
breast.
“Do ye not fear for him? Takin’ him all that way through a war?”
She didn’t add, 
“Wouldn’t losing him be worse than death?”
 but she didn’t
need to.
Rachel unfastened her blouse and put Oggy to suck, drawing in her breath
as he seized her nipple, then relaxing as her milk let down. Jenny was waiting
for her, eyes fixed on Oggy’s head. Rachel spoke evenly.
“Would thee let thy husband go alone seven hundred miles to rescue his
first wife and her three children—one of whom might just possibly be his?”
Jenny’s mouth opened, but apparently there were no Scottish sounds
appropriate to the occasion.
“Well, no,” she said mildly. “Thee has a point.”57
Ready for Anything
HE’D HAVE TO TELL her, and sooner rather than later. At least he’d got a
plan made, whether she liked it or not.
It was raining, and the solid drops pounded the tin roof of the goat shed
like gunfire. Ian ducked inside to find his mother milking one of the nannies
and singing a waulking song called 
“Mile Marbhaisg Air A’ Ghaol”
 at the
top of her lungs. She glanced up at him, nodded to indicate that she’d be with
him in a wee bit, and went on singing “A Thousand Curses on Love” and
milking.
The goats looked up at him, too, but recognized him and went on
munching their grass with nothing more than the twitch of an ear. They
seemed to be enjoying the song; they weren’t agitated by the rain—or the
thunder, in the distance but growing steadily louder. His mother stripped off
the udder with a wee flourish and concluded with 
“A’ Ghaol!”
 Ian
applauded, which startled all the goats into a belated chorus of 
mehhh
s.
“Hark at ye, ye wee gomerel,” his mother said, but in a tolerant tone. She
rose, loosed the goat from the stanchion, and picked up the brimming pail.
“Here, carry this into the house, but tell Rachel not to churn it ’til the storm
passes—I dinna ken if she knows ye mustn’t churn during thunder; the butter
won’t come.”
“I think she kens well enough that ye dinna want to stand on the front
stoop doin’ it while the rain’s pissing down, even if ye weren’t like to be
struck by lightning.”
“Piff,” she said, and pulled her shawl up over her head. No sooner had she
done so, though, than the rain changed abruptly to hail. 
“A Mhoire
Mhàthair!”
 she said, making the horns. “Dinna go out there now, ye’ll be
brained.”She 
might
 have added something about the quality of his brain, but it was
impossible to hear a word. Hailstones the size of pig’s knuckles were
thundering on the tin roof, bouncing and rolling on the green grass outside
the open shed. He set the pail down by the wall, where it wouldn’t be kicked
over, and, raising a brow at his mother, crossed his arms and leaned against
one of the timbers, prepared to wait. He’d worked himself up for this and he
wasn’t doing it over again. Do it and have done; there wasn’t time to haver.
The goats, goatlike, wandered over to him and began to nose him
familiarly for anything loose, but aside from his shirttail, which he’d already
gathered up in his hand, there was nothing to attract them. Despite the open
front of the shed and the cold breath of the passing storm, it was pleasantly
warm amongst the inquisitive, hairy bodies, and he felt his anxiety over the
coming conversation subsiding a bit.
His mother came over to stand by the goat nosing his buttocks and stood
gazing contentedly out at the storm, scratching the goat between the ears. It
was a fine view, to be sure; she’d chosen the site for her goat shed and he’d
built it so she could look out through a wide gap in the trees and see Roan
Mountain in the distance, very dramatic at the moment, its top disappearing
into lowering black clouds that sparked and spat lightning. As they watched,
a huge thunderbolt split both sky and air and he and the goats all jerked back
at the dazzling crash.
As though the lightning had been a signal, though, the hail abruptly
stopped, and the rain resumed, more quietly than before.
“It looks like the MacKenzies’ badge, no?” his mother remarked, nodding
at the distant mountain. “Fires all over it.” There were in fact three small
plumes of smoke rising from the lower slopes, where the lightning had struck
something flammable. Nay bother; with this much rain, they wouldn’t burn
long enough to matter.
“I’ve never seen a MacKenzie badge,” he said. “A mountain, is it? With
fires?”
She glanced up at him, momentarily surprised, but then nodded. “Aye, I
was forgetting. All that was gone before ye could walk.” Her mouth
tightened, but only for a moment. “Did your da ever tell ye the Murrays’
motto?”
“Aye, but I dinna remember much … something about fetters, was it?”
“Furth, Fortune, and Fill the Fetters,” she said succinctly. “Go ye out, and
make sure to come back wi’ gold and captives.”That made him laugh.
“A warlike lot, were they? The auld Murrays?”
She shrugged. “Not as I ever noticed, but ken, your da did go for a
mercenary when he was a young man. And your uncle Jamie, too.” Her
mouth twitched. “I’m sure Jamie’s telt ye the Fraser motto, more than once.
Je suis prest
?”
“He has.” Ian smiled, a little ruefully. “I am ready.”
His mother smiled at that, glancing up at him. The shawl had slipped back
to her shoulders, and her bound hair glowed like polished steel in the rain-
light.
“Aye. Well, there’s a second Murray motto—the first was made by the
Duke of Atholl, bloodthirsty auld creature—but the second one’s better: 
Tout
prest.
”
“Quite ready? Or ready for anything?”
“Both. I thought o’ that, now and then, whilst they were gone away to
France. 
Je suis prest … Tout prest.
 And every night, I’d pray to the Virgin
that they were. Ready, I mean.” She fell silent, her hand resting on the goat’s
brown-and-white head.
He’d not find a better moment. He coughed.
“As for bein’ ready, Mam …” She caught the note in his voice and looked
at him sharply.
“Aye?”
“I’ve spoken to Barney Chisholm. Ye’ll be welcome to stay wi’ him and
Christina, while—whilst we’re gone. Rachel and me,” he added, swallowing.
“We’re going up into the North, to see about—about—”
“Your Indian wife?” she asked dryly. “Dinna trouble yourself; I’ve already
asked the MacDonald lassies to care for the goats.”
“You … what?” He felt as though she’d stuck out a foot and hooked his
legs out from under him. She gave him a look of mild exasperation.
“Ye dinna think I’d let Rachel follow ye alone through a war, and her wi’
that lolloping great bairn of yours?”
“But …” The words died in his throat. He kent his mother well enough to
see that she meant it. And no matter what the Frasers 
said
 their motto was, he
kent fine that it might as well have been 
Stubborn as a Rock.
 He’d seen that
look on Uncle Jamie’s face often enough to recognize it now.
“Besides,” she added, pushing the goat’s nose away from the fringe of her
shawl, “I dinna suppose ye’ll find much gold wi’ the Mohawk, but I’d just assoon ye didna end up in fetters yourself in a redcoat prison.”
There wasn’t much to do but laugh. He had one last try, though, just so he
could tell his da he had.
“D’ye think Da would let ye go do such a daft thing?”
“I dinna see that he’d have much room to talk,” she said, with a one-
shouldered shrug. “Here, take this one.” She handed over the full pail and
bent for the other one. “Besides, he wouldna try to stop me; wee Oggy’s his
blood, as much as mine. Ian Mòr will be right there wi’ me, all the way.”
Ian swallowed a wee lump in his throat, but felt curiosity along with
remembered grief.
“Ye feel Da by ye?” he asked. “I—do. Sometimes.”
His mother gave him the second pail and opened the gate across the front
of the shed. The rain had let up and the air shimmered round them, silver in
the grayness.
“Ye dinna stop loving someone just because they’re deid,” she said
reprovingly. “I canna suppose they stop lovin’ you, either.”
“HOW OLD 
IS
 thy mother?” Rachel said to Ian. “I’d welcome her company,
and to have help with the bairn would be a great relief, but thee knows better
than I do what such a journey may be like.”
Ian grinned, not at the question, but at the way she said 
“bairn,”
 hesitating
for an instant before saying it, as though afraid it might get away before she
could clap a lid over it.
“I dinna ken for sure,” he said, in answer to her question. “She’s two years
the elder of Uncle Jamie, though.”
“Oh.” Her face eased a bit at that.
“And it’s barely a year since she left Scotland and came wi’ Uncle Jamie,
all the way across the ocean, and then makin’ their way hundreds of miles
cross-country to Philadelphia. This journey may be a bit longer,” he coughed
a little, thinking 
and just a bit more dangerous,
 “but we’ll have good horses
and enough money for inns, where there are any.
“Besides,” he said, shrugging. “She says she’s comin’ with us. So she is.”58
Telling Beads
JAMIE DIDN’T BOTHER WALKING softly. Bears weren’t afraid of
anything. And it would likely be chance alone that determined who saw
whom first.
The shadows that overlay the trail to the upper meadow they called 
Feur-
milis
 were still black with the night’s cold. The yellowing trees that edged the
path were slick and heavy with last night’s rain, and Jamie had pulled his
plaid up over his head to keep the drips out. Old and worn as his plaid was, it
was still warm and still shed water. 
I should have told Claire I want to be
buried in it if a bear gets the better of me; it’ll be cozy against the grave-
damp.
But then he thought of Amy Higgins, and crossed himself. He came out of
the shadows into the high meadow, misty in the early morning. Three does
grazing on the far side looked up at him, startled by the intrusion, then
disappeared with a crash of shrubbery.
That answered one question, then: no bears were nearby. At this time of
year, a bear likely wouldn’t bother with deer—the streams teemed with fish
and the woods were still full of everything a bear thought tasty, from grubs
and mushrooms to bee trees full of honey (and he did hope his present quarry
might have found one of those recently; it gave a faint soft smell to the
grease)—but deer had very set opinions of carnivores in general, and didn’t
pause to reckon the odds when one showed up.
He quartered the meadow, then walked slowly round the edge looking for
bear sign, but found nothing more than a crumbled pile of old droppings
under a pine and claw marks on a big alder—made recently, but the sap had
dried hard. Jo had seen a bear in the meadow five days ago, he said; clearly it
hadn’t been back since.Jamie stood still for a moment, lifting his face to the breeze that stirred the
grass tops. A faint tang on the air: not bear. A buck deer close by, not yet in
full rut, but interested in the does.
More crashing made him turn, but the eager chorus of 
mehh-hh
s told him
who it was long before his sister came up over the lip of the trail with four
young nanny goats on a long rope. She had a gun over her shoulder and was
looking keenly round.
“And what d’ye mean to do wi’ that, 
a phiuthair
?” he asked
conversationally. She hadn’t seen him in the shadows and swung round,
startled, the fowling piece pointed straight at him.
He took a hasty step to the side, just in case it should be loaded.
“Dinna shoot, it’s me!”
“Gomerel,” she said, lowering her gun. “What d’ye mean, what do I mean
to do with it? How many things can ye do with a gun?”
“Well, if ye’re after bear, I think your piece might give him a nosebleed,
but not much more,” he said, nodding at the gun in her hand. His own rifle
was still slung on his shoulder, loaded and primed. Not that it would likely
stop a charging bear, but if the creature was only suspicious, a shot might
make it keep its distance.
“Bear? Oh, is that what ye’re up to. Claire wondered.” She loosed the
eager goats, and they dived headfirst into the thick grass like ducks in a
millpond.
“Did she, then.” He kept his voice casual.
“She didna say so,” his sister said frankly. “But she saw your gun was
gone, while we were makin’ breakfast, and she stopped dead, only for an
instant.”
His heart squeezed a little. He hadn’t wanted to wake Claire when he left
in the dark, but he should have told her last night that he meant to see if he
could get upon the trail of the bear Jo Beardsley had seen. There’d been little
time for hunting while they worked to get the roof raised before winter—they
needed the meat and grease badly. Besides, they had only a few quilts and
one woolen trade blanket he’d got from a Moravian trader. A good bear rug
would be a comfort to Claire in the deep cold nights; she felt the cold more
now than the last time they’d spent a winter on the Ridge.
“She’s all right,” his sister added, and he felt her interested gaze on his
own face. “She only wondered, ken.”He nodded, wordless. It might be a wee while yet before Claire could wake
to find him gone out with a gun and think nothing of it.
He took a breath and saw it wisp out white, vanishing instantly, though the
new sun was already warm on his shoulders.
“Aye, and what are ye doing up here, yourself? It’s a far piece to walk for
forage.” One of the goats had come up for air and was nosing the hanging
end of his leather belt in an interested manner. He tucked it up out of reach
and kneed the goat gently away.
“I’m fattening them to stand the winter,” she said, nodding at the nosy
nanny. “Maybe breed them, if they’re ready. They like the grass better than
the forage in the woods, and it’s easier to keep an eye on them.”
“Ye ken well enough Fanny would mind them for ye. Is wee Oggy drivin’
ye mad?” The baby had vigorous lungs. You could hear him at the Big House
when the wind was right. “Or are ye drivin’ Rachel mad yourself?”
“I like goats,” she said, ignoring his question and shoving aside a pair of
questing lips nibbling after the fringe of her shawl. “
Teich a’ ghobhair.
 Sheep
are goodhearted things, when they’re not tryin’ to knock ye over, but they’re
no bright. A goat has a mind of its own.”
“Aye, and so do you. Ian always said ye liked the goats because they’re
just as stubborn as you are.”
She gave him a long, level look.
“Pot,” she said succinctly.
“Kettle,” he replied, flicking a plucked grass stem toward her nose. She
grabbed it out of his hand and fed it to the goat.
“Mmphm,” she said. “Well, if ye must know, I come up here to think, now
and then. And pray.”
“Oh, aye?” he said, but she pressed her lips together for a moment and 
then
turned to look across the meadow, shading her eyes against the slant of the
morning sun.
Well enough,
 he thought. 
She’ll say whatever it is when she’s ready.
“There’s a bear up here, is there?” she asked, turning back to him. “Shall I
take the goats back down?”
“Not likely. Jo Beardsley saw it a few days ago, here in the meadow, but
there’s no fresh sign.”
Jenny thought that over for a moment, then sat down on a lichened rock,
spreading her skirts out neatly. The goats had gone back to their grazing, and
she raised her face to the sun, closing her eyes.“Only a fool would hunt a bear alone,” she said, her eyes still closed.
“Claire told me that last week.”
“Did she?” he said dryly. “Did she tell ye the first time I killed a bear, I did
it alone, with my dirk? 
And
 she hit me in the heid wi’ a fish whilst I was
doin’ it?”
She opened her eyes and gave him a look.
“She didna say a fool canna be lucky,” she pointed out. “And if you didna
have the luck o’ the devil himself, ye’d have been dead six times over by
now.”
“Six?” He frowned, disturbed, and her brow lifted in surprise.
“I wasna really counting,” she said. “It was only a guess. What is it, 
a
ghràidh
?”
That casual “Oh, love,” caught him unexpectedly in a tender place, and he
coughed to hide it.
“Nothing,” he said, shrugging. “Only, when I was young in Paris, a
fortune-teller told me I’d die nine times before my death. D’ye think I should
count the fever after Laoghaire shot me?”
She shook her head definitely.
“Nay, ye wouldna have died even had Claire not come back wi’ her wee
needle. Ye would have got up and gone after her within a day or two.”
He smiled.
“I might’ve.”
His sister made a small noise in her throat that might have been laughter or
derision.
They were silent for a moment, both with heads lifted, listening to the
wood. The dripping had ceased now, and you could hear a treepie close by,
with a call exactly like a rusty hinge opening. Then there was a loud 
quah-
quah
 as a bird called from somewhere behind him, and he saw Jenny look up
over his shoulder wide-eyed.
“Is that a magpie?” she said. In the Highlands, you always listened for
magpies, because they were omen birds—and if you heard one, you hoped to
hear another. 
One for sorrow … two for mirth …
“No,” he said, reassuring. “I dinna think there are proper magpies in these
mountains. That’s no but a kind of yaffle. Aye—see him there?” He nodded,
and she looked over her shoulder to the grayish bird with a scarlet slash at its
throat, clinging to a swaying pine branch, a beady eye fixed on the ground.Jenny relaxed and drew breath, and, taking up the conversation where
she’d left it, asked, “D’ye hold it against me, that I made ye marry
Laoghaire?”
He gave her a look.
“What makes ye think ye could make me do 
anything
 I didna want to, ye
wee fussbudget?”
“What the devil is a fussbudget?” she demanded, frowning up at him.
“A bag of nuisance, so far as I can tell,” he admitted. “Jemmy calls Mandy
that.”
A sudden dimple appeared near Jenny’s mouth, but she didn’t actually
laugh. “Aye,” she said. “Ye ken what I mean.”
“I do,” he said. “And I don’t. Hold it against ye, I mean. She didna actually
kill me, after all.”
One of the goats squatted, a few feet away, and let fall a dainty shower of
neat black pellets. They steamed briefly, and he caught the oddly pleasant
warm scent for an instant before it vanished in the chill.
“I wonder how it is goats are so neat about it,” Jenny said, watching, too.
“Compared with coos, I mean.”
“Och, ye’d want to be asking Claire about that,” he told her. “If it’s a
matter of innards, she kens nearly as much as God about it.”
Jenny laughed, and he realized belatedly that he’d seen no goat droppings
at all in his survey of the meadow. She hadn’t been bringing her nannies up
here regularly, then. And therefore … she’d come after him a-purpose. She
had a thing to tell him, maybe, in private.
He cleared his throat and touched his chest, where the wooden rosary hung
beneath his shirt.
“Pray, ye said. D’ye want to tell the beads together, then? Like we used
to?”
She looked surprised, and for a moment dubious. But then made up her
mind and nodded, reaching into her pocket.
“Aye, I would. And since ye mention … there was a thing I meant to ask
ye, Jamie.”
“Aye, what?”
To his surprise, she drew out a string of gleaming pearls, the gold crucifix
and medal bright in the rising sun.
“Ye brought your good rosary?” he asked. “I didna ken that—thought ye’d
have left it for one of your lasses.” “Good” was putting it lightly. That rosaryhad been made in France and likely cost as much as a good saddle horse—if
not more. It was their mother’s rosary—Brian had given it to Jenny when
he’d given Ellen’s pearl necklace to Jamie.
His sister grimaced and looked halfway apologetic. “If I gave it to any one
o’ them, the others would take it amiss. I dinna want them to be fighting over
such a thing.”
“Aye, you’re right about that.” He squatted down by her, reached out a
finger, and gently touched the softly bumpy little beads; it was made of
Scotch pearls, like the necklace he’d given Claire. “Where did Mam get it,
d’ye know? I never thought to ask, when I was wee.”
“Well, ye wouldn’t, would ye? When ye’re wee, Mam and Da are just
Mam and Da, and everything’s just what it’s always been.” She gathered the
beads up into the palm of her hand, shoogling them into a little pile. “I do ken
where this came from, though; Da told me when he gave it to me. D’ye think
that doe’s comin’ in heat?” She squinted suddenly at one of the nanny goats,
who had raised her head and let out a long, piercing bleat. Jamie gave the
animal an eye.
“Aye, maybe. She’s waggling her tail. But it’s maybe just she smells the
buck deer in yonder grove.” He lifted his chin at the grove of sugar maples,
gone half scarlet already, though none of the leaves had fallen. “It’s early for
rut, but if I can smell him, so can she.”
His sister lifted her face to the light breeze and breathed in deep. “Aye? I
dinna smell anything, but I’ll take your word. Da always said ye had a nose
like a truffle pig.”
He snorted.
“Aye, right. So what did Da say to you, then? About Mam’s rosary.”
“Aye, well. He was jealous, he said. She wouldna ever say who’d sent her
the necklace, ken.”
“Oh, aye—do 
you
 know?”
She shook her head, looking interested. “You do?”
“I do. A man named Marcus MacRannoch—one of her suitors from Leoch,
and a gallant man; he’d bought them for her, hoping to wed her, but she saw
Da and was awa’ with him before MacRannoch could speak to her. He said—
well, Claire said he said,” he corrected, “that he’d thought of them so often
round her bonnie neck, he couldna think of them anywhere else, and so sent
them to her for a wedding present.”
Jenny rounded her lips in interest.“Oo, so that’s the way of it. Well, Da kent it was another man, and as I say,
he said he was jealous—they hadna been marrit long, and he maybe wasna
quite sure she thought she’d made a good bargain, takin’ up wi’ him. So he
sold a good field—to Geordie MacCallum, aye?—and gave the money to
Murtagh, to go and buy a wee bawbee for Mam. He meant to give it her when
the babe was born—Willie, aye?” She lifted the crucifix and kissed it gently,
in blessing of their brother.
“God only kens where Murtagh got this—” She poured the rosary from
one hand to the other, with a slithering sound. “But the words on the medal
are French.”
“Murtagh?” Jamie glanced at the beads and furrowed his brow a bit. “But
Da must ha’ kent how he felt about her—about Mam.”
Jenny nodded, rubbing a thumb over the crucifix and the beautifully
sculpted, tortured body of Christ. The yaffle called, faint and distant, beyond
the maple grove.
“He could see I thought the same thing—why would he send Murtagh on
such an errand? But he said he hadna meant to, only he’d told Murtagh what
was in his mind, and Murtagh asked to go. Da said he didna want to let him,
but he couldna very well go off himself and leave Mam about to burst with
Willie and not even a solid roof over her head yet—he’d laid the cornerstones
and started the chimneys, but nay more. And—” She lifted one shoulder. “He
loved Murtagh, too—more than his ain brother.”
“God, I miss the old bugger,” Jamie said impulsively.
Jenny glanced at him and smiled ruefully. “So do I. I wonder sometimes if
he’s with them now—Mam and Da.”
That notion startled Jamie—he’d never thought of it—and he laughed,
shaking his head. “Well, if he is, I suppose he’s happy.”
“I hope that’s the way of it,” Jenny said, growing serious. “I always wished
he could ha’ been buried with them—wi’ the family—at Lallybroch.”
Jamie nodded, his throat suddenly tight. Murtagh lay with the fallen of
Culloden, burnt and buried in some anonymous pit on that silent moor, his
bones mingled with the others. No cairn for those who loved him to come and
leave a stone to say so.
Jenny laid a hand on his arm, warm through the cloth of his sleeve.
“Dinna mind it, 
a bràthair,
” she said softly. “He had a good death, and you
with him at the end.”“How would you know it was a good death?” Emotion made him speak
more roughly than he meant, but she only blinked once, and then her face
settled again.
“Ye told me, eejit,” she said dryly. “Several times. D’ye not recall that?”
He stared at her for a moment, uncomprehending.
“I told ye? How? I dinna ken what happened.”
Now it was her turn to be surprised.
“Ye’ve forgotten?” She frowned at him. “Aye, well … it’s true ye were off
your heid wi’ fever for a good ten days when they brought ye home. Ian and I
took it in turn to sit with ye—as much to stop the doctor takin’ your leg off as
anything else. Ye can thank Ian ye’ve still got that one,” she added, nodding
sharply at his left leg. “He sent the doctor away; said he kent well ye’d rather
be dead.” Her eyes filled abruptly with tears, and she turned away.
He caught her by the shoulder and felt her bones, fine and light as a
kestrel’s under the cloth of her shawl.
“Jenny,” he said softly. “Ian didna want to be dead. Believe me. I did, aye
… but not him.”
“No, he did at first,” she said, and swallowed. “But ye wouldna let him, he
said—and he wouldna let you, either.” She wiped her face with the back of
her hand, roughly. He took hold of it and kissed it, her fingers cold in his
hand.
“Ye dinna think ye had anything to do with it?” he asked, rising to his feet
and smiling down at her. “For either of us?”
“Hmph,” she said, but she looked modestly pleased.
The goats had moved away a little, brown backs smooth amid the
tussocked grass. One of them had a bell; he could hear the small 
clank!
 of it
as she moved. The yaffles had moved off as well—he caught the flash of
scarlet as one flew low across the field and disappeared into the black mouth
of the trail.
He let a moment go by, two, and then shifted his weight and made a small
menacing noise in the back of his throat.
“Aye, aye,” Jenny said, rolling her eyes at him. “Of course I’ll tell ye. I
had to fettle my mind, first, ken?” She rearranged her skirts and settled
herself more firmly. “Aye, then—this is the way of it. As ye told it to me, at
least.
“Ye said”—her brows drew together with the effort of careful
remembrance—“that ye’d fought your way across the field in a fury andwhen ye 
stopped because ye had to breathe, you—you were … dismayed …
to find ye weren’t dead yet.”
“Aye,” he said softly, and with a deep sense of fear, felt the day well up in
him. Cold, it had been bitter cold in the wind and rain, but he’d been ablaze
with the fighting; he hadn’t felt it ’til he stopped. “What then? That’s what I
dinna ken …”
She drew a deep, audible breath.
“Ye were behind the government lines. There were cannon behind ye—
pointing the other way, aye? Toward … our men.”
“Aye. I could see—I could … see them. Lying dead and dying, in
windrows.”
“Windrows?” She sounded a little startled, and he looked down, still
feeling the chill of Culloden in his hands and feet.
“They fell by lines,” he said, his own voice sounding remote and
reasonable, detached. “The English guns, the muskets—they’ve a range of …
I dinna mind it now, but that’s where we fell, at the end of that range. There
were men blown up and crushed by the cannon, but most of it was the
muskets. Bayonets later—I heard that, didna see.” He swallowed, and
keeping his voice steady asked, “What did I say happened then?”
She exhaled through her nose, and he saw she had closed her hand on the
rosary, clenching it as though to draw strength from the beads.
“Ye said ye couldna think what to do, but there was a cannon nearby and
the crew had their backs to ye. So ye turned to go after the nearest man—but
there was a knot of redcoats between you and the cannon, and when ye wiped
the sweat out of your eyes, ye saw one of them was Jack Randall.” Her free
hand made an unobtrusive sign of the horns, then folded into a fist.
He remembered. Remembered and felt a lurch in his wame as the image
he’d seen in dreams met and merged with memory.
“He saw me,” he whispered. “He stood stock-still and so did I. The shock
of it—I couldna make myself move.”
“And Murtagh …” Jenny’s voice came soft.
“I sent him back,” he whispered, seeing his godfather’s face, creased in
stubborn refusal. “I made him go. Made him take Fergus and the others—I
said he must see them safe to Lallybroch, because … because …”
“Because ye couldn’t,” she said, low-voiced.
“I couldn’t,” he said, and swallowed the growing lump in his throat.“But he was there, ye said,” Jenny prompted after a moment. “On the field.
Murtagh.”
“Aye. Aye, he was.” He’d seen the sudden movement, a jerk of the frozen
scene before him, and lifted his eyes from Jack Randall’s face to look, and
saw Murtagh running …
And once more the dream came down on him and he was in it. Cold. So
cold the voice froze in his throat, rain and sweat plastering wet cloth to his
body and the icy wind cutting through his bones as easily as through his
clothes. He tried—he had tried—to call out, to stop Murtagh before he
reached the English soldiers. But it would have taken more than muskets and
British cannon to stop Murtagh FitzGibbons Fraser, let alone Jamie’s voice,
and he didn’t stop, bounding over the tumps of the moor grass, water bursting
like broken glass under his feet as he went.
“Captain Randall spoke to ye, ye said …”
“Kill me.”
 He heard his own voice whisper the words. “He asked me to
kill him.”
My heart’s desire.
 The words lay like drops of lead in his ear. The wind
had been whistling past his head, whipping the hair out of its binding and
across his face. But he’d heard that, he knew he had, he hadn’t dreamed it …
But his eyes had been on Murtagh. There was movement, confusion,
someone came toward him, he saw the dark blade of a bayonet, wet with rain
or blood or mud, and he pushed it aside and suddenly it was a fight, with two
of them pulling at him, bashing, trying to knock him down.
A sudden sound surprised him and he opened his eyes, disoriented, and
realized that he’d made the noise, it was the sound he’d made when
something took his left leg out from under him, a grunt of impact,
impatience, he had to get up …
“And Captain Randall reached down to ye, then, where ye lay on the
ground …”
“And I had my dirk in my hand and I—” He broke off and looked down at
his sister, urgent. “Did I kill him? Did I say I did?”
She was watching him closely, a look of deep concern on her face. He
made an impatient gesture, and she gave him a reproving look. No, she
wouldn’t lie to him, he kent better than that …
“Ye said ye did. Ye said it over and over …”
“I said I killed him, over and over?”Despite herself, she gave a small shudder. “No. That it was hot. The—his
—blood. ‘Hot,’ ye kept saying, ‘God, it was so hot …’”
“Hot.” For a moment, that made no sense, and then he caught a glimpse of
it: the dim sense of darkness leaning over him, the brush of wet wool across
his face, effort, so much effort to raise his arm one more time, trembling, he
saw drops of clean rain run down the blade, over his shaking hand, and effort,
pushing, pushing up and the thick resisting, rasping cloth, momentary
hardness, 
push, God damn it,
 then a deep, startling heat that had spilled over
his frozen hand, his wind-chilled arm. He’d been desperately grateful for the
warmth, he remembered that—but he could not remember the blow itself.
“Murtagh,” he said, and the sense of blood-heat left him as suddenly as it
had come, the chilly wind in his ears. “Did I say what happened to Murtagh?”
He gave a sigh of pain, exasperation, desolation. “Why would ye not go when
I 
told
 ye, ye scabbit auld bugger?”
“He did,” Jenny said, unexpectedly. “He took the men as far as the road
and set them on their way. They said so, when they came back to Lallybroch.
But then he went back—for you.”
“For me.” He didn’t have to close his eyes now, he saw it; he’d felt it in his
own back, seeing the jolt of Murtagh’s knife, up hard, aiming for the
captain’s kidney. Randall had dropped like a rock—hadn’t he? But then how
was he standing later … and then the others were all on them.
He’d been knocked flat onto his face and someone had stepped on his
back, kicked him in the head, a gun-butt had struck him in the ribs and
knocked his breath out … There was shouting all around and the sense of ice
was creeping up his body—of course, he’d been badly wounded but hadn’t
known it, was slowly bleeding to death. But all he could think of was
Murtagh, that he must reach Murtagh … He’d crawled. He remembered
seeing the water come up between his fingers as his hand pressed down and
the tough black prickle of wet heather as he grasped it, pulling himself along
… his kilt was soaked from falling, heavy and dragging between his legs,
hindering …
“I found him,” he said, and took a breath that shook in his lungs.
“Something happened—the soldiers were gone, I dinna ken how long it took
—from one breath to the next, is how it felt.” His godfather had been lying a
few yards away from him, curled up like a babe asleep. But he hadn’t been
asleep—nor dead. Not yet. Jamie’d gathered him up into his arms, seen the
terrible dented wound that had caved in his temple, the blood pumping blackfrom a gash in his neck. But seen too the beauty, the lightening of Murtagh’s
face as he opened his eyes to see Jamie holding him.
“He told me that it didna hurt to die,” Jamie said. His voice was hoarse and
he cleared his throat. “He touched my face and said not to be afraid.”
He’d remembered that—but now he remembered, too, the sense of sudden,
overwhelming peace. The lightness. The exultation that had come back so
strangely in his dream. Nothing mattered any longer. It was over. He’d bent
his head and kissed Murtagh’s mouth, laid his own forehead against the
bloody, tangled hair, and given up his soul to God.
“But—” He opened his eyes—didn’t recall closing them—and turned to
Jenny, urgent. “But he came back! Randall. He wasna dead, he came back!”
Black, a black thing, man-shaped, upright against a sky gone white and
blind. Jamie’s hands curled into fists, so sudden the nails bit his palms.
“He came back!”
Jenny didn’t speak and didn’t move, but her eyes were fixed on him,
urging him silently to remember. And he did.
His limbs had gone weak and he’d lost the feeling in his leg altogether.
Without meaning it, he’d fallen to the ground, losing his hold on Murtagh’s
body. Was lying flat on his back, still able to feel the rain on his face but
nothing else, his sight gone. He didn’t care about the black man, about
anything. The peace of death was upon him. Pain and fear had gone and even
hate had seeped away.
He’d closed his eyes again now, seeing it, and imagined that he felt
Murtagh’s hand, hard and callused, still holding his as they lay on the ground.
“Did I kill him?” he whispered, more to himself than to Jenny. “I did … I
ken I did … but how …”
The blood. The hot blood.
“The blood—it spilled down my arm, and then I … I wasna there anymore.
But when I woke, my eyes were sealed shut wi’ dried blood and that’s what
made me think I was dead—I couldna see anything but a sort of dark-red
light. But then later I couldna find a wound on my head. It was 
his
 blood
blinding me. And he was lyin’ on me, on my leg—”
He’d opened his eyes, still explaining it to himself, and found that he was
sitting on the ground, the callused hand clinging tight to his was his sister’s,
and tears were running silently down her face as she watched him.
“Och,” he said, and rising to his knees gathered her off her rock and into
his arms. “Dinna weep, 
a leannan.
 It’s over.”“That’s what 
you
 think, is it?” she said, voice muffled in his shirt. She was
right, he knew that. But she held him tight. And slowly, slowly the morning
came back.
They sat for a little while, not speaking. The sun had come well above the
treetops by now, and while the air was still fresh and sweet, there was no
longer any chill in it.
“Aye, well,” he said, at last, standing up. “Do ye still want to pray?” For
she still held the pearl rosary, dangling from one hand. He didn’t wait for her
reply but reached into his shirt and drew out the wooden rosary that he wore
about his neck.
“Oh, ye’ve got your old beads after all,” she said, surprised. “Ye didna
have your rosary in Scotland, so I thought ye’d lost it. Meant to make ye a
new one, but there wasna time, what with Ian …” She lifted one shoulder, the
gesture encompassing the whole of the terrible months of Ian’s long dying.
He touched the beads, self-conscious. “Aye, well … I had, in a way of
speaking. I … gave it to William. When he was a wee lad, and I had to leave
him at Helwater. I gave him the beads for something to keep—to …
remember me by.”
“Mmphm.” She looked at him with sympathy. “Aye. And I expect he gave
them back to ye in Philadelphia, did he?”
“He did,” Jamie said, a bit terse, and a wry amusement touched Jenny’s
face.
“Tell ye one thing, 
a bràthair
—he’s no going to forget you.”
“Aye, maybe not,” he said, feeling an unexpected comfort in the thought.
“Well, then …” He let the beads run through his fingers, taking hold of the
crucifix. “I believe in God, the Father Almighty …”
They said the Creed together, then the Our Father, and the three Hail
Marys, and the Glory Be.
“Joyful or Glorious?” he asked, fingers on the first bead of the decades. He
didn’t want to do the Sorrowful Mysteries, the ones about suffering and
crucifixion, and he didn’t think she did, either. A yaffle called from the
maples, and he wondered briefly if it was one they’d already seen, or a third.
Three for a wedding, four for a death …
“Joyful,” she said at once. “The Annunciation.” Then she paused, and
nodded at him to take the first turn. He didn’t have to think.
“For Murtagh,” he said quietly, and his fingers tightened on the bead. “And
Mam and Da. Hail Mary, full o’ grace, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thouamongst women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.”
“Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our
death, Amen.” Jenny finished the prayer and they said the rest of the decade
in their usual way, back and forth, the rhythm of their voices soft as the rustle
of grass.
They reached the second decade, the Visitation, and he nodded at Jenny—
her turn.
“For Ian Òg,” she said softly, eyes on her beads. “And Ian Mòr. Hail Mary
…”
The third decade was William’s. Jenny glanced at him when he said so, but
only nodded and bent her head.
He didn’t try to avoid thinking of William, but he didn’t deliberately call
the lad to mind, either; there was nothing he could do to help, until or unless
William asked for it, and it would do neither of them good to worry about
what the lad was doing, or what might be happening to him.
But … he’d said “William,” and for the space of an Our Father, ten Hail
Marys, and a Glory Be, William must perforce be in his mind.
Guide him,
 he thought, between the words of the prayer. 
Give him good
judgment. Help him to be a good man. Show him his way … and Holy Mother
… keep him safe, for your own Son’s sake …
 “World without end, Amen,” he
said, reaching the final bead.
“For all those to hame in Scotland,” Jenny said without hesitation, then
paused and looked up at him. “Laoghaire, too, d’ye think?”
“Aye, her, too,” he said, smiling despite himself. “So long as ye put in that
poor bastard she’s married to, as well.”
For the last decade, they paused for a moment, eyeing each other.
“Well, the last was for the folk in Scotland,” he said. “Let’s do this one for
the folk elsewhere—Michael and wee Joan and Jared, in France?”
Jenny’s face grew momentarily soft—she’d not seen Michael since Ian’s
funeral, and the poor lad had been shattered, his young wife suddenly dead, a
child gone with her—and then his father. Jenny’s mouth trembled for an
instant, but her voice was clear and the sun lay soft on the white of her cap as
she bent her head. “Our Father, who art in heaven …”
There was silence when they finished—the sort of silence a wood gives
you, made of wind and the sounds of drying grass and of trees shedding
leaves in a yellow rain. The goat’s bell clanked on the far side of the
meadow, and a bird he didn’t know chattered to itself in the maple grove. Thebuck deer was gone; he’d heard it leave sometime while he was praying for
William, and he’d wished his son good fortune in the hunt.
Jenny drew breath as though to speak, and he lifted a hand; there was
something in his mind and he’d best say it now.
“What ye said about Lallybroch,” he began, a little awkwardly. “Dinna be
worrit about it. If ye should die before me, I’ll see to it that ye get home safe,
to lie wi’ Ian.”
She nodded thoughtfully, but her lips were pursed a little, as she held them
when thinking.
“Aye, I ken ye would, Jamie. Ye dinna need to go to great lengths about it,
though.”
“I don’t?”
She blew air out through her lips, then set them firmly.
“Well, see, I dinna ken where I might be, come the time. If it’s here, then
o’ course—”
“Where the devil else might ye be?” he demanded, with the dawning
realization 
that she couldn’t have come up here to tell him about Murtagh,
because she hadn’t known he needed telling. So—
“I’m going wi’ Ian and Rachel to find his Mohawk wife,” she said, as
casually as she might have said she was off to pull turnips.
Before he could find a single word, she held up the rosary in front of his
face. “I’m leavin’ this with you, ken—it’s for Mandy, just in case I dinna
come back. Ye ken well enough what sorts of things can happen when ye’re
traveling,” she added, with a small moue of disapproval.
“Traveling,” he said. “
Traveling?
 Ye mean to—to—” The thought of his
sister, small, elderly, and stubborn as an alligator sunk in the mud, marching
north through two armies, in dead of winter, beset by brigands, wild animals,
and half a dozen other things he could think of if he’d time for it …
“I do.” She gave him a look, indicating that she didn’t mean to bandy
words for long. “Where Young Ian goes, Rachel says she’s goin’, too, and
that means so does the wee yin. Ye dinna think I mean to leave my youngest
grandchild to the mercies of bears and wild Indians, do ye? That’s a rhetorical
question,” she added, with a pleased air of having put a stop to him. “That
means I dinna expect ye to answer it.”
“Ye wouldna ken a rhetorical question from a hole in the ground if I hadna
told ye what one was!”“Well, then, ye should recognize one when it bites ye on the nose,” she
said, sticking her own lang neb up in the air.
“I’ll go and talk to Rachel,” he said, eyeing her. “Surely she’s better sense
than to—”
“Ye think I didn’t? Or Young Ian?” Jenny shook her head, half admiringly.
“It would be easier to move yon wee mountain there”—she nodded at the
bulk of Roan Mountain, looming dark green in the distance—“than to get that
Quaker lass to change her mind, once it’s made up.”
“But the bairn—!”
“Aye, aye,” she said, a little irritably. “Ye think I didna mention that? And
she did squinch her eyes a bit. But then she said to me, reasonable as Sunday,
would 
I
 let my husband go alone seven hundred miles to rescue his first wife,
and her wi’ three pitiable bairns—one of whom might just possibly be Ian’s?
—and that’s the first 
I
 heard of it, too,” she added, seeing his face. “I see her
point.”
“Jesus.”
“Aye.” She stretched herself, groaning a little, and shook her skirts, which
were thick with foxtails by now. Jamie could feel the prick of them through
his stockings, dozens of tiny needles. The thought of Jenny’s going was a
dirk right through his heart. It hurt to breathe.
He knew she could tell; she didn’t look at him but coiled up the pearl
rosary neatly and, taking his hand, dropped it into his palm.
“Keep it for me,” she said, matter-of-factly, “and if I dinna come back,
give it to Mandy, when she’s old enough.”
“Jenny …” he said softly.
“See, when ye come to reckon your life,” she said briskly, stooping to pick
up the goat’s rope, “ye see that it’s the bairns are most important. They carry
your blood and they carry whatever else ye gave them, on into the time
ahead.” Her voice was perfectly steady, but she cleared her throat with a tiny
hem
 before going on.
“Mandy’s the farthest out, aye?” she said. “As far as I can reach. The
youngest girl of Mam’s blood. Let her take it on, then.”
He swallowed, hard.
“I will,” he said, and closed his hand over the beads, warm from his sister’s
touch, warm with her prayers. “I swear, sister.”
“Well, I ken that, clot-heid,” she said, smiling up at him. “Come and help
me catch these goats.”Part Four
A JOURNEY OF A THOUSAND MILES
59
Special Requests
JAMIE HANDED IAN A small, heavy purse.
“I can manage, Uncle,” he said, trying to hand it back. “We’ve horses, and
I’ve got enough coin to feed us, I think.”
“
You’d
 be happy enough to sleep in the woods along the way, and Rachel’s
young and strong, and doubtless she’d do it for love of ye. But if ye think ye
can make your mother travel seven hundred miles, sleeping by the side of the
road and eating what ye can catch along the way … think again, aye?”
“Mmphm.” Ian acknowledged the reason in this, though he weighed the
purse reluctantly in the palm of his hand.
“Besides,” his uncle added, and glanced over his shoulder. “There’s a
favor I’d ask of ye.”
“Of course, Uncle Jamie.” Auntie Claire was out in the side yard, helping
with the laundry; he saw his uncle’s eye rest on her, with a mingled look of
affection and wariness that piqued Ian’s interest. “What is it?”
“Rachel says ye mean to stop in Philadelphia for a few days on your way,
so that she can visit some of her Quaker Friends and go to a proper meeting.”
“Aye. So …?”
“Well. About five miles outside the city, along the main road, there’s a
small lane—it’s called Mulberry; I’ve drawn ye a map, but ye can ask your
way, too. There’s a wee falling-down sort of house at the end of the lane; that
belongs to a woman named Silvia Hardman.”
“A woman?” Ian glanced involuntarily at Auntie Claire, too. She was
laughing at something Jem had once said to her, her face flushed from the
heat of the fire and her mad hair escaping from the scarf she had bound round
her head.
“Aye,” his uncle said tersely, turning slightly so his back was to the
launderers. “A Quaker lady, a widow wi’ three small girls. She did me a greatservice, before Monmouth, and since ye’ll be passing by, I’d like ye to see
what her condition is, and no matter 
what
 it is, oblige her to take this.” He
fished in his sporran and came out with another, smaller, purse.
Ian accepted it without question, putting it away in his own pouch. Uncle
Jamie was frowning slightly, hesitant.
“Anything else, Uncle?”
“If—I mean—I dinna ken whether …”
“Whatever it is, 
a bràthair-mhàthair,
 ye ken I’ll do it, aye?” He smiled at
Uncle Jamie, who relaxed and smiled back.
“I do, Ian, and I’m grateful. The thing is—Friend Silvia is a virtuous
woman, but her husband was killed, maybe by the British army, maybe by
Loyalists, maybe by Indians. He left her badly off, she’s no kin, and … there
aren’t so many ways for a woman alone to provide for three wee girls.”
“She’s a hoor, then?” Ian had lowered his own voice, keeping an eye on
the steam rising from the laundry kettle. Wee Orrie Higgins was minding
Oggy and apparently trying to teach him to play patty-cake, though the bairn
couldn’t manage more than waving his chubby arms and crowing.
“No!” Uncle Jamie’s face darkened. “I mean—she sometimes …”
“I understand,” Ian said hastily, suddenly wondering at the nature of the
service Mrs. Hardman might have rendered his uncle.
“Not 
me,
 for God’s sake!”
“I didna think it was, Uncle!”
“Aye, ye did,” Uncle Jamie said dryly. “But beyond rubbing horseradish
liniment into my backside and poulticing my back, the woman never laid a
hand on me—or I on her, all right?”
Ian grinned at his uncle and raised both hands, indicating a complete
acceptance of this story.
“Mmphm. So, as I said, I want ye to see what her condition is. It may be
that she’s found a man to marry her—and if she has, you be damned careful
about giving her the money so he doesna see; even if he’s a good man, he
might assume things that aren’t true—” And here he gave Ian a hard look.
“But if she’s entertaining men that come to her house, you find that out and
make sure that none of them are threatening her or seem a danger to her or
her wee lassies.”
“And if they are …?”
“Take care of it.”
I FOUND IAN in the springhouse, sniffing cheeses.
“Take that one,” I suggested, pointing at a cheesecloth-wrapped shape at
the end of the top shelf. “It’s at least six months old, so it’ll be hard enough to
travel with. Oh, but you might want some of the softer cheese for Oggy,
mightn’t you?”
There were at least a dozen tin tubs of soft goat’s cheese, some flavored
with garlic and chives—one adventurous experiment with minced dried
tomatoes that I had severe doubts about—but four unflavored, for use in
feeding people with digestive upset and for mixing in medicines that I
couldn’t get anyone to swallow otherwise.
“Rachel thinks he might be teething,” Ian assured me. “By the time we
reach New York, he’ll be gnawing raw meat off the bone.”
I laughed, but felt a sharp pang at the realization that he was right; by the
time we saw Oggy again, he would likely be walking, perhaps talking, and
fully equipped to eat anything that took his fancy.
“He might even have a proper name by that time,” I said, and Ian smiled,
shaking his head.
“Ye never ken when a person’s right name will come—but it always does.”
He glanced down to one side, by reflex. To where Rollo would have been.
“Wolf’s Brother?” I said. That was the name the Mohawk had given him
when he became one of them. I was quite aware—and I thought Rachel and
Jenny both knew it even better—that he had by no means 
stopped
 being a
Mohawk, even though he’d come back to live with us again. He hadn’t
stopped looking down at his side for Rollo, either.
“Aye,” he said, a little gruffly, but then he gave me a half smile and the
Scottish lad showed through the tattoos. “Maybe another wolf will come find
me, sometime.”
“I hope so,” I said, meaning it. “Ian—I wanted to ask you a favor.”
One eyebrow went up.
“Name it, Auntie.”
“Well … Jamie said that you plan to stop in Philadelphia. I wondered …” I
felt myself blushing, much to my annoyance. His other eyebrow rose.
“Whatever it is, Auntie, I’ll do it,” he said, one side of his mouth curling.
“I promise.”
“Well … I, um, want you to go to a brothel.”
The eyebrows came down and he stared hard at me, obviously thinking he
hadn’t heard aright.“A brothel,” I repeated, somewhat louder. “In Elfreth’s Alley.”
He stood motionless for a moment, then turned and put the cheese back on
the shelf, and glanced down at the clear brown water of the creek rushing past
our feet.
“This might take a bit of time to explain, aye? Let’s go out into the sun.”60
Just One Step
September 15, 1779
JUST ONE STEP. THAT’S all it ever took, all it ever takes. Sometimes you
see such a step coming, from a long way off. Sometimes you never notice,
until you look backward.
Here it was, right in front of her. The door of her cabin—hers, her home,
the home of her marriage, of her baby’s first months, of her realest life—was
open to the morning and the round gold leaves of the aspens lay flat on the
wood of the stoop, gleaming with dew as the dawn came up.
One step over the threshold that divided her small rag rug, with its quiet,
homely blues and grays, from that pagan abandon of golds and greens and
red outside, and her life here was over. They might come back—Ian had
promised that they would, and she trusted that he’d do whatever he could to
make it so—but even if they did, it would be a different life.
Oggy—perhaps he would be walking, talking, might have a different name
by then. He wouldn’t recall this early life, the closeness of waking against her
body in bed, turning at once to her breast and yielding up his separate
existence 
so easily, becoming one with her as he’d been when she carried
him inside, just for those moments while he fed from her again. Somewhere
he might be weaned, on the road between now and then. He would be a
different person when they came back. So would she.
Jenny came up beside her, her face bright and a pack with food and drink,
handkerchiefs, clouts, and clean stockings under her arm. She glanced at
Rachel’s face, then at the inside of the cabin, as though making an inventory.
There was little enough to take note of: the rug, the bed and its trundle where
Jenny slept, Oggy’s cradle. They had already given everything else away;
what they needed would be given back or built again if they returned.“Well, then, laddie,” Jenny said to Oggy. “This will be your first journey
from home, aye? It’s my third. Just pay attention to me; I’ll see ye right.”
Oggy promptly leaned out of Rachel’s arms, reaching for his grannie, who
laughed and took him.
“Ye’re fettled, 
m’annsachd
?” she said to Rachel. “Is the sense o’ the
meeting clear? Let’s be off, then, and see what lies ahead.”
THE FIRST STEP took them from the cabin to the Big House to take their
leave. They’d said goodbye to Brianna and Roger and seen them off with
their wagon full of children and contraband sauerkraut three weeks before—
an experience that had made Rachel’s heart uneasy. Now she was
inexpressibly relieved to see Jamie and hear that he intended to accompany
the travelers on the three-day journey to Salisbury in the Piedmont, where
they would find the Great Wagon Road that would take them north.
“I need to meet wi’ a few men there,” Jamie had said, with a casual reserve
that she knew was meant to protect her own feelings. She knew his business
was that of war, and he knew how much that troubled her, but she knew how
much it troubled 
him
 and would not force him to say the things he was
thinking, let alone the things he knew.
She’d felt moved to speak about it—the war—in general, in meeting. And
then she’d talked about her brother, Denzell. A Friend from birth, as she was;
a godly man, but also a doctor, and a man of conscience.
“Such men aren’t always comfortable to live with,” she’d said, half
apologetically, but more than one woman had smiled in sympathy, knowing
what she meant. “But I wouldn’t have him otherwise, thee knows. And he’s
of the mind that God has called him to the battlefield—not to fight with a
musket or sword, but to fight Death itself, in the name of Liberty.” She’d
drawn a deep breath then, and added, “I have had word that my brother was
captured, and is in a British prison. I’d ask thee all, please, to pray for him.”
They had nodded, solemn. And Jamie Fraser had crossed himself, which
moved her.
Jamie nearly always came to meeting, but seldom spoke himself. He’d
come in quietly and sit on a back bench, head bowed, listening. Listening, as
any Friend would, to the silence and his inner light. When people felt moved
of the spirit to speak, he would listen courteously to them, too, but watchingthe remoteness of his face on these occasions, she thought his mind was still
by itself, in quiet, persistent search.
“I dinna suppose Young Ian’s told ye much about Catholics,” he’d said to
her once, when he’d paused afterward to give her a fleece he’d brought from
Salem.
“Only when I ask him,” she said, with a smile. “And thee knows he’s no
theologian. Roger Mac knows more, I think, regarding Catholic belief and
practice. Does thee want to tell me something about Catholics? I know thee
must feel seriously outnumbered every First Day.”
He’d smiled at that, and it made her heart glad to see it. He was so often
troubled these days, and no wonder.
“Nay, lass, God and I get on well enough by ourselves. It’s only that when
I come to your meeting, sometimes it reminds me of a thing Catholics do now
and then. It’s no a formal thing—but a body will go and sit for an hour before
the Sacrament, in church. I’d do it now and then when I was a young man, in
Paris. We call it Adoration.”
“What does thee do during that hour?” she’d asked, curious.
“Nothing in particular. Pray, for the most part. Say the Rosary. Or sit in
silence. Read, maybe, the Bible or the writings of some saint. I’ve seen folk
sing, sometimes. I remember once, goin’ into the chapel of Saint Joseph in
the wee hours of the morning, long before dawn—almost all the candles were
burnt out—and hearin’ someone playing a guitar, singing. Very soft, not
playing to be heard, ken. Just … singing before God.”
Something odd moved in his eyes at the recollection, but then he smiled at
her again, a rueful smile.
“I think that may be the last music I remember really hearing.”
“What?”
He touched the back of his head, briefly.
“I was struck in the heid wi’ an ax, many years gone. I lived, but I never
heard music again. The pipes, fiddles, singin’ … I ken it’s music, but to me,
it’s nay more than noise. But that song … I dinna recall the song itself, but I
know how I felt when I heard it.”
She’d never before seen a look on his face as she did when he called back
that song for her, but now, watching his back, straight and square as he rode
before them, quite suddenly she felt what he had felt in the depth of that
distant night, and understood why he found peace in silent spaces.61
’Gin a Body Meet a Body …
“I’M OLDER THAN THIS place,” Jenny said, looking about with a
disparaging eye as the wagon pulled up outside an ordinary. “This town looks
as though ’twas thrown up yesterday.”
“It’s been here for the last twenty-five years,” Jamie said, wrapping his
horse’s reins around the hitching post. “It’s older than Rachel, aye?” He
smiled at his niece, but his sister snorted, edging backward out of her nest in
the wagon.
“No age at all for a city,” she said dismissively.
“Crawling wi’ Loyalists, too,” said Young Ian, seizing his mother round
the middle and swinging her down. “Or so I hear.”
“I hear that, too,” Jamie said, and gave the main street an eye, as though
Loyalists might come darting out of the taverns like mice. “But I hear they
havena got guns, nor yet a proper militia.”
Despite its relative youth, Salisbury was the largest town in Rowan
County. It was also the seat of Rowan County, the closest town between
Fraser’s Ridge and the Great Wagon Road—and the military fiefdom of one
Francis Locke, a patriot. And one with guns 
and
 militia. That being so, Jamie
settled Jenny, Rachel, and Oggy temporarily at a decent-looking ordinary
with an expensive pot of strong coffee and a plate of stuffed rolls, sent Ian to
buy provisions for the journey north, then went himself in search of Colonel
Locke.
Once met, Jamie found himself disposed to like Francis Locke. A stocky,
red-faced Irishman of about his own age, the man had a direct manner that
appealed to him. He was a landowner, a businessman—and the commander
of the Rowan County Regiment of Militia.
“One hundred and sixty-seven companies of militia we have on our rolls,”
Locke said, with a certain grim satisfaction. “At present. From all overRowan County—though none from the far backcountry as yet. I’d be glad to
welcome you and your company, Mr. Fraser, should ye care to join us.”
Jamie gave him a cordial nod but refrained from committing himself, just
yet.
“I’ll not yet have my company fully equipped, sir—though I expect to
accomplish that before the snow flies and be ready for the spring.”
The British army surely would be.
Locke gave him the same kind of nod, with the same look of reservation.
Locke knew perfectly well that Jamie wouldn’t admit his true state of
readiness until he’d made up his mind about Locke 
and
 his regiment.
“How many men have you?”
“Forty-seven, at present,” Jamie replied equably. “I think we will have
more, once the harvest is in.”
They were sitting in the City Tavern, with a pitcher of ale and a platter of
small fried fishes. Tasty fare after three days of journeycake and boiled eggs,
though the fish were equipped with an inconvenient number of small bones.
“Might I ask, sir—are ye maybe familiar with a man called Partland? Or
Adam Granger?”
Locke’s heavy gray brows cocked upward.
“Nicodemus Partland? Aye, heard of him. From Virginia. Loyalist gadfly.
Troublemaker,” he added offhandedly.
“He is that. But perhaps a bit more than a gadfly.” Jamie gave Locke a
brief account of Partland’s appearance on his land—his connection with
Captain Cunningham—and then of the rifles that Claire and Young Ian had
confiscated. Jamie didn’t embellish that encounter, but he knew how to tell a
story, and Locke was laughing at the end of it.
“Do ye manage the mounting of your men in the same fashion, Mr.
Fraser?”
“No, sir. I make fine liquor and trade for horses where I find them.”
Locke blinked, drawing conclusions. Jamie had told Locke where Fraser’s
Ridge was.
“Indians?”
Jamie inclined his head an inch.
“A few years back, I was an Indian agent for the Crown in the Southern
Department—under Mr. Atkins and then Colonel Johnson. I still have friends
among the Cherokee.”
The look of amusement came back into Locke’s weathered face.“I take it ye don’t number Colonel Johnson among your friends just at
present.”
“A friendship requires two parties of like mind, does it not?” When Jamie
had resigned his commission, Johnson had threatened to have him hanged as
a traitor—and meant it. Jamie chose another fish and bit into it carefully,
disentangling small bones with his tongue and laying them neatly on the
sheet of greasy, food-spattered newsprint that covered the table in lieu of a
cloth. Claire wasn’t with him to deal with things if he choked.
The newspaper was 
The Impartial Intelligencer,
 and made him think of
Fergus and Marsali. He made an instinctive move to cross himself at the
thought of them and Germain, but stilled his hand before it lifted. Locke
might well be a Protestant; no need to alienate someone he might need as an
ally.
Jamie laid aside the staring head and backbone of the first fish and chose
another. Ought he to give Locke one of the Masonic signs? Given his origins
and situation, the man was likely Made. Not yet, he decided, watching Locke
methodically engulfing his sixth fish. Locke seemed solid enough, but Jamie
wanted to talk to a few of the militia colonels presently enrolled in the Rowan
County Regiment before deciding whether—and how—to make an alliance.
There were the Overmountain men to be considered, too; they were less
official, less well armed, and less organized, but a damn sight closer to
Fraser’s Ridge than Locke was, and if he needed help in a hurry, they could
move quickly.
He put that thought aside. He’d do what he could and pray about the rest.
Locke leaned back, considering as he chewed his last fish slowly.
“Well, I trust we may in time be fast friends, Colonel. Given our
commonalities, as you might say.”
Before he could agree to this sentiment, the door opened and Young Ian
came in on the wings of a chilly draft that lifted the newspapers on the tables.
The Murrays had best be on their way quickly, before the weather turned wet,
he thought.
He introduced his nephew to Francis Locke, who glanced at Ian’s tattoos,
then at Jamie with an interested cock of the brow.
“I’ve found us lodging wi’ a widow named Hambly, Uncle,” said Ian,
ignoring Locke’s examination. “She says her supper will be ready in an hour,
should ye care to sit down at her table.”
Locke made a 
hem
 sound of warning in his throat.“The widow’s a kind woman and her house is clean, but she’s no sort of a
cook, God bless her. Perhaps ye’d best bring your family to my house for
their supper. My land lies outside Salisbury,” he added, seeing Jamie’s brow
rise, “but I’ve a small house in town for convenience, and my wife’s a
famous gossip. She likes nothin’ better than to meet new folk and turn ’em
inside out.”
Jamie met Ian’s eye and they shared a look. 
“Five to one on my mother,”
Ian’s face said, and Jamie agreed with a slight nod.
“We’ll join ye, sir, with great pleasure,” he said formally to Locke, and
rose. “We’ll go and fettle the women, and join ye by six o’clock, if that
suits?”
MRS. LOCKE WAS a bright-eyed bird of a woman who asked blunt
questions with the regularity of a cuckoo clock, but she 
was
 a good cook, and
Jenny kept her engaged in a discussion of cheese making and the virtues of
cow’s milk versus that of goats or sheep, while Rachel fed the bairn and
Jamie and Ian asked questions about the regiment, all of which Locke
answered readily.
Too far from the Ridge,
 Ian’s sidelong glance said, and Jamie looked down
in agreement.
Locke seemed well organized, but even with the recent excision of Burke
County, Rowan County still covered a vast area. If it was a matter of a large
battle, with the militia assisting regular troops, like Monmouth, that was one
thing: there’d be time to summon a number of Locke’s 167 companies. But
for someone to send a rider to Salisbury, appeal to Locke, and from there
summon help from surrounding areas to meet an unexpected and imminent
threat to the Ridge, a hundred miles away? No.
Ian and Jamie had silently concluded that the Ridge was better off
defending itself, and Ian had just raised an eyebrow to ask Jamie whether he
meant to tell Locke so when a sound of footsteps came up the front steps and
there was a rapid thumping on the door that stopped Mrs. Locke in mid-
question.
The caller was a boy of fifteen or so, with the beginnings of a scanty beard
creeping along his jaw like a fungus.
“Beggin’ your pardon, sir,” he said, bowing to Locke. “Constable Jones
sent me to say as he’s found a body and will you maybe come and sit on itbefore it gets any riper?”
“Sit on it?” said Rachel, looking up in surprise.
“Aye, ma’am,” Locke said, getting up from the table. “I’m the county
coroner, for my sins. Where’s this body, Josh?”
“In Chris Humphreys’s stable, sir. But ’twas found behind the Oak Tree
tavern, to start with. Mrs. Ford wouldn’t let ’em bring it inside the tavern.”
“Oh.” Locke cast a quick look at the landlord, who crossed his arms and
lowered his brow. “I suppose our host has similar feelings. I’ll go out to the
stable and have a look. Will you wait, Mr. Fraser? Likely I won’t be long
about it.”
“I’ll come with ye, if I may.” Jamie rose, making a small gesture indicating
that Ian should seize the opportunity to take his leave. Jamie was mildly
curious to see the dead man, but his main intent was to have an excuse to
break 
up the party. He could see Rachel at the table, drooping with weariness,
Oggy asleep in her lap, and his sister, while still upright, had been radiating
waves of impatience in his direction for the last quarter hour.62
A Stranger’s Face
THE STABLE WAS A respectable shed with four stalls, smelling of horse
but presently empty save for a pair of trestles with a sheet of tin roofing laid
across them. The body had been placed on this, a handkerchief laid over the
face for decency, though it was too cold for flies.
Jamie crossed himself unobtrusively and offered a brief, silent prayer for
the stranger’s soul.
“Any sign he was robbed, Mr. Jones?” Locke took out his own
handkerchief and a small bottle. He shook several drops from this onto the
cloth and pressed it to his nose in a practiced manner. Oil of wintergreen; the
sharp smell prickled the hairs inside Jamie’s own nose, and a good thing, too.
The stranger 
was
 ripe.
“Well, yes,” said the constable, with a touch of impatience. “If empty
pockets and a cracked skull are sign enough for you.”
Locke plucked the damp handkerchief off the man’s face with two fingers
and set it aside. Jamie felt his wame clench and rise.
The man had a shocking great wound in the side of his head, but that
wasn’t what was making the sweat break out in a rush on Jamie’s body.
“You know this man, Mr. Fraser?” Locke had noticed his reaction.
“No, sir,” he said. His lips felt stiff, as though someone had hit him in the
mouth. The man was strange to him, but the look of him was not. Not tall, but
large, a heavy-boned man who had run to fat, his bloated stomach a great
round swelling under his half-buttoned breeches, tapering down to too-small
feet that had flattened and spread under the weight they were required to bear
and burst the seams of the man’s worn shoes.
He’d seen those feet and those bursten shoon before—and likewise the
dead, broad face, hairy jaw slack and eyes half open, dull and sticky undertheir lids. Seen it covered with dirt as he filled in the grave, shoveling fast lest
he vomit again.
LOCKE, IN HIS office as coroner, told the constable to go and inquire of the
tavern’s patrons and bring any potential witnesses to view—and hopefully
identify—the body.
Jones shifted his weight, restive. “Whoever robbed him’s long gone. Think
he must have been in that alley for two, three days at least, from the smell.”
“Tell me about it in the morning, Mr. Jones,” Locke said, and shrugged his
coat closer. It was perishing in the shed, and his voice rose in a white cloud.
Jamie felt the chill in the aching bones of his maimed right hand and closed it
into a fist, which he thrust into the pocket of his greatcoat.
“Do ye have such occurrences often?” he asked Locke as they made their
way back through the dark streets.
“More often than I’d like,” Locke replied grimly. “And more often than
used to be the case.”
“War does bring out the worst in folk.” He hadn’t meant it as a joke, and
Locke didn’t take it as one—merely nodded. He closed the door of the shed
behind them and they walked in silence up the street.
Jamie declined the offer of a final dram, bade Locke farewell at his door,
and asked him to give their thanks to his wife for the fine supper. The Widow
Hambly’s house was two streets over; he’d pass the stable again on his way
there.
THERE WAS A flickering light inside the stable; it spilled through the
chinks between the boards, making a ghostly outline against the night. Jamie
stopped dead at the sight, but curiosity and dread combined made him walk
softly toward the door.
The door was ajar, and he saw a fantastical figure inside, an elongated
shadow that moved sharply at the crunch of his footstep on gravel.
“Uncle Jamie?” It was Ian, holding a lantern, and Jamie’s heart slowed
down.
“Aye.” He stepped into the shed. “Are Rachel and your mother settled,
then?”“Well, they’ve got to the Widow Hambly’s, all right. As Mrs. Locke
kindly came with them, to bring a packet of food for tomorrow and stayed to
tell the widow everything that was said over supper, I doubt they’ll find their
beds before midnight.” He twisted a forefinger in his ear, in illustration.
“Which would be why you’re here,” Jamie said. “Ye consider this
gentleman better company?”
Ian held out a flattened hand and oscillated it, indicating that the difference
between Mrs. Locke and an ill-feckit corpse was negligible in terms of
providing good company.
“I wanted to see what he looked like.” He raised one sketchy brow at
Jamie. “And ye’re here because …?”
“I wanted to see what he looks like, again. I maybe didna get a clear keek
at him, earlier.”
Ian nodded and moved aside, holding his lantern high above the body.
They looked at it in silence. Jamie closed his eyes and took two or three deep
breaths, despite the smell. Then he opened them again.
Was it? The stranger seemed different now than he had on first sight.
Shorter. The neck was maybe longer, and it was scrawny, in spite of the
bulging 
stomach. The other’s neck had been creased, two deep lines dividing
the fat into rings. “Fat lumpkin,” his sister had called the man who’d raped
Claire. The pressure in his chest eased a little, and he considered the face,
carefully this time.
No. No, it wasn’t the same at all, and his belly hollowed with relief. The
face was unshaven and had been for some time, but if he disregarded that,
then … no. Nose and mouth were a different shape altogether.
“Ye thought ye might ken him, Uncle?” Ian was looking at him from the
opposite side of the table, interested. “I thought that, too.”
“Did ye, indeed,” Jamie said, and the pressure in his chest was back. He
resisted the urge to turn and look outside. Instead, he said in the 
Gàidhlig,
 “A
man ye might have seen by firelight once before?”
Ian nodded, his gaze steady, and replied in the same language.
“The man whose filth defiled your fair one? Yes.”
That was as much a shock as finding Ian here, and it must have shown on
his face, for Ian grimaced, then looked apologetic. “Janet Murray’s your
sister, 
bràthair-mhàthair,
 but she’s my mother.” Dropping back into English,
he added, “I’ll no say she canna keep secrets, for she does. But if she sees
reason to speak, then ye’re going to hear what she has to say. She told mesome weeks ago, when I came to say I was going to Beardsley’s trading post,
and did she want anything. She told me to keep an eye out for the fellow.”
This eased Jamie a little, and he looked back at the dead stranger.
“We dinna want to say anything to her about this.”
“No, we don’t,” Ian agreed, and a faint shudder went over him at the
thought.
“From curiosity,” Jamie said, returning to the 
Gàidhlig,
 “
why
 did your
mother tell ye about the 
mhic an diabhail
?”
“If it might be that you needed my help in the killing, 
a bràthair mo
mhàthair,
” Ian said, with the trace of a smile. “She said I must not offer, but
if ye asked, I must go with you. And I would have done so,” he added softly,
his eyes dark in the lantern’s glow. “Without the telling.
“What do you think?” he said then, changing subjects with a nod at the
stranger. “Plainly, it is not the same man. That man is dead?”
“He is.”
Ian nodded, matter-of-fact.
“Good. Do we think this one might be his kin?”
“I dinna ken, but this one is also dead, and I canna think his death”—Jamie
nodded at the corpse—“can have aught to do with the other.”
Ian nodded in agreement.
“Then I think it hasna anything to do wi’ us, either.”
Jamie felt air in his chest, light and cold and fresh.
“He has not,” he agreed. Then, struck by a thought, asked, “How do ye
come to ken what the—other—looked like?”
“The same as you, I expect. Went to Beardsley’s and asked after the man
wi’ the birthmark. Dinna fash,” he added. “I didna make a meal of it; no one
would remember.”
“No,” Jamie said flatly. No one 
would
 remember, because no one would
ever see the man again, or think to look for him—he wasn’t the sort of man
who had real business with anyone. He was the sort of man who lived and
died alone. Save for his dog.
And even if someone thought to visit him, they willna find him.
 It wasn’t
unusual for solitary men to disappear in the backcountry, their passing
unremarked. Killed by accident, died of untended illness, wandered away …
They stood together for a moment, scrutinizing the stranger’s face. Jamie
felt Ian relax, his decision made, and a moment later, Jamie also shook his
head and stepped back.“No,” he said, and Ian nodded and, leaning forward, blew out the lantern’s
wick, leaving them in darkness with the smell of the dead man.
“Ye’re sure, yourself?” Jamie asked, not moving. Ian hadn’t asked 
him
that, but he couldn’t help himself. Ian touched his shoulder.
“I’m sure this man is no concern of ours,” he said firmly. “Ought we to
leave him with a blessing, though? He’s a stranger.”
They stood close together and murmured the short form of the death dirge.
Jamie’s eyes were accustomed now to the dark of the shed, and he saw the
words come out of their mouths in white wisps, insubstantial as the soul they
blessed.
They left, and Jamie closed the shed door quietly behind them.
THE MAN WAS still in their minds, though, as they walked down the street.
Not the dead man they had just left. The other.
“Ye didna go to look for him, did ye?” Jamie asked Ian as they turned in to
the main street. “After ye learnt his name, I mean.”
“Och, no. I kent ye’d dealt with him.” They were near the square, and there
was enough light from the taverns that he saw Ian glance at him, one brow
raised.
“Ken, I had some business in the forest near the bottom of the Ridge, and I
heard your horse comin’ along the wagon road just after dawn, so I went and
looked. Ye had your rifle with ye and ye looked grim enough. I could tell ye
were hunting, but it wouldna be an animal, of course, not on horseback.”
Ian’s head turned briefly toward him.
“Ye didna look like ye needed help, but I said the prayer for ye, Uncle—
for a warrior goin’ out.”
The knot between Jamie’s shoulder blades relaxed a bit. He found it oddly
comforting to know that he had not in fact gone alone on that journey, even
though he’d not known it at the time.
“I thank ye, Ian. It was a help, I’m sure.” The cold oppression of the shed
had lifted with the advent of torchlights and the noise of the town, so they
walked for a bit by silent consent, leaving the women time to settle
themselves and put the bairn to bed.
The moon was well above the housetops of Salisbury, but there were still
men abroad in the streets, and the place had a restless air about it.They passed a group of men, twenty or so, faceless under the dark brims of
their hats, but the moon lit a pale cloud of the dust kicked up by their 
boots,
so it seemed they walked knee-deep through a rising fog. They were Scotch-
Irish, talking loudly, noticeably drunk and arguing among themselves, and
Jamie and Ian passed by unnoticed. Francis Locke had said there were a
number of militia companies in the town; these men had the look of new
militia—self-important and unsure at the same time, and wanting to show
that they weren’t.
They crossed through the square and the streets behind it and found silence
again amid the calling of owls from the trees near Town Creek. Ian broke it,
talking low, halfway to himself and halfway not.
“Last time I walked like this—at night, I mean, just walking, not huntin’—
was just after Monmouth,” he said. “I’d been in the British camp, wi’ his
lordship, and he asked me to stay, because I’d an arrow in my arm—ye recall
that, aye? Ye broke the shaft for me, earlier that day.”
“I’d forgot,” Jamie admitted.
“Well, it was a long day.”
“Aye. I remember bits and pieces—I lost my horse when he went off a
bridge into one of those hellish morasses, and I’m never going to forget the
sound o’ that.” A deep shudder curdled his wame, recalling the taste of his
own vomit. “And then I remember General Washington—were ye there, Ian,
when he turned back the retreat after Lee made a collieshangie of it?”
“Aye,” Ian said, and laughed a little. “Though I didna take much notice. I
had my own bit o’ trouble to settle, with the Abenaki. And I did settle it, too,”
he added, grimness coming into his voice. “Your men got one o’ them, but I
killed the other in the British camp that night, wi’ his own tomahawk.”
“I hadna heard about that,” Jamie said, surprised. “Ye did it 
in
 the British
camp? Ye never told me that. How did ye come to be there, for that matter?
Last I saw ye was just before the battle, and the next I saw ye, your cousin
William was bringin’ what I thought was your corpse into Freehold on a
mule.”
And the next time he’d seen William had been in Savannah, when his son
had come to ask his help in saving Jane Pocock. They’d been too late. That
failure had been neither of their faults, but his heart still hurt for the poor wee
lassie … and for his poor lad.
“I dinna mind most o’ that, myself,” Ian said. “I came in wi’ Lord John—
we got arrested together—but then I walked out o’ the camp, meanin’ to gofind Rachel or you, but I was bad wi’ the fever, the night goin’ in and out
around me like as if it was breathin’ and I was walkin’ along through the stars
wi’ my da beside me, just talkin’ to him, as if …”
“As if he was there,” Jamie finished, smiling. “I expect he was. I feel him
beside me, now and then.” He glanced automatically to his right as he said
this, as though Ian Mòr might indeed be there now.
“We were talkin’ o’ the Indian I’d just killed—and I said it put me in mind
o’ that gobshite who tried to extort ye, Uncle—the one I killed there by the
fire after Saratoga. I said something about how it seemed different, killing a
man face-to-face, but I’d thought I ought to be used to such things by now,
and I wasn’t. And he said I maybe shouldn’t be,” Ian said thoughtfully. “He
said it couldna be good for my soul, bein’ used to things like that.”
“Your da’s a wise man.”
THEY 
WALKED BACK into town, easy with each other, talking now and
then, but not of anything that mattered.
“Ye’ve got all ye need, Ian?” Jamie asked. “For the journey?”
“If I don’t, it’s too late now,” Ian said, laughing.
Jamie smiled, but the words 
“too late”
 lingered in the back of his mind.
He’d part with the travelers at daybreak, see them onto the Great Wagon
Road, and then they’d be gone—God knew for how long.
They were nearly to the Widow Hambly’s house when he stopped, a hand
on Ian’s arm.
“I wasna going to ask, and I’m not,” Jamie said abruptly. “Because ye
must be free to do whatever ye need to. But I find I must say a thing to ye,
before ye go.”
Ian didn’t say anything, but made a slight adjustment of posture that gave
Jamie his full attention.
“Ken, when Brianna brought us the books,” Jamie began carefully, “there
was the strange one for the bairns, and a romance for me about … well,
fanciful things, to say the least. And a medical book for your auntie.”
“Aye, I’ve maybe seen that one,” Ian said thoughtfully. “A big blue one,
very thick? Ye could kill a rat wi’ that one.”
“That’s the one, aye. But the lass brought along a book for herself.” He
hesitated; he’d never spoken to Ian about Claire’s life away from him. “It was
written by a man named Randall. A historian.”Ian’s head turned sharply toward him.
“Randall. Was his name 
Frank
 Randall?”
“Aye, it was.” Jamie felt as though Ian had rabbit-punched him, and shook
his head to clear it. “How—did Bree 
tell
 ye about him? Her—her—”
“Her other father? Aye. Years ago.” He made a small motion with one
hand, disturbing the dark. “Doesna matter.”
“Aye, it does.” He paused for a moment; he’d never talked about Randall
with anyone save Claire. But he had to, so he did.
“I kent about him, from the first day I met Claire—though I thought he was
dead, and in fact, he 
was,
 but …” He cleared his throat, and Ian reached into
his pack and handed him a battered flask. Dark as it was, he felt the crude
fleur-de-lis
 under his thumb. It was Ian Mòr’s old soldier’s flask, which his
friend had kept from their time in France as young mercenaries, and the feel
of it steadied him.
“The thing is, 
a bhalaich,
 he kent about me, too.” He uncorked the flask
and drank from it; watered brandy, but it helped. “Claire told him, when she
… went back. She thought I was dead at Culloden, and—”
Ian made a small noise that might have been amusement.
“Aye,” Jamie said dryly. “I meant to be. But ye dinna always get to choose
what happens to ye, do you?”
“True enough. But Brianna told me her father was dead—so … he was, he
is …
 really dead?”
“Well, I’d thought so. But the bugger wrote a damn book, didn’t he? The
one Brianna brought wi’ her—to remember him by. I read it.”
Ian rubbed a thumb across his chin; Jamie could hear the scratch of the
bristles, and it made his own chin itch.
“What the devil did he say in it?”
Jamie sighed and saw his breath, white for an instant in the dark. The
moon had faded out of sight behind the clouds. They couldn’t stay out here
long; Ian needed sleep before the journey, and Jamie’s bad hand was telling
him that rain was coming.
“It’s about Scots, ken? In America. What they—we—did, what we’ll do, in
the Revolution. The thing is … aye, well. There are a good many men named
Jamie Fraser in Scotland, and I’m sure there are plenty here, too.”
“Och, ye’re in his book?” Ian straightened up, and Jamie made a negative
gesture.“I dinna ken, that’s the trouble. It 
might
 be me, and it bloody well might
not be, too. He mentions my name fourteen times, but never makin’ enough
of it to be able to tell whether it’s me or someone else. He never comes right
out and says, 
‘Jamie Fraser of Fraser’s Ridge,’
 or 
‘Broch Tuarach,’
 or
anything o’ that sort.”
“Why are ye worried, then, Uncle?”
“Because he says there’s going to be a battle nearby us—at a place called
Kings Mountain. And Jamie Fraser’s killed in it. Will be, I mean. 
A
 Jamie
Fraser.” Saying it aloud actually steadied him a little. It seemed ridiculous.
Ian wasn’t taking it that way, though. He gripped Jamie’s arm, close in the
darkness.
“Ye think it’s you he means?”
“Well, that’s the devil of it, Ian. I canna say, at all. See—” His lips were
dry, and he licked them briefly. “The man kent about me, and he had nay
reason to love me. We—Claire and Bree and I—think Frank Randall knew
that the lass would come back, to find her mother and me. And if he looked,
in—in history—he’d maybe find us.”
Ian clicked his tongue in consternation—in just the way his father had, and
Jamie smiled involuntarily.
“And if he did …”
“No man is objective about Claire,” Jamie said. “I mean—they’re just
not.”
Ian made a wee fizzing noise of assent.
“Which isna to say everyone loves her …”
“A lot of us do, Uncle,” his nephew assured him. “But aye, I ken what ye
mean.”
“Aye. Well, what I mean is—and I ken this sounds as though I’ve lost my
senses and maybe I 
have
—but … I’ve read his book, and by God, I think the
man is talkin’ to me.”
Ian was silent for quite a while. The dim shape of a nightjar rose from the
ground near their feet and shot off into the dark with a high, clear 
zeeek
!
“And if he is talkin’ to you?” Ian said at last.
That
 scared him.
“If he is—and if the Jamie Fraser who dies at Kings Mountain is me … I
just … I …” He couldn’t ask it. And for God’s sake, he was not afraid of
dying, not so many times as he’d looked Death in the face. It was only—
Ian’s hand slid into his and clasped it firmly.“I’ll be there with ye, Uncle. When does it happen? The battle, I mean.”
Relief coursed through him, and the breath he took went down to his feet.
“In about a year. October next, it will be. Or … so he says.”
“That’ll be plenty time enough for me to do whatever needs to be done in
the North,” Ian said, then squeezed his hand and let it go. “Dinna fash.”
Jamie nodded, his heart full. In the morning he would bid them all
farewell, but he would take his leave of Ian Òg now.
“Turn about, Ian,” he said quietly, and Ian did, looking out at the house
across the street, dark save for the glow of a smoored hearth, visible at the
edge of the shutters. He put a hand on Ian’s shoulder, and spoke for him the
blessing for a warrior going out.63
The Third Floor
Fraser’s Ridge
IT WAS A BIG house. Roger and Bree were gone, and now Jamie had left to
see Ian and Rachel and Jenny safely on their road. The house seemed even
bigger now, with only two people and a dog in it.
Fanny, deprived of companionship, clung to me like a small cocklebur, her
footsteps echoing behind me—and the 
tic-tic-tic
 of Bluebell’s behind hers—
as I went to and fro from surgery to kitchen to parlor and back to surgery, the
three of us always conscious of the vacant bedrooms overhead and the
distant, shadowy, empty third floor high above, its walls a ghostly forest of
studs, its glassless windows still covered by laths to keep out rain and snow
until the vanished master should return to finish the jobs he’d left undone.
I’d invited her to share my bedroom, and we’d hauled in the truckle bed
from the children’s room. It was a comfort to hear each other’s breathing in
the night, something warm and quick, almost drowning out the slow, chilled
breathing of the house around us—almost imperceptible, but definitely there.
Especially at dusk, when the shadows began to rise up the walls like a silent
tide, spilling darkness into the room.
Now and then I’d wake at dawn to find Fanny in my bed, curled against
me for warmth and sound asleep, Bluey lying in a nest of quilts at our feet.
The dog would look up when I woke, gently thwapping her feathery tail
against the bedding, but she wouldn’t move until Fanny did.
“They’ll come back,” I assured her, every day. “All of them. We just have
to stay busy until they do.”
But Fanny had never lived alone a day in her life. She didn’t know how to
deal with solitude, let alone a solitude filled with the menace of one’s own
thoughts.What if—?
 was the constant refrain of her thoughts. The fact that it was
also the refrain—if a silent one—of mine didn’t help.
“Do you think houses are alive?” Fanny blurted one day.
“Yes, I’m sure of it,” I said rather absently.
“You are?” Fanny’s round eyes jarred me back into the present. We were
darning socks in front of the fire, having finished the morning chores and
eaten lunch. We’d fed the pigs, forked dry hay for the other stock, and milked
the cow and two goats—I’d have to churn butter tomorrow, leave aside a
couple of buckets for cheese making, and send the rest of the extra milk
downhill to Bobby Higgins for his boys.
“Well … yes,” I said slowly. “I think any place that people live for a long
time probably absorbs a bit of them. Certainly houses affect the people who
live in them—why shouldn’t it work both ways?”
“Both ways?” She looked dubious. “You mean that I left part of me at the
brothel—and I brought part of the brothel with me?”
“Didn’t you?” I asked gently. Her face went blank for a moment, but then
the life returned to her eyes.
“Yes,” she said, but she was wary now, and added nothing more.
“Who’s doing for Bobby and the boys this week, do you know?” I asked
her. The neighbor women—and their daughters—who lived in easy walking
distance had been taking it in turn to stop into the Higgins cabin every few
days, to bring food, cook supper, and do small jobs of mending and
housekeeping, lest the Higginses descend irretrievably into male slovenliness.
“Abigail Lachlan and her sister,” Fanny replied readily. “They always
come together because they’re jealous of each other.”
“Jealous? Oh, over Bobby, you mean?” She nodded, squinting at the thread
she was trying to put through the eye of her needle. The competition to
become the next Mrs. Higgins was still discreet, civil, and unspoken, but
becoming somewhat more defined. Bobby showed little sign so far of
wanting to make a choice—or of seeming to notice the efforts made to
ensnare his attention, though he always thanked the young women sincerely
for their help.
“What you said about houses …” Fanny held her breath for a moment,
then let it out with a small 
ah!
 of triumph when the thread went through the
needle’s eye. “Do you think maybe Amy Higgins is still in the cabin?
Haunting it, I mean, to keep other women away?”That took me slightly aback—but the suggestion was made without any
emotion beyond curiosity, and I answered it on the same terms. Right after
Amy’s death, there had been occasional rumors about her being seen in the
gorge where she was killed, or washing clothes in the creek—a very common
occupation for Scottish or Irish female ghosts, and no wonder, as they’d
likely spent most of their lives doing just that—but these had mostly ceased
as the heavy work of autumn came on and people returned to their own
preoccupations.
“I don’t know about the house itself. I’ve never felt anything of Amy when
I’ve gone there since she died. But when someone dies, naturally the people
they leave behind will still sense them. I don’t know whether you’d call that
haunting, though; I think it’s maybe just memory and … longing.”
Fanny nodded, eyes intent on the heel of the stocking she was darning. I
could hear the faint scrape of her needle on the wooden darning egg.
“I wish Jane would haunt me.” The words weren’t much above a whisper,
but I heard it clearly enough, and my heart clenched.
The memory of that sort of wish—the bone-deep need to have contact of
any sort, a longing that harrowed the soul, a hollowness that could never be
filled—struck me so hard that I couldn’t speak.
Jamie 
had
 haunted me—in spite of all my efforts to forget, to immerse
myself in the life I had. Would I have found the strength to come back, if he
hadn’t remained as a constant presence in my heart, my dreams?
“You won’t forget her, Fanny,” I said, and squeezed her hand. “She won’t
forget you, either.”
The wind had come up; I heard it rushing through the trees outside, and the
glass window rattled in its frame.
“We’d better close the shutters,” I said, getting up to do so. The surgery
window was the largest in the house and thus endowed with both external and
internal shutters—both to protect the precious expanse of glass panes from
bad weather and potential attack and to insulate the room against the creeping
cold.
As I leaned out with the shutter hook in my hand, though, I saw a tall black
figure hastening toward the house, skirts and cloak flying in the wind.
“You and your little dog, too,” I murmured, and risked a glance at the
forest, in case of flying monkeys. A blast of cold air rushed past me into the
surgery, rattling glassware and flipping the pages of the 
Merck Manual
 that Ihad left open on the counter. Luckily I’d taken the precaution of removing
the copyright page …
“What did you say?” Fanny had followed me and stood now in the surgery
door, Bluebell yawning behind her.
“Mrs. Cunningham’s coming,” I said, leaving the shutters open and closing
the window. “Go and let her in, will you? Put her in the parlor and tell her I’ll
be right there; perhaps she’s come for the slippery elm powder I promised
her.”
So far as Fanny was concerned, Mrs. Cunningham probably 
was
 the
Wicked Witch of the West, and her manner in inviting the lady inside
reflected as much. To my surprise, I heard Mrs. Cunningham declining to sit
in the parlor, and in seconds, she was in the door of the surgery, windblown
as a bat, and pale as a pat of fresh butter.
“I need …” But she was sagging toward the floor as she spoke, and fell
into my arms before she managed a whispered “help.”
Fanny gasped, but grabbed Mrs. Cunningham round the waist, and together
we bundled her onto my surgery table. She was clutching her black shawl
tight with one hand, holding on like grim death. She’d been gripping it
against the wind so hard that her fingers had locked with cold, and it was a
job to get the shawl loose.
“Bloody hell,” I said, but mildly, seeing what the trouble was. “How did
you manage to do that? Fanny, get me the whisky.”
“Fell,” Mrs. Cunningham rasped, beginning to get her breath back.
“Tripped over the scuttle, like a fool.” Her right shoulder was badly
dislocated, the humerus humped and elbow drawn in against her ribs, the
apparent deformity adding a lot to the witchy impression.
“Don’t worry,” I told her, looking for a way to ease her bodice off so I
could reduce the dislocation without tearing the cloth. “I can fix it.”
“I wouldn’t have staggered two miles downhill through buggering
brambles if I didn’t think you could,” she snapped, the warmth of the room
beginning to revive her. I smiled and, taking the bottle from Fanny, uncorked
it and handed it to Elspeth, who put it to her lips and took several slow, deep
gulps, pausing to cough in between.
“Your husband … knows … his trade,” she said hoarsely, handing the
bottle back to Fanny.
“Several of them,” I agreed. I’d got the bodice loose but couldn’t free the
strap of her stays and instead severed it with a Gordian stroke of my scalpel.“Hold her tight round the chest, please, Fanny.”
Elspeth Cunningham knew exactly what I was trying to do, and gritting her
teeth, she deliberately relaxed her muscles as far as she could—not all that
far, under the circumstances, but every little bit helped. I supposed she must
have seen it done on ships—that had to have been the source of the language
she was using while I maneuvered the humerus into the correct angle. Fanny
snorted with amusement at “grass-combing son of a buggering 
sod
!” as I
rotated the arm and the head of the humerus popped back into place.
“It’s been a long time since I heard language like that,” Fanny said, her lips
twitching.
“If you have to do with sailors, young woman, you acquire both their
virtues and their vices.” Elspeth’s face was still white and shone like polished
bone under a layer of sweat, but her voice was steady and her breath was
coming back. “And where, might I ask, 
did
 you hear language like that?”
Fanny glanced at me, but I nodded and she said simply, “I lived in a
brothel for some time, ma’am.”
“Indeed.” Mrs. Cunningham drew her wrist out of my grasp and sat up,
rather shaky, but bracing herself with her good hand on the table. “I suppose
whores must also have both virtues and vices, then.”
“I don’t know about the virtues,” Fanny said dubiously. “Unless you count
being able to milk a man in two minutes by the clock.”
I had taken a nip of the whisky myself, and choked on it.
“I think that would be classed as a skill rather than a virtue,” Mrs.
Cunningham told Fanny. “Though a valuable one, I daresay.”
“Well, we all have our strong points,” I said, wanting to put a stop to the
conversation before Fanny said anything else. My relationship with Elspeth
Cunningham had warmed after Amy Higgins’s death—but only to a certain
degree. We respected each other but could not quite be friends, owing to the
mutual but unacknowledged realization that, at some point, political reality
might oblige my husband and her son to try to kill each other.
WANTING 
TO AVOID further revelations from Fanny, I sent her to the
kitchen to deal with the quails Mrs. McAfee had brought by earlier, in
payment for the garlic ointment I’d given her for pinworms.
“I’ve always wondered,” I remarked, tying Elspeth’s sling. “What, exactly,
does ‘grass-combing’ mean? Is it actual bad language, or just descriptive?”She’d been holding her breath as I made the final adjustments but now let
it out with a small sigh, gingerly testing the sling.
“Thank you. As to ‘grass-combing,’ it usually means someone who is
either idle or incompetent. Why combing grass should imply either attribute
is unclear, but it’s not actually bad language as such, unless the term
‘bugger’—sometimes multiple buggers—is attached. Though I can’t say I’ve
ever heard it 
without
 ‘bugger,’” she added fairly.
“I daresay you’ve heard more than that, if you’ve been at sea. I think you
may have shocked Fanny. Not the language itself, but that you don’t look like
a whore.”
She snorted briefly.
“Women tend to be much freer in their speech when there are no men
present, regardless of profession; surely you’ve noticed that?”
“Well, yes,” I said. “Including nuns.”
“Do you know any nuns? On a personal basis?” she asked, with a trace of
sarcasm. Her face was beginning to show a tinge of color, and her breathing
was easier.
“I did, once.” And in fact, while I’d seldom heard any of the sisters of the
Hôpital des Anges say anything like “grass-combing bugger,” I’d certainly
heard them mutter 
“Merde!”
—and a few more colorful sentiments—under
their breaths while dealing with the more trying aspects of practicing
medicine among the poor of Paris.
And suddenly I had a vivid memory of Mother Hildegarde, who seldom
said even 
“Merde,”
 but who had told me quite frankly that the King of
France would expect to lie with me if I went to beg him for Jamie’s release
from prison. And then she’d dressed me in red silk and sent me off to do
exactly that.
“Merde,”
 I muttered, under my own breath. Elspeth didn’t quite laugh—
probably because it would hurt her shoulder—but snorted a little.
“It’s been my observation,” she said, “that either sex is much more
constrained in language when in the presence of the other than when they are
solely in the company of their own kind. Save perhaps in brothels,” she
added, with a glance toward the kitchen, where Fanny was singing “Frère
Jacques” to herself while rolling quails in clay. “That is a remarkable child,
but you must really try to persuade her not to—”
“She knows not to say things like that in public,” I assured Elspeth, and
poured some whisky into a cup. “But you’ll be quite free to say anything youlike tonight, because I’m not having you go back to your cabin in your
condition.”
She gave me a considering look but then shoved a straggle of steel-gray
hair behind one ear and acquiesced.
“I’m not sure whether by my 
‘condition’
 you mean injured or intoxicated,
but in either case, thank you.”
“Shall I send Fanny up to your cabin to smother your fire?”
“No. I drowned it before I left, with a pitcher of cold tea. Quite a waste, but
I couldn’t tell how soon I should be back.”
“Good.” I took her by her sound arm and helped her off the table. “I’ll help
you upstairs to lie down for a bit.”
She didn’t argue, and I saw how much the injury and the journey to reach
me had exhausted her. She lifted her feet with slow care, to keep from
stumbling on the stairs. I parked her on one of the children’s beds, provided
her with a quilt, a pitcher of cold water, and a stiff dram, then went down to
help Fanny with the supper preparations.
Brianna had shown her how to pack quails in clay for baking in the ashes,
but this was the first time she’d done it alone, and she was frowning at the
row of pale clods and smears of mud on the table.
“Do you think that’s 
enough
 mud?” she asked me, dubiously. There was a
long streak of clay down her cheek, and quite a bit in her hair. “If it’s not
enough, Bree says, it will crack before they’re cooked and burn the meat, but
if it’s 
too
 much mud, they’ll be raw inside.”
“I expect we’ll be too hungry to care much by the time they’re cooked,” I
said, but gave one of the little packages a light squeeze and felt the clay give
under my fingers. “I think we may have a few air pockets in the clay, though.
Squish them—lightly—with your hands all over, to be sure we’ve got rid of
all the air—otherwise, when the steam hits an air pocket, the quail—well, the
package, not the actual quail—will explode.”
“Oh, dear,” Fanny said, and began determinedly squeezing the embedded
quail. I drew breath and rubbed two fingers between my brows.
“Have you a headache?” Fanny asked, brightening. “There’s fresh willow
bark; I could brew you some tea in a moment!”
I smiled at her. She was fascinated by herbs and adored all the grinding,
boiling, and steeping.
“Thank you, sweetheart,” I said. “I’m fine. Just trying to think what the
devil to eat 
with
 the quail.” Meals were the daily bane of my existence; not somuch the constant work of picking, cleaning, chopping, cooking—though
those activities were fairly baneful in themselves—but primarily the never-
ending chore of remembering what we had on hand, and balancing the effort
required to make it edible against the knowledge of what might spoil if we
didn’t eat it right away. Bother nutrition; I crammed apples, raisins, and nuts
into people more or less constantly, and poked green stuff down their
reluctant gullets whenever I got the chance, and no one had died of scurvy
yet.
“We have lots of beans,” Fanny said dubiously. “Or rice, I suppose … or
maybe turnips? Er … neeps, I mean.”
“That’s a thought. Bashed neeps aren’t bad, so long as there’s butter and
salt, and I 
know
 we have salt.” Two hundred and fifty pounds of it sheltering
in the smoking shed, as a matter of fact. Tom MacLeod had brought it by
wagon from Cross Creek last week—the year’s supply for the entire Ridge, in
time for the hunting, butchering, and preserving. A meager eighty pounds of
sugar, but I did have honey …
“Right. Baked quail with buttered bashed neeps, and—dried peas boiled
with onion? Maybe a little cream?”
In the end, the three of us sat down an hour later to a very reasonable
dinner—only one of the quails had exploded, and in fact, the smoky meat was
very tasty, and the slightly burnt onions actually improved the creamed peas,
I thought. There wasn’t much conversation, though; Fanny and I were tired to
the bone and Elspeth Cunningham was old, tired, and in pain.
Still, she made an effort to be civil.
“Do you mean to tell me,” she said, looking round the enormous kitchen,
“that there are only the two of you left to run this house?”
“The house 
and
 the livestock and garden,” I agreed, stifling a yawn with a
jam-spread bannock. “And the butchering.”
“And the bees,” Fanny put in helpfully. “And all of Mrs. Fraser’s
medicines to be made, and all the people she puts back togeth … Er … all the
people she helps,” she ended, rather more tactfully than she’d begun.
“And the cleaning, too, of course,” Elspeth added, looking thoughtfully at
the expanse of foot-marked wooden flooring that disappeared into shadow at
the far end of the room. She glanced at me in a way I recognized at once:
diagnosis.
Whatever she saw, she was tactful enough to keep it to herself, but she
took the whisky bottle I pushed in her direction, nodded her thanks, and said,“I owe you a great deal, Mrs. Fraser. Please allow me to repay you—in part
—by sending down one of my son’s lieutenants to take care of the more …
manly chores, while your husband is away. Two of them will be coming next
week, to stay with us for a time.”
I opened my mouth to refuse politely, but then met her eye—firm, but
kindly—and then Fanny’s, pleading and hopeful.
“Thank you,” I said, and topped up her cup.
TALK WAS SMALL and desultory, and within half an hour Fanny had
begun to yawn, and so had Bluebell, making a loud creaking noise when she
did so.
“I think the dog wants to go to bed, Fanny,” I said, clenching my jaw to
contain my own contagious yawn.
“Yes’m,” she murmured, and taking the candlestick I shoved into her hand,
she wobbled slowly off to bed, Bluebell trudging in her wake with drowsy
determination.
Elspeth made no move to go to bed, though I thought she must be dropping
with weariness. I certainly was; too stupid with fatigue to think of any sort of
conversational gambit. Luckily, none seemed to be needed. We just sat
peacefully by the fire, watching the flames and listening to the wind howl
through the empty attics overhead.
Suddenly, a door slammed, and we both jerked upright.
No other noise came down the stairs, though, and after a moment, my heart
quit pounding.
“It’s all right,” I said.
Elspeth looked at me sharply. “Patrice MacDonald told me your third floor
was unfinished. Her husband was intending to come and work on it this
Friday.”
“True.”
“That noise didn’t come from the second floor. I’m sure of it.”
“No,” I agreed. “It didn’t.”
She stared at me, eyes narrowed. I sighed, wishing that I had coffee.
“All houses make sounds, Elspeth—especially big houses. My daughter
could undoubtedly tell you why—I can’t, though I can guess now and then.
All I can tell you is that when the wind’s in the east, we often hear that
particular noise from the third floor.”“Oh.” She relaxed a little, and took another sip of whisky. “Why do you
not just leave that door shut, then?”
“There aren’t any doors on the third floor,” I said. “Yet.” I took a sip of my
own. The whisky wasn’t Jamie’s special, but it wasn’t at all bad. I could feel
it spreading through my middle in a soft cloud of warmth.
“Are you telling me,” Elspeth said, a few moments later, “that you
consider an unfinished floor in a new house to be 
haunted
?”
I laughed.
“No, I’m not. I don’t know what does make that noise, but I’m sure it isn’t
a ghostly door of some kind. Really,” I added, seeing her still dubious.
“Dozens of people have worked up there over the last couple of months, and
none of them have died there—nor did any of them ever see or hear anything
odd. And you know 
that’s
 true,” I finished, pointing my little finger at her,
“because if anyone had, the whole Ridge would know about it by now.”
She’d been on the Ridge long enough to realize the truth of this and
nodded, relaxing enough to resume drinking whisky. The tension in the room
began to ebb, disappearing up the chimney in a wavering white stream of
hickory smoke.
“The attic,” she said, after a few minutes of silence. “Why? It’s a
remarkably large house, without adding a third floor.”
“Jamie insisted on it,” I said, with a one-shouldered shrug.
She made a noncommittal noise of acknowledgment and went on sipping.
But her sparse gray brows were drawn together, and I knew she wouldn’t
stop thinking about it.
“My husband 
is
 the Fraser of Fraser’s Ridge,” I said. “If there should ever
be … an emergency of some kind that compelled some of the tenants to leave
their homes, they could take temporary refuge here. I’ve had that happen
before,” I added. “Had refugees in my kitchen—in the old house, I mean—
for months. Worse than cockroaches.”
Elspeth laughed politely at that, but she wasn’t troubling to hide her
thoughts, and I knew that she appreciated exactly what sort of emergency I
had in mind.
“Your son,” I said, feeling that I might as well be blunt. “You believe
him?”
She swallowed slowly and leaned back, seeming to look at me from a great
distance, as one might regard a bear on a mountaintop: interesting, but no
great threat.“You mean, of course, what he told his congregation, about his son’s
death. Yes, I believe him. It is a comfort,” she added softly.
I nodded, accepting this. The story had been a comfort to many more
people than her—including me, I realized, with a small sense of surprise. But
that wasn’t what I was getting at.
“I was thinking specifically of what his son said to him, that he—
your
 son,
I mean—would see him again in seven years’ time. Do you believe that? Or
rather—does your son believe that?”
Because a man who believed beyond doubt that he would die on a certain
date might just feel himself able to take risks before that date.
Elspeth made no bones about understanding what I meant. She sat silently
looking at me, rolling the empty cup slowly between the palms of her hands,
the air between us thick with the ghosts of barleycorn and burning wood. At
last she sighed and, leaning forward, gingerly, put the cup on the table.
“Yes. He does. He’s adjusted his will so that I will be taken care of—
should I outlive him, which I actually don’t plan to.”
I waited, silent. She must of course know that Jamie—and thus I—knew
about the captain’s attempts to raise a militia unit of Loyalists. I didn’t think
the captain could have hidden the gunrunning incident from her.
“Jamie won’t let him do it,” I said, and she glanced sharply up at me.
“Perhaps not,” she said, over-enunciating in the way that people do when
slightly drunk. “But it won’t be up to your husband, in the end.” A small,
lady-like belch interrupted her, but she ignored it. “General Cornwallis is
sending an officer—a very 
effective
 officer, supported by the power of the
Crown—to raise Loyalist regiments of militia throughout the Carolinas. To
suppress local rebellion.”
I didn’t reply to this, but added an inch of whisky to both our cups, and
raised mine to my lips. It seemed to pass straight through my tissues and into
my dissolving core.
“Who?” I asked.
She shook her head slowly, and tossed off her whisky.
“And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where are the beast and the false prophet, and shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever.”
“Indeed,” I said, as dryly as possible for someone marinated in single-malt
Scotch. I wasn’t sure whether the devil she had in mind was Jamie, George
Washington, or the Continental Congress, but it probably didn’t matter.“Upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it,”
 I said, and ceremoniously threw the last few drops from
my cup into the fire, which sizzled and spat blue for an instant.
“You know, I really think we should go to bed, Elspeth. You need your
rest.”64
Ten Loaves of Sugar, Three Casks of
Gunpowder, and Two Needles for Sewing
Flesh
Salisbury
AT EIGHT O’CLOCK THE next morning, the Great Wagon Road lay before
them, a broad stretch of trampled red dirt, spotted with dung and bits of
rubbish, but empty of travelers for the moment.
“Here.” Jamie pulled one of the pistols from his belt and handed it to his
sister. Who—to Rachel’s surprise—merely nodded and pointed it at a broken
wagon wheel left at the side of the road, checking the sight.
“Powder?” Jenny asked, sliding the pistol into her belt.
“Here.” Jamie took a cartridge box off his neck and swung the strap of it
carefully over Jenny’s white cap. “Ye’ve enough powder and shot to kill a
dozen men, and six fresh-made cartridges to give ye a head start.”
Jenny caught sight of Rachel’s face at “kill a dozen men” and smiled
slightly. Rachel wasn’t reassured.
“Dinna fash, 
a nighean,
” Jenny said, and patted her arm before settling the
cartridge box into place. “I willna shoot anyone unless they mean us harm.”
“I—would greatly prefer that thee didn’t shoot anyone in 
any
circumstances,” Rachel said carefully. She hadn’t eaten much for breakfast,
but her stomach felt tight. “Not on—on our behalf, certainly.” But she’d
cupped Oggy’s bonneted head at the thought, pressing him close.
“Is it all right wi’ you if I shoot them on my own behalf?” Jenny asked,
arching one black brow. “Because I’m no standing for anyone molesting my
grandson.”“Dinna be fratchetty, Mam,” Ian said tolerantly, before Rachel could reply
to this. “Ye ken if we meet any villains, Rachel will talk them into a stupor
afore ye have to shoot one.” He gave Rachel a private smile, and she breathed
a little easier.
Jenny made a guttural sound that might have been agreement or mere
politeness, but didn’t say more about shooting anyone.
They had two good mules and a horse, a stout wagon filled with
provisions, a box of clothes and clouts, and a dozen bottles of Jamie’s whisky
hidden in a cache under the floorboards. This would be the center of her
world for the next several weeks, and then … the North Country—and Emily.
Wishing with all her heart that she and Ian and Oggy were in their snug cabin
on the Ridge, Rachel put on a brave face when Jamie bent and kissed her
forehead in farewell.
“Fare thee well, daughter,” he said softly. “I will see thee safe again.” A
smile creased his eyes, and brief as it was, it gave her soul enough peace that
she could smile back.
Jamie took Oggy, helped Rachel up onto the seat, kissed the baby, and
handed him up as well. Jenny hopped up at the back and took her place in a
cozy nest of blankets amid the provisions, and threw a kiss to her brother,
who grinned at her. Ian clapped his uncle on the shoulder, climbed aboard,
and with a slap of the reins, they were off.
People said you oughtn’t to look back when you left a place, that it was ill
luck, but Rachel turned round without hesitation, watching. Jamie was
watching, too, standing like a sentinel in the middle of the road. He raised a
hand, and so did she, waving.
You never knew, when you took farewell of someone, whether it might be
the last time. The least you could do was say you loved them—and she
wished she had. She pressed her fingertips to her lips and, as they swung out
to go around the first curve, threw a kiss to the distant figure, still standing in
the road.
OGGY HAD FUSSED all night, and Jenny had stayed up to walk him round
the floor. Consequently, as soon as Salisbury and the pang of parting from
Jamie had passed, Jenny crawled into the back of the wagon, curled up
among the bags and boxes, and fell sound asleep, Oggy cuddled beside her,
dead to the world in his blanket.This was the first opportunity Ian and Rachel had had for private
conversation since the day before, and she asked him at once about the dead
man that Constable Jones had found.
“Does thee know who he is?”
“Nay, no one does. Seems he was a stranger to the town.”
She nodded and squeezed his arm gently.
“Thee took a great time to learn that.”
“Aye, well. Uncle Jamie thought at first he might ken the man, so we went
back to have another keek at him.”
He was always truthful with Rachel, and she with him—but he did take
pains not to tell her things he knew she would find distressing, unless he
thought it really necessary. What Jamie had told him about Frank Randall’s
book could wait for a bit, he thought, but plainly the stranger bothered her,
and he told her why the sight of the dead man had disquieted Jamie.
“Mrs. Fraser? Abducted and raped?” Ian could see she was appalled. “And
your uncle thinks this stranger might have to do with the—the man who did
it?”
“I dinna think it likely, nor does Uncle Jamie,” Ian said, as nonchalantly as
he could. It wasn’t a lie, after all … “It’s only that the stranger bears a wee
resemblance. If it should be he was the man’s kin, for instance …”
“If this man 
was
 his kin, then what?” Tiredness had shadowed Rachel’s
eyes, but they were still clear as a trout stream.
Well, that was a good question. While he was searching for some
reasonable answer, she asked another.
“Do you know where the man—the criminal—
is
? So that you might send
him word of a dead kinsman?”
Ian concealed a smile. Rachel naturally would think that even a vicious
rapist deserved to hear of a kinsman’s death—and would undoubtedly go
herself to tell him, if necessary.
Fortunately, it wouldn’t 
be
 necessary.
“I dinna ken exactly what happened to him, but we’ve had certain word
that he’s dead.” He made a quick note to get his mother alone and make sure
she kent what was going on, lest she inadvertently tell Rachel just 
why
 they
were sure the rapist was dead.
Rachel’s sigh lifted her breasts briefly, so the swell of them showed above
her shift; Ian had the fleeting thought that when he talked to his mother whenthey stopped at an inn tonight, she might be induced to take Oggy out for air
at some point.
“May God have mercy on his soul,” Rachel said, but her face had relaxed.
“Does Mrs. Fraser know?”
“Aye, she does. I didna speak to her about it, but I think she’s … better in
her mind for knowing it.”
Rachel nodded soberly.
“It would be terrible for her, to know he was alive. That he might … come
back.” A small shudder passed through her, and she hugged her wrapper
around her shoulders. “And terrible for Jamie, too. He must be relieved that
God has taken the burden from them.”
“God works in mysterious ways, to be sure,” Ian said. She looked sharply
at him, but he kept his face calm and after a moment, she nodded, and they
left the subject of dead fat men behind them in the dust.
JAMIE HAD LITTLE business left to conduct in Salisbury; he’d got what he
came for, in terms of making a connection with Francis Locke, and learned
what he needed to. Still, Salisbury was a large town, with merchants and
shops, and Claire had given him a list. He felt his side pocket and was
reassured to hear the crinkle of paper; he hadn’t lost it. With a brief sigh, he
pulled the list out, unfolded it, and read:
Two pounds alum (it’s cheap)
Jesuit bark, if anyone has it (take all of it, or as much as we can
afford)
½ lb. plaster of Gilead (ask at apothecary, otherwise surgeon)
2 qts. Sweet oil—make sure they seal with wax!
25 g. each of belladonna, camphor, myrrh, powdered opium, ginger,
ganja, if available, and Cassia alata (it’s for ringworm and toe
gunge)
Bolt of fine linen (underclothes for me and Fanny, shirt for you)
Two bolts sturdy broadcloth (one blue, one black)
Three oz. steel pins (yes, we need that many)
Thread (for sewing clothes, not sails or flesh)—four balls white, four
blue, six blackA dozen needles, mostly small, but two very large ones, please, one
curved, one straight
As for food—
Ten loaves sugar
Fifty pounds flour (or we can get it from Woolam’s Mill, if too
expensive in Salisbury)
Twenty pounds dry beans
Twenty pounds rice
Spice! (If any and you can afford it. Pepper, cinnamon, nutmeg …?)
Jamie shook his head as he strolled down the street, mentally adding:
3 casks gunpowder
½ pig of lead
Decent skinning knife …
Someone had taken his and snapped the tip off it, and he strongly suspected
Amanda, she being the only one of the children who could lie convincingly.
Aye, well, he had Clarence and the new mule, a sweet-paced light bay
called Abednego, to carry it all home. And enough in miscellaneous forms of
money and trade to pay for it all, he hoped. He wouldn’t dream of showing
gold in a place like this; ne’er-do-wells and chancers would be following him
back to the Ridge like Claire’s bees after sunflowers. Warehouse certificates
and whisky would cause much less comment.
Making calculations in his head, he nearly walked straight into Constable
Jones, coming out of an ordinary with a half-eaten roll in his hand.
“Your pardon, sir,” they both said at once, and bowed in reflex.
“Heading back to the mountains, then, Mr. Fraser?” Jones asked
courteously.
“Once I’ve done my wife’s shopping, aye.” Jamie had the list still in hand
and gestured with it before folding it back into his pocket.
The sight of it, though, had brought something to the constable’s mind, for
his eyes fixed on the paper.
“Mr. Fraser?”
“Aye?”
The constable looked him over carefully, but nodded, apparently thinking
him respectable enough to question.“The dead man ye came to look at last night. Would ye say he was a Jew?”
“A what?”
“A Jew,” Jones repeated patiently.
Jamie looked hard at the man. He was disheveled and still unshaven, but
there was no smell of drink about him, and his eyes were clear, if baggy.
“How would I ken that?” he asked. “And why would ye think so?” A
belated thought occurred to him. “Oh—did ye look at his prick?”
“What?” Jones stared at him.
“D’ye not ken Jews are circumcised, then?” Jamie asked, careful not to
look as though he thought Jones 
should
 know that. He was trying hard not to
wonder whether Claire might have noticed if the man who had touched her
…
“They’re what?”
“Ehm …” Two ladies, followed by a maid minding three small children
and a lad with a small wagon for parcels, were coming toward them, skirts
held gingerly above the mud of the street. Jamie bowed to them, then jerked
his head at Jones to follow him round the corner of the ordinary into an alley,
where he enlightened the constable.
“Jesus Christ!” Jones exclaimed, bug-eyed. “What the devil do they do that
for?”
“God told them to,” Jamie said, with a shrug. “Your dead man, though. Is
he …”
“I didn’t 
look,
” Jones said, giving him a glance of horrified revulsion.
“Then why d’ye think he might be a Jew?” Jamie asked, patient.
“Oh. Well … this.” Jones groped in his clothes and eventually came out
with a grubby much-folded slip of paper, handing it to Jamie. “It was in his
pocket.”
Unfolded, it had eight lines of writing, done carefully with a good quill, so
each character stood clear.
“We couldn’t make out what the devil it was,” Jones said, squinting at the
paper as though that might help in comprehension. “But I was a-showin’ of it
to the colonel in the tavern this morning, and we was studyin’ on it and
gettin’ nowhere. But Mr. Appleyard happened to be there—he’s an educated
gentleman—and he said as how he thought it might be Hebrew, though he’d
forgot so much since he learnt it, he couldn’t make out what it said.”
Jamie could make it out fine, though knowing what it said made little
difference.“It 
is
 Hebrew,” he said slowly, reading the lines. “It’s part of a Psalm … or
maybe a hymn of some kind.”
This clearly rang no bells for Constable Jones, who frowned sternly at the
paper as though desiring it to speak.
“What’s that last word, then? Might it be the name of who wrote it? It
looks like it’s in English.”
“Aye, it is, but it’s nobody’s name.” The word, printed with the same care
as the graceful Hebrew characters, was “Ambidextrous.” He left it to Colonel
Locke to enlighten Constable Jones as to what that might be and handed back
the paper, wiping his fingers on the skirt of his coat.
“Have a wee keek in his breeks,” Jamie suggested, and with a nod he took
firm leave of Constable Jones, Salisbury, Francis Locke, the Rowan County
Regiment of Militias—and the dead man.
Only three ounces of pins, ten loaves of sugar, and a mort of gunpowder
stood between him and home.65
Green Grow the Rushes, O!
Fraser’s Ridge
I WAS LISTENING WITH half an ear to the singing in the kitchen as I
pounded and ground sage, comfrey, and goldenseal into an oily dust in the
surgery. It was late afternoon, and while the sun fell warm across the
floorboards, the shadows held a chill.
Lieutenant Bembridge was teaching Fanny the words to “Green Grow the
Rushes, O.” He had a true, clear tenor that made Bluebell yodel when he hit a
high note, but I enjoyed it. It reminded me of working in the canteen at
Pembroke Hospital, rolling bandages and making up surgical kits with the
other student nurses, hearing singing coming in with the yellow fog through
the narrow open slit at the top of a window. There was a courtyard down
below, and the ambulatory patients would sit there in fine—or even not-so-
fine—weather, smoking, talking, and singing to pass the time.
“Two, two, the lily-white boys,
Clothed all in green, O—
One is one and all alone
And evermore shall be so!”
The fog-muffled song was often interrupted by coughing and hoarse curses,
but someone could always carry it through to the end.
Elspeth Cunningham had been as good as her word. Lieutenants
Bembridge and Esterhazy were eighteen and nineteen, respectively, lusty and
in good health, and with Bluebell’s joyous assistance were making so much
noise that I didn’t hear either the front door opening or footsteps in the
hallway, and was so startled to look up from my mortar and see Jamie in thedoorway that I dropped the heavy stone pestle straight down onto my
sandaled foot.
“Ouch! Ow! Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” I hopped out from behind the
table, and Jamie caught me by one arm.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
“Do I 
sound
 like I’m all right? I’ve broken a metatarsal.”
“I’ll buy ye a new one next time I go into Salisbury,” he assured me,
letting go of my elbow. “Meanwhile, I’ve got everything on the list, except
… Why are there Englishmen singing in my kitchen?”
“Oh. Ah. Well …” It wasn’t that I hadn’t thought about what his response
to two of His Majesty’s naval officers lending a hand to the domestic
economy might be, but I’d thought I’d have time to explain before he actually
encountered them. I rested my bottom against the edge of the table, lifting my
wounded foot off the floor.
“They’re two young lieutenants who used to sail with Captain
Cunningham. They were cast ashore or marooned or something—anyway,
they lost their ship and it’s so late in the year that they can’t find a ship to
join before March or April, so they came to the Ridge to stay with the
captain. Elspeth Cunningham lent them to me for chores, in payment for my
reducing her dislocated shoulder.”
“Elspeth, is it?” Luckily, he seemed amused rather than annoyed. “Do we
feed them?”
“Well, I’ve been giving them lunch and a light supper. But they’ve been
going back up to the captain’s cabin in the evening and coming down
midmorning. They’ve repaired the stable door,” I offered, in extenuation,
“dug over my garden, chopped two cords of wood, carried all the stones you
and Roger dug out of the upper field down to the springhouse, and—”
He made a slight gesture indicating that he accepted my decision and now
would like to change the subject. Which he did by kissing me and asking
what was for supper. He smelled of road dust, ale, and faintly of cinnamon.
“I believe Fanny and Lieutenant Bembridge are making burgoo. It has
pork, venison, and squirrel in it—apparently you must have at least three
different meats for a proper burgoo—but I have no idea what else is in it. It
smells all right, though.”
Jamie’s stomach rumbled.
“Aye, it does,” he said thoughtfully. “And what does Frances make o’
them?”“I think she’s somewhat smitten,” I said, lowering my voice and glancing
toward the hall. “Cyrus came to call yesterday while she was serving the
lieutenants lunch, and she asked him to stay, but he just drew himself up to
about seven feet, glared at them, said something rude in Gaelic—I don’t think
she understood it, but she wouldn’t need to—and left. Fanny went pink in the
face—with indignation—and gave them the dried-apple-and-raisin pie she’d
meant for Cyrus.”
“Is fheàrr giomach na gun duine,”
 Jamie said, with a philosophical shrug.
Better a lobster than no husband.
“You don’t actually think that, do you?” I asked, curious.
“In the case of most lassies, yes,” he said. “But I want someone better for
Frances, and I dinna think a British sailor will do. Ye say they’re leaving in
the spring, though?”
“So I understand. Ooh!” I tenderly massaged the throbbing bruise on my
foot. The pestle had struck smack at the base of my big toe, and while the
original pain had receded a bit, trying to put my weight on the foot and/or
bend it resulted in a sensation like hot barbed wire being pulled between my
toes.
“Sit yourself down, 
a nighean,
” he said, and pushed the big padded chair
that Brianna had dubbed the Kibitzer’s Chair toward me. “I brought a few
bottles of good wine from Salisbury; I expect one o’ those would make your
foot feel better.”
It did. It made Jamie feel better, too. I could see that he’d come home
carrying something, and I felt a small knot below my own heart. He’d tell me
when he was ready.
So we sipped our wine—it was red—and felt together the gentle touch of
the grape. I told him about Elspeth’s sudden appearance and our conversation
after dinner. He told me about seeing Ian and Rachel and Jenny off, relieving
his clear sense of sorrow at their parting with Jenny’s remark about her pistol.
“That took Rachel aback, as ye might suppose,” he said, eyes alight with
amusement. “But then Young Ian steps in and says, ‘Dinna be fratchetty,
Mam. Ye ken if we meet any villains, Rachel will talk them into a stupor
afore ye have time to load.’”
I laughed, as much because the cloud seemed to be lifting from Jamie’s
face as because it was funny.
“I hope Jenny doesn’t feel obliged to shoot what’s-her-name—Ian’s wife
—”“Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa,” Jamie said patiently, and I flipped a hand.
“Emily, then. You don’t suppose she’d try to—to get Ian back?”
“She didna want him when she put him out of her house,” Jamie pointed
out. “Why would she now?”
I looked at him over the rim of my second—or possibly third—glass.
“How little you know of women, my love,” I said, shaking my head in
mock dismay. “And after all these years.”
He laughed and poured the rest of the bottle into my glass.
“I dinna think I want to ken anything about any woman other than you,
Sassenach. After all these years. Why, though?”
“She’s a widow with three small children,” I pointed out. “She put Young
Ian out because he couldn’t give her live children, not because he was a bad
husband. Now she’s 
got
 live children, she doesn’t need a husband for that
purpose—but there are a lot of other things a husband’s good for. And I
rather think Ian might be very good at some of those things.”
He looked at me thoughtfully, then tossed off the rest of his glass.
“Ye talk as though Young Ian had nothing to say about it, Sassenach. Or
Rachel.”
“Oh, Rachel will have something to say about it,” I said, though I wasn’t
sure 
what
 she might say. Rachel was neither timid nor inexperienced in the
ways of the world, but meeting one’s spouse’s ex-wife might be more
complicated than either she or Ian thought.
“Look at what happened when I met Laoghaire again,” I pointed out.
“Aye, she shot me,” he said dryly. “D’ye think Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa is
likely to kill Rachel, rather than let her have Ian? Because I think my sister
might have something to say about that.”
“She 
is
 a Mohawk,” I said. “They have rather different standards, I think.”
“They havena got different standards of hospitality,” he assured me. “She
wouldna kill a guest. And if she tried, my sister would put a bullet through
her head before ye could say … what is it ye could say?”
“Jack Robinson,” I said. “Though I’ve always wondered who he was and
why that should be quicker to say than Fogarty Simms or Peter Rabbit. Is
there more of that wine?”
“Aye, plenty.” He stood up and went to the door of the surgery, where he
paused to listen. The singing in the kitchen had stopped, and there was just
the murmur of conversation—interrupted by occasional laughter—and the
rattle of plates.“Will your foot stand the stairs, Sassenach?” he asked, turning to me. “I
could maybe carry ye up, if not.”
“Upstairs?” I said, rather surprised. I glanced involuntarily toward the
kitchen. “What, now?”
“Not that,” he said, with a brief smile. “Not yet. I meant the third floor.”
THE BENEFICIAL EFFECTS of half a bottle of wine were sufficient to get
me up the stairs with Jamie’s supportive elbow, and I emerged into the open
space of the third floor with a sense of exhilaration. There was a strong, cold
breeze blowing from the east, and it swept away the last remnants of cooking,
dog, sweaty young men, and left-too-long laundry from the house below. I
spread my arms and my shawl flared out behind me like wings, my skirts
pressed flapping round my legs.
“Ye look like you’re meaning to fly away, Sassenach,” Jamie said. “Maybe
ye’d best sit down.” He sounded half serious but was smiling when I turned
to look at him.
He 
had
 brought a stool up with him, along with the second bottle of wine.
He hadn’t bothered with glasses but drew the cork with his teeth, sniffed the
contents appraisingly, and then handed me the bottle.
“I dinna think decanting would improve it much.”
I was in no mood for niceties. The relief of having him home subsumed all
minor considerations, and I wouldn’t have minded drinking water. Still, the
wine was good, and I held a mouthful for a few moments before swallowing.
“This is wonderful,” I said, gesturing toward the view with the bottle. “I
haven’t been up since we saw Bree and Roger off.” The memory of standing
up here, watching their wagon disappear slowly into the trees, twisted my
heart a little, but the Ridge spread out around us now in all its glory—and it
was glorious, with flaming patches and sparks of autumn beginning to burn
amongst the rippling cool dark greens and blues of spruce and fir and pine
and sky. Here and there I could make out the white threads of chimney
smoke, though the tossing trees hid the cabins themselves.
“Aye, it is,” Jamie said, though most of his attention was—naturally—
focused on the timbers of the framing around us. The walls were skeletal but
undeniably walls, and the rooftree and trusses creaked overhead. It was a
remarkable feeling: to be inside a house and still outside, the solidfloorboards under our feet marked with water stains from earlier rains and
drifts of dry leaves caught in the corners of the framing timbers.
Jamie shook two or three of the uprights, grunting in satisfaction when
they didn’t move.
“Well, those are no going anywhere,” he said.
“You built them,” I pointed out. “Surely you didn’t think they’d come
loose?”
He made a noise indicating extreme skepticism, though I couldn’t tell
whether he was skeptical of his own skills, the perversity of weather, or of
the trustworthiness of building materials in general. Probably all three.
“I’ll maybe have time to get the roof on before snow flies,” he said,
squinting up.
“And walls?”
“Ach. With a couple of men, I can do the outer walls in a day. Maybe
two,” he amended, as a fresh blast of wind roared through the framing,
whipping strands of hair out of the scarf I’d wrapped round it. “I can take my
time with the plastering, over the winter.”
“It’s not as peaceful as the second floor when it was open,” I said. “But
somewhat more exciting.”
“I dinna want the top of my house to be exciting,” he said, but he smiled
and came to stand behind me, hands on my shoulders to keep me from
blowing away.
“I don’t suppose we’ll really need it to be finished before spring,” I said,
when the wind dropped enough to make speech possible. “None of our
wanderers will be back before …” I trailed off, because in fact, there was no
telling when—or if—everyone would come home. The war had already
begun to move south, and the calming chill of approaching winter would be
only a short delay of what was coming.
“They’ll be home safe,” Jamie said firmly. “All of them.”
“I hope so,” I said, and leaned back against him, wanting his firmness, of
belief as well as body. “Do you think Bree and Roger have got to Charles
Town yet?”
“Oh, aye,” he said at once. “It’s a bit more than three hundred miles, but
the weather should have been fine for the most part. If they didna lose a
wheel or meet a catamount, they’d make it in two weeks or so. I expect we’ll
have a letter soon; Brianna will write to say that all is well.”That was a heartening thought, in spite of the catamounts, but I thought the
force of his belief was a little less.
“It will be fine,” I said, reaching back and wrapping a hand round his leg in
reassurance. “Marsali and Fergus will be so happy to have Germain back
again.”
“But—?” he said, having picked up the unspoken thought that came in the
wake of my remark. “Ye think there’s something else that’s maybe amiss wi’
them?”
“I don’t know.” Looking over the vast spaces into which our family had
vanished made the separation suddenly frightening. “There are so many
things that could happen to them—and us unable to help.” I tried to laugh. “It
reminds me of Brianna’s first day at kindergarten. Watching her disappear
into the school, clutching her pink lunch box … all alone.”
“Was she afraid?” he asked quietly, gathering my flying hair into a bundle
and tying his handkerchief round it.
“Yes,” I said, my throat tight. “She was very brave. But I could see she
was afraid.” I leaned down and picked up the bottle of wine. “She’s afraid
now,” I blurted.
“Of what, 
a nighean
?” He came round in front of me and squatted down to
look me in the face. “What’s wrong?”
“It’s her heart,” I said. And taking a deep breath, I told him about the atrial
fibrillation.
“And ye canna fix it?” His brow was furrowed, and he looked over his
shoulder, into the endless forest. “Is she like to die on the road?”
“No!” The sudden panic was clear in my voice, and Jamie grabbed my
hand, squeezing tight.
“No,” I said, willing myself back into calm. “No, she isn’t. It’s almost
never fatal; particularly not in a young person. But it’s—unpredictable.”
“Aye,” he said, after studying my face for a moment. “Like war.” He
nodded toward the distant mountains, though his eyes didn’t leave mine. “Ye
never ken for sure what will happen—maybe nothing, maybe not for a long
time, maybe not here, not now—” His fingers tightened on mine. “But ye ken
it’s there, all the time. Ye try to push it away, not think of it until there’s need
—but it doesna ever go away.”
I nodded, unable to speak. It lived with both of us; with everyone, these
days.The wind had dropped, but so high up, there was still a cold breeze,
breathing through my clothes. The warmth of the wine had faded from my
blood, and Jamie’s hand was as chilled as mine—but his eyes were warm and
we held on.
“Dinna be afraid, Sassenach,” he said at last. “There’s still the two of us.”
DESPITE THE COLD wind, we didn’t go down again immediately. While it
was an exposed and vulnerable location, there was something comforting in
the knowledge that if something was coming toward us, we’d see it in time to
prepare.
“So what else did you do in Salisbury?” I asked, leaning back against him.
“I know you bought cinnamon, because I can smell it. Was there any
cinchona?”
“Aye, about half a pound. I took it all, as ye told me. I couldna get more
than two loaves of sugar; it’s scarce, wi’ the blockade. But I did get pepper,
too, and …” He let go of me to fumble in his sporran and came up with a tiny
round brown thing, which he held out to me. “A nutmeg.”
“Oh! I haven’t smelled nutmeg in years!” I took it from him, cold-fingered
and careful lest I drop it. I held it under my nose and breathed in. My eyes
were closed but I could clearly see Christmas cookies and taste the thick
sweetness of eggnog. “How much was it?”
“Ye dinna want to know,” he assured me, grinning. “Worth it, though, for
the look on your face, Sassenach.”
“Bring me some rum tonight, and I’ll put the same look on yours,” I said,
laughing. I handed back the nutmeg for safekeeping, noticing as he put it
back a small, ragged-edged piece of paper sticking out. “What’s that? A
secret communiqué from the Salisbury Committee of Safety?”
“It might be, if any of them are Jews.” He handed me the paper, and I
blinked at it. I hadn’t seen Hebrew writing any time in the last forty-five
years, but I recognized it. What was more peculiar, though, was the fact that
it was 
Jamie’s
 handwriting.
“What on earth …?”
“I dinna ken,” he said apologetically, and took back the note. “A constable
in Salisbury found it—not this, I dinna mean, but the original—on a dead
body, and he asked me did I ken aught about it. I told him it was Hebrew, and
I read it to him in English, but neither of us could tell what it had to do wi’anything. I thought it was queer enough, though, that I wrote it out for myself
when I got back to my lodgings.”
“Queer is a good word for it.” I couldn’t read Hebrew myself—Jamie had
learned it in Paris, studying at the 
université,
 but there was one English word
at the bottom of the note. “What does ‘ambidextrous’ have to do with
anything, do you suppose?”
He shrugged and shook his head.
“The Hebrew bit is a sort of blessing for a house. I’ve seen it before, in
Jewish houses in Paris; they put it in a wee thing called a 
mezuzah
 by the
door. But ‘ambidextrous’ …” He hesitated, looking at me sideways. “The
only thing I can think of, Sassenach, is that it’s a long word wi’ no repeating
letters.”
The mention of Paris had at once reminded me of his cousin Jared’s house,
where we had lived in the year before the Rising—and where he had spent
his days selling wine and his nights—all too often—in intrigue and—
“Spying?” I said, incredulous. I knew almost nothing about codes, ciphers,
and secret writing—but he did. He looked mildly embarrassed.
“Aye, maybe. I’m sorry, Sassenach; I shouldna have brought such a thing
home. I was only curious.”
It was no more than a scrap of paper, and whatever message it might hold
was certainly not meant for us—but it brought back those anxious days and
nights in Paris, full of glamour, fear, and uncertainty—and then of sorrow,
grief, and anger. I swallowed, hard.
“I’m sorry,” he said again, very softly, his eyes fixed on my face. Still
looking at me, he opened his hand and held it out. The wind snatched the
little note at once and whirled it away like a leaf, flying off the roof and into
the deep woods beyond. Gone.
His hand was still open, and I took it. His fingers were as cold as mine.
“Forgiven,” I said, just as softly.
The slam was so sudden that I jerked my hand out of Jamie’s and whirled
round.
“What 
did
 that?” I demanded, looking wildly to and fro.
“Likely a tree,” he said mildly. “Over there, I reckon—” He gestured
toward the distant trees. “I’ve only heard it when the wind’s out of the east.”
“I’ve never heard a tree make a noise like a slamming door,” I said,
unconvinced.“If ye spent much time sleeping in the forest, Sassenach, ye’d hear them
make as many sounds as there are animals on the ground near ye—and it’s
often hard to tell the difference, if the wind’s blowing. They groan and
scream and clatter and drop their limbs and hiss and squeal when they catch
fire from lightning, and now and then they fall over with an almighty crash
that shakes the ground. If ye paid attention to the racket, ye’d never sleep.”
“For one thing, I wouldn’t be sleeping much if I were in a forest,
regardless. And for another, it’s broad daylight now.”
“I dinna think that matters to a tree.” He was openly laughing at me, and it
absurdly made me feel better. He bent, picked up the bottle, and handed it to
me. “Here, Sassenach. It will settle your nerves.”
I took a solid gulp, and it did. Somewhat.
“Better now?” he asked, watching.
“Yes.”
“Good. I said I had something to tell ye, aye?”
“Yes,” I said, eyeing him. “Why do I think it’s bad news?”
“Well, it’s no exactly 
bad,
” he said, tilting his head. “But I didna want to
be talking about it wi’ the sailors in earshot.”
“Oh, just dangerous, then. That’s a relief.”
“Well, only a wee bit dangerous.” He took back the bottle, had a quick
swig, and told me about his meetings with Colonel Locke and his conclusions
regarding the Rowan County militia.
“So,” he finished, “I said I’d got everything on my list, save the one thing
—gunpowder.”
“Ah,” I said. “So you have guns—some, at least—courtesy of Captain
Cunningham—”
“And with any luck, Roger Mac will get me more in Charles Town,” he
interrupted. “But I’ve barely enough powder to keep us in meat for the
winter. I couldna buy any in Salisbury, for Colonel Locke has requisitioned
all of it for military use.”
“And if you joined the Rowan County super-militia, Colonel Locke would
supply you. But you don’t want to do that, because then you’d need to answer
his call and take orders from him.”
“I dinna mind taking orders, Sassenach,” he said, giving me a faintly
reproachful look. “But it does depend who from. And if it were to be Locke
… he’ll be taking the companies under his command toward battle, God
knows where—but not anywhere near the Ridge. And I will not leave myhome—or you—unprotected while I mind Locke’s business a hundred miles
away.”
His mind was plainly made up, and for once I was in complete agreement
with him.
“I’ll drink to that,” I said, lifting the bottle in salute to him. He smiled, took
it, and drained it.
“Elspeth Cunningham and I shared a bottle of your second-best whisky,” I
said, taking the empty bottle and setting it down under the stool. “We talked
about her son. I told her that you wouldn’t let the captain raise a Loyalist
militia under your nose, so to speak.”
“Nor will I.”
“Naturally not. But what she said in reply—and mind you, she was
exhausted, in pain, and fairly well intoxicated by that time, so I don’t think
she was lying—she said that it wouldn’t be up to you, in the end. Because
General Cornwallis is sending an officer—a very 
effective
 officer, she said,
and one supported by the power of the Crown—to raise Loyalist regiments of
militia throughout the Carolinas. To suppress local rebellions.”
He stood quite still for a long moment, eyes creased against the wind,
which had risen again.
“Aye,” he said at last. “Then it will have to be the Overmountain men—
Cleveland and Shelby and their friends.”
“It will have to be them for 
what
?”
He picked up the stool and empty bottle and shook his head, as though
thinking to himself.
“I’ll have to make alliance wi’ them. They have an understanding wi’ Mrs.
Patton to provide powder for them from her mill, and if I agree to stand with
them in need, they’ll let her know to supply me. And they’ll presumably
come to my aid, should I call.” I heard that “presumably” and moved close to
him, feeling suddenly colder than before. He was essentially alone, without
Roger or Young Ian at hand, and he knew that all too well.
“Do you trust Benjamin Cleveland and the rest?”
“Sassenach, there are maybe eight people in the world I trust, and
Benjamin Cleveland isna one o’ them. Luckily, you are.”
He put an arm around me and kissed my forehead. “How’s your foot?”
“I can’t feel either of my feet.”
“Good. Let’s go down and warm ourselves wi’ a bit of the sailors’
burgoo.”“That sounds di—” The word died on my lips as I saw a movement on the
far side of the clearing below, at the head of the wagon road that led down
behind Bobby Higgins’s cabin. “Who’s that?”
I groped automatically for my spectacles, but I’d left them in the surgery.
Jamie looked over my shoulder, squinting against the wind, and made an
interested noise.
It was a person on foot; I could see that much. And a woman, moving
slowly, in the manner of someone putting one foot before another out of
sheer determination.
“It’s the lassie who came to fetch ye to her mother’s childbed,” he said.
“Agnes Cloudtree, was it?”
“Are you sure?” I squinted, too, but it didn’t help much; the figure
remained a blur of brown and white against the darker dirt of the road. A stab
of fear went through my heart, though, at the name “Cloudtree.” I’d thought
often of the twins I’d delivered, of their mother’s stoic heroism … and the
very peculiar circumstance of that birth; a circumstance made the more
peculiar by the simplicity of it. I could feel the sense of that small body in my
hands now. Nothing dramatic; no tingling or glowing. Just the sure and
certain knowledge of life.
If this was indeed Agnes Cloudtree coming toward us, I hoped against
hope that she hadn’t come to tell me that her small sister was dead.
“I think it’s all right, Sassenach.” Jamie had continued watching the small,
dogged figure, his arm still round my middle. “I can see she’s weary—and no
wonder, if she’s walked all the way from the Cherokee Line—but her
shoulders are square and her heid’s unbowed.” The tension in his arm
relaxed. “She doesna come in sorrow.”
WE OPENED THE front door in welcome, but stayed sheltering in the front
hall from the wind until she should come closer. Fanny looked warily past
Jamie’s elbow, at the small figure coming up the hill, and suddenly stiffened.
“She’s coming to stay!” she said, and looked accusingly at me.
“What?” I said, startled, and Fanny relaxed a little, seeing that my surprise
at this remark was genuine.
“Th—
she
 has her things.” She nodded at Agnes, who was now close
enough that I could see her long, wispy blond hair escaping from a grubbycap. Agnes was indeed carrying a flour sack, the neck of it tied in a knot and
the weight swinging like a pendulum as she walked.
“She’s likely bringing us something from her mother,” I said.
“Aye, she is.” Jamie’s eyes were fixed on her, interested. “Herself.” He
glanced down at Fanny, who wore a slight frown. “Frances is right,
Sassenach. Something’s happened, and the lass has left home.”
“Agnes!” I called, and came out and down the steps to meet her. “Agnes,
are you all right?”
Her face was tired and grimy, but her eyes warmed when she saw me.
“Mrs. Fraser,” she said. Her voice was croaky, in the way of one who
hasn’t spoken a word aloud in hours, or days, and she cleared her throat and
tried again.
“I—it’s—I mean … I’m well.”
“I’m glad to hear it.” I reached out and took the flour sack from her—
Jamie and Fanny had been right; I could tell from the feel of it that it held
clothing, rather than a ham or a bag of onions. “Come in, child, and have
something to eat; you look starved.”
Fanny eyed Agnes warily but went to fetch hot burgoo and some bread and
butter when asked. Agnes ate hungrily, and we let her eat her fill without
talking. As she began to show signs of slowing down, I exchanged a glance
with Jamie that agreed I would ask the questions.
“How is your mother, dear?” I asked. “And would you like a bit of apple-
and-raisin pie? I think there’s some left in the pie safe, isn’t there, Fanny?”
“Yes’m,” Fanny said. She hadn’t taken her eyes off Agnes since she’d
entered the house, and was still eyeing her as though suspecting she might
have come to steal the spoons, but she got up at once and went to get the pie.
“My mother’s well,” Agnes said, looking at me directly for the first time.
Her face was strained and anxious, though, and another qualm of
apprehension went through me.
“Your brothers? And …”
“My sister’s well,” she said, her face relaxing a little. “Thriving, Mam said
to tell you. She’s near as big as her twin now, and eating like one o’ the
piglets. My brothers 
always
 eat like pigs,” she added dismissively.
“I’m 
so
 glad to hear that,” I said, and warmth filled me. “About your little
sister, I mean.”
I hesitated, not sure what to ask next, but her strength had come back with
a little rest and food, and she straightened up on her stool, folded her handson her knee, and looked at Jamie.
“I thank you kindly for the food, and I’ve come to ask for work, sir.”
“Have ye, then?” Jamie gave me a glance that said “See?” then smiled at
her. “What sort of work did ye have in mind, lass?”
She looked rather nonplussed at that and spread her hands, frowning at
them.
“Well … anything you need done, I suppose. Laundry?” she ventured,
looking from Jamie to me and back. “Or maybe I could feed your animals or
scrub the floors …” Everyone looked down at the kitchen floor, which was
covered with dried muddy footprints at the moment; it had rained on and off
all week.
“Mmphm,” Jamie said. “I imagine we can find enough for ye to do, lass.
And we’ll give ye a bed and plenty to eat. But would ye tell me, then, why
ye’ve left your family?”
A dull flush rose in her cheeks, and I knew what she was about to say.
“Your … um … stepfather, perhaps?” I asked delicately. She looked down
and the flush got deeper. She nodded, once.
“He came back,” she blurted. “He always comes back. And mostly he’s all
right for some time; he’s run out of drink and so long as there’s no money to
buy more … it’s all right.” She took a deep breath and looked up, meeting
Jamie’s eyes squarely. “It’s not what you’re thinkin’, sir; he hasn’t … you
know.”
“I do,” Jamie said softly. “And I’m glad he hasn’t. But what 
has
 he done?”
She sighed.
“When he drinks, he gets angry and he … has ideas. So this time his idea
was that we should all go into the Overhill people’s land and live in one of
the villages there. My mother didn’t mind; she was glad to go to a place
where there would be other women, people to be with and help.”
She looked at me, biting her lower lip.
“But I didn’t want to go. Aaron meant to marry me off to a friend of his in
Chilhowee. He—we—don’t get on, him and me. He wanted me out of the
house, and when I said I wouldn’t go and be married, he said I could suit
myself but he was shut of me. And … he threw me out.” She’d kept a tight
grip on her feelings so far, but a tear trickled down her cheek at this, and she
swiped at it hastily, as though not wanting us to see it.
“I—I spent two days in the woods, sir. Not wanting to leave Ma and the
little ones and not knowin’ what else to do. My brother Georgie snuck somefood to me, and then finally Ma got out long enough to bring me my things
—” She nodded at the forlorn little sack on the floor at her feet. “She said I
should come to you. You were so kind and good to us, maybe …” She
stopped and swallowed, hard.
“So I came,” she concluded, in a very small voice. She sat with her head
bent. The room had grown dark by now, and the firelight flickered softly over
her, as though the warmth reached out to her.
Fanny got up suddenly, came over to Agnes, and squatted down in front of
her. She took Agnes’s hand in both of hers and patted it.
“Can you cook?” she asked hopefully.66
Diaspora
I SNIPPED SEVERAL SMALL chunks of sugar off one of the loaves Jamie
had brought back from Salisbury and carried them up to the garden, wrapped
in my handkerchief. Long before I reached the garden itself, bees began to
appear, circling me in interest.
“Just how far away can you smell it?” I asked. “Be patient; you’ll get your
snack in a minute.” There were still flowers blooming on the mountain—
asters, stonecrop, goldenrod, fall crocuses, Joe-Pye weed—but there were
also caterpillars in a greater abundance than I was accustomed to, and the
ones called woolly bears were noticeably larger and woolier than usual; sure
sign of a hard winter, according to John Quincy, who ought to know. I
wanted to make sure the bees would have enough honey to keep them ’til
spring, so I augmented their diet with a treat of sliced fruit or sugar-water
every few days.
Inside the garden—with the gate carefully closed against intrusions by deer
or raccoons—I dipped water from the barrel with the shallow bowl I kept
there and crumbled the sugar into it, stirring it with my finger. Bees at once
lighted on the bowl, my clothes, the high stool I used as a workbench, and on
my hand, their feet tickling with busy interest.
“Do you 
mind
?” I said, shaking them off and carefully brushing a few
strays from my face. I had had the forethought to wrap my hair in a cloth,
having more than once had the unnerving experience of trying to disentangle
a panicked bee from the floating strands.
“All right, then,” I said, putting down the dish of sugar-water with a sense
of relief. “Go to it!” They didn’t need encouragement; bees were already
clustered shoulder-to-shoulder on the rim of the dish, greedily sucking, then
flying back to their hives—I had eight now, in the garden, and three more in
the woods, all thriving—to be instantly supplanted by more.“Well, then.” I stood back and watched them for a moment, with a sense of
satisfaction. The thrum of their wings was a low, pleasant sound and I relaxed
into the sense of the garden in early autumn, cool-leaved and pungent with
the sharp scents of turnips, potato vines, and turned earth. I’d dug a deep
trench for the spring peas along one side of the garden, one for pole beans on
the other; Jamie or one of the girls would need to carry up a few baskets of
manure for me to mix with the earth before filling them, so it could decay
peacefully over the winter. A few late tomatoes glowed in the shadow of the
northeast corner, and I went to pick whatever might be usable off the slug-
tattered plants; they wouldn’t last much longer.
“So,” I said to a bee that had obligingly accompanied me to the tomato
patch, “you already know about Roger and Bree and the children—I imagine
you could smell the sauerkraut for miles. I hope they’ve made it to Charles
Town by now and that things are all right between Germain and his family. I
don’t think I told you about Rachel and Ian, though—they’ve gone off with
Jenny—you know her, she was smelling like hickory nuts, goat’s milk, and
bannocks the last time I saw her—to New York.
“Yes, that 
is
 a long way,” I continued, unrolling the small mat of woven
reeds that I knelt on for weeding. “The only good thing is that there won’t be
any more fighting up north—it’s all coming down 
here.
 But there 
was
fighting up there, so they’ve gone to see Ian’s ex-wife and make sure that she
and her children are all right. Rachel’s not happy about that, naturally, but her
inner light obviously sees that Ian has to go, and so she’s going with him.
With
 the baby,” I added, with a twinge of apprehension.
“Anyway, it’s quite the little diaspora—I suppose you’ll know what that is;
you do it every day, don’t you?” 
But then you come back at the end of the
day,
 I thought.
I said a quick prayer that our own busy bees would survive their
adventures unscathed and make it back to our hive in the spring. Then I
recalled Agnes.
“Oh, we’ve someone new. She’s called Agnes and at the moment she
smells pretty strongly of lye soap and hyssop, because I had to nit-comb her
hair, but I’m sure that’s only temporary—the smell, I mean; the nits are gone.
I’ll bring her up tomorrow and introduce her to you.”
It was comforting to think that Fanny wasn’t rattling around in the big
house by herself. She and Agnes had quite hit it off, after a brief initial
wariness. When I’d left to come up to the garden, they’d been sitting on theporch braiding onions and garlic and speculating about Bobby Higgins’s
marital prospects, since they could see the cabin below and Bobby repairing a
rotted plank in the stoop, Aidan helping him, and the two little boys chasing
each other round and round the cabin, shrieking.
“Would you have him?” Fanny had asked Agnes. “You had—I mean,
have,
” she corrected herself hastily, “little brothers, so maybe you could deal
with the boys.”
“I 
could,
” Agnes said doubtfully, laying a fresh braid of onions on the trug.
“But I don’t know about 
him.
 Mr. Higgins, I mean. Judith MacCutcheon says
the scar on his cheek is an 
M,
 and that stands for ‘Murderer.’ I think I’d be
afraid to lie with a man who’s killed someone.”
“It’s easier than you think, child,” I said under my breath, recalling this.
Still, it was true that while the competition to be the next Mrs. Higgins
continued, some of the young women—and some of their families—on the
Ridge viewed Bobby with a slightly jaundiced eye, now that he was a
widower and in the market for a wife. When he’d married Amy McCallum,
taken on her sons Aidan and Orrie, and quickly produced little Rob, the
community had come slowly to accept him. But now, when he might be
marrying one of their daughters, they were seeing him again as a Sassenach
and remembering that he had been a soldier—and a redcoat. And a murderer,
with a brand on his face to testify to his crime.
I pushed aside the small pile of weeds—I had a row of such piles along the
edge of the turnip patch, each more wilted and decaying than the one beside
it. I kept them to prove to myself that I was, in fact, accomplishing
something, 
though if I looked over my shoulder, it was apparent that the
weeds were gaining on me. Jamie referred to the little heaps as my scalps—
which, while he meant it to be funny, was actually not wrong.
There were other things to do today, though, so I rose, knees creaking, and
rolled up my mat.
I picked up the basket of tomatoes, turnips, and herb cuttings and paused at
the garden gate, looking down at the house. The girls had vanished from the
porch, and the trug was gone, too—likely they’d gone to the root cellar with
the onions.
Fanny was—we thought—thirteen now; Agnes fourteen. Girls 
did
 marry at
such ages, but they weren’t going to if I—and Jamie—had anything to say
about it, and we did.A flicker of movement caught my eye through the trees. A woman … a
young woman, in a blue-checked blouse and a gray skirt with an embroidered
petticoat just showing beneath. Her head came into view and I recognized
Caitriona McCaskill. She also carried a basket, and was headed downhill with
a sense of purpose. Not everyone had reservations regarding Bobby Higgins.
“And what do you think of 
her
?” I asked the bees, but if they had an
opinion, they kept it to themselves.67
Réunion
Charles Town, South Carolina
MANDY WAS BUG-EYED WITH excitement and incoherent—but by no
means silent—about everything she saw, from the clouds of mosquitoes
drifting around them, and flocks of birds that were presumably eating the
mosquitoes, to black slaves at work in the rice fields.
“Uncle Joe!” she shouted, hanging half out of the wagon and waving
madly. “Uncle Joe, Uncle Joe!”
“That’s not Uncle Joe,” Jem told her, grabbing the back of her pinafore.
“He’s in Boston.” He glanced quickly at his mother, who nodded, thankful
for the intervention. She and Roger had had a private talk with both Jem and
Germain about slavery—and a slightly more private talk with Jem.
“Look, Mandy!” Germain had grabbed Mandy’s arm, turning her to see a
huge blue heron looking disapprovingly at them from an undrained paddy,
and no more was said about the men and women working with tiny hand
scythes on the other side of the road, bending and stooping in the thick, hot
air, harvesting the knee-deep yellowing grain.
On the outskirts of the city, they saw Continental soldiers.
“
Lots
 of soldiers!” The boys were now hanging out of the wagon, pulling
at each other’s sleeves to see a new marvel. Small canvas tents, only large
enough to shelter a man from the rain, but hundreds of them, seeming to
breathe as a breeze from the distant river fluttered through them. The breeze
brought the sound of rhythmic shouting: men drilling, marching to and fro in
a distant cleared square of trodden dirt, muskets on their shoulders. And then
a pair of cannon, dark and lethal, on their limbers and ready to move, with
their caissons full of crates of balls and barrels of powder. The boys were
struck speechless.“Jesus Christ.” Brianna, parochial-school girl that she was, seldom took the
Lord’s name in vain, but this was a muttered prayer. Roger heard it and
glanced at her.
“Aye,” he said, seeing what she was looking at. “They look harmless in a
museum, don’t they?” His mouth tightened a little as he looked at the
openmouthed boys, but he gave Brianna a wry smile and handed her the
reins.
“Distraction,” he said briefly, and hoisted Mandy onto his lap, where he
took a firm grip on her waist and began pointing out flights of snowy egrets
and what just might be the hazy masts of ships in the distant harbor.
HOW LONG HAD it been since she’d seen a city? Brianna had been so
keyed up when they came within sight of Charles Town that she’d scarcely
noticed the city itself. She’d felt the heavy slosh of the sauerkraut barrels with
every bump in the road, and when they reached the cobblestoned streets of
Charles Town and the sloshing turned to a constant judder through the frame
of the wagon, between nightmare visions of a barrel tipping out and bursting
on the road and the necessity of keeping a grip on Mandy, she had little
attention to spare.
But now, at last, they’d stopped. She felt weak-kneed, like someone
stepping ashore after a long sea voyage, and thought she might smell of
sauerkraut for the rest of her life, but such considerations weighed little
against the relief of arrival. They’d had to leave the wagon in the yard of an
inn and make their way on foot to the printshop. Charles Town had broad,
gracious streets, but Fergus’s establishment lurked modestly on a smaller lane
near the edge of the business district, tree-lined and pleasant, with several
small shops about it—but not a street wide enough for wagons to pass each
other.
Roger had given the inn’s ostler a few pennies to mind the wagon while
they walked to the printshop, but he still felt uneasy at leaving it. On the other
hand, the ostler had reared back, catching a whiff of sauerkraut, then spat on
the cobbles and gave Roger a look indicating that a niggardly threepence was
in no way enough for 
this.
The MacKenzies had long since ceased to notice the reek of fermenting
cabbage, but their noses were twitching now, avid for the smells of a city—
particularly the city’s food. They were near the river, and the scents of fryingfish, chowder, and the briny whiff of fresh oysters mingled with the smell of
grain and flowers and rose in an appetizing miasma around them.
“Oh, my God. Shrimp and grits?” Brianna’s stomach gave an audible
growl, throwing all the children into giggles.
“What’s grits?” Mandy asked, sniffing hard. “I smell fish!”
“Grits are ground-up corn that’s been soaked in lye,” Roger told her
absently. Hungry as he was, he was more taken by the houses, painted in
brilliant blues and pinks and yellows like a kid’s crayon box. “Ye put butter
or gravy on them.”
“Lye?”
 all three children chorused, aghast. All of them had been routinely
threatened since babyhood not to go within a yard of the eye-watering lye
bucket, Or Else.
“You wash the lye off it before you grind it up and eat it,” Brianna assured
them. “You’ve eaten it before.” She glanced at Mandy, then at Roger.
“Should we get something to eat before we …”
“No,” he said firmly, barely forestalling an outburst of enthusiasm from his
troops. He was looking at Germain, who looked like he might throw up at
any moment. “We need to go to the printshop first.”
Germain didn’t say anything, but swallowed visibly and licked his lips.
He’d been doing that for the last couple of days; his lips were dry and
cracked at the corners.
Brianna touched his shoulder gently.
“Je suis prest,”
 she said, and the look of apprehension lifted briefly from
his face.
“You’re a girl, Auntie,” he said, with a roll of his eyes. “You have to say,
‘Je suis preste.’
”
“You can’t make me,” she said, and laughed.
“There it is!” Jem said suddenly and stopped dead, pointing. It was across
the street: a small building with its bricks painted blue and its shutters and
door a vivid purple. A large window beside the door displayed an array of
books, and above it hung a neatly lettered sign that said, 
FERGUS FRASER AND
SONS, PRINTING AND BOOKS
.
“Merde,”
 Germain whispered.
“Sons?” Jem asked, puzzled.
“Germain and his wee brothers, I expect,” Roger replied. He spoke matter-
of-factly, but his own heart had suddenly clenched and then beat faster. He
reached to take Germain’s hand. “Come on, Germain, we’ll go in first.”THE DIRECTION OF the breeze changed and suddenly the smells of ink and
hot metal from the open door breathed upon them, a warm invisible cloud
surrounding them. Germain took a big gulp of it and coughed. Coughed again
and cleared his throat, eyes watering—possibly not just from the acrid scent,
Roger thought. He thumped Germain lightly on the back.
“Going to be all right, then?” he asked. Germain nodded, but before he
could say anything, footsteps came pounding over the cobbles behind Roger
and, with a shout of 
“Germain!”
 Fergus flung his arms about his son and
snatched him hard against his chest.
“Mon fils! Mon bébé!”
“Bébé?”
 Germain said. His face was flexing through emotions ranging
from astonishment to joy to pretended indignation, so fast that Roger could
hardly read them—but there wasn’t any doubt as to what the boy really felt.
His cheek was pressed tight to his father’s shabby waistcoat and now he
turned his head, buried his face in his father’s heart, and sobbed with relief.
“Certainly, 
bébé,
” Fergus said, softly, and Roger saw that tears were
running down his own cheeks. He held Germain a little way away from him
and said, “I see you are a man now, and yet when I look at you—always,
always—I see you as I first saw you.” He let go, gently, and took an ink-
stained handkerchief from his pocket. “Short, fat, and covered with drool,” he
added, wiping his nose and grinning at his son.
Everyone laughed, including—after a brief, stunned moment—Germain.
“What’s going on out— Germain!” There was a flurry of skirts and
Marsali rushed out of the shop and engulfed her wayward son.
Roger heard a small sound from Brianna and, stepping back, took her hand
and held it hard.
“Mam! What’s—
Eeeeeee!
 Fizzy, Fizzy, come see, it’s 
Germain
!” Joan,
small round face flaming with excitement, ran back into the shop and ran
back an instant later, yanking her younger sister half off her feet.
Roger felt a small hand tugging on his breeches and looked down.
“Who’s dose?” Mandy asked, clinging to his leg and frowning suspiciously
at the tearstained, laughing mob scene taking place before them.
“Our cousins,” Jem said tolerantly. “You know—just more family.”
SANCTUARY
 WAS BREE’S first thought at sight of the printshop, and the
feeling continued to grow as the commotion of arrival gradually smoothed
out into small eddies: the brief exchange of news, down payment on further
conversation; water for washing; the orderly bustle of making supper; the less
orderly business of eating it, with half the people sitting at the table and the
others mostly under it, giggling over their bowls of rice and red beans; and
then the washing-up and changing of clothes and clouts for bed, as the heat of
many bodies and of the banked type-forge was gradually wicked away by a
cool, dark breeze that rose from the river and ran through the house from the
open back door to the open front door, harbinger of a peaceful night.
All of the children at last in bed, the adults sat down in the tiny parlor to
toast their reunion with a bottle of very good French wine.
“Where did ye 
get
 this?” Roger asked, after the first sip. He lifted his glass
to admire the color, sparkling like a ruby in the firelight. “I haven’t drunk
anything like this since—since—well, I’m no sure I’ve ever drunk anything
this good.”
Marsali and Fergus exchanged a marital glance.
“It’s likely better ye dinna ken,” she told Roger, laughing. “But there’s a
wee bit more where that came from—dinna hold back!”
“Certainement,”
 Fergus agreed, and lifted his own glass to Roger. “You
have brought home our prodigal. If you want to bathe in it, say the word.”
“Don’t tempt me.” Roger took a long, slow sip and closed his eyes, his
worn face relaxing wonderfully.
Bree hadn’t drunk much wine since Amy Higgins’s death; the smell of
grapes reminded her too much of that day among the scuppernongs, and the
color of red wine was too much the color of blood, fresh in the sunlight. Even
so, this wine seemed not so much to be swallowed as to dissolve right
through her membranes and into her own sweet blood, and she felt her body
gradually soften, easing back into its natural shape as the tension of the trip
left her.
They’d made it.
So far,
 said the cynical back of her mind, but she ignored that. For the
moment, everyone was safe—and together.
Germain hadn’t gone to bed with Jem and Mandy and his sisters; he was
curled up beside his mother on the settle, sound asleep with his head in her
lap, and she smoothed a hand gently over his tousled blond head, with a look
of such tenderness on her face that it smote Bree in the heart.She touched her breastbone lightly at the thought, but everything was
peaceful within, a soft, regular 
THUMP-thump, THUMP-thump
 that would
lull her to sleep in moments, if she let it. A brief squawk from the cradle by
Fergus’s chair drove the notion of sleep out of her head, and she sat up
quickly, a maternal surge rising straight up from belly to breasts with
surprising force.
“If one goes, the other will, too,” Marsali said, sighing and reaching for her
laces. “Hold my wine, will ye, Bree?”
She took the glass, warm from the fire and Marsali’s hand, and watched,
half enviously, as Fergus handed one swaddled bundle to his wife, then bent
to pick the other baby up from the cradle.
“This one’s wet,” he said, holding the little boy away from his body.
“I’ll change him.” Bree put the wine on the table and took the bundle from
Fergus, who released his son with alacrity and sat down again with his own
glass, looking happy.
There were clean clouts and rags on a shelf, and a small tin of some sort of
ointment that smelled of lavender, chamomile, and oatmeal. She smiled,
recognizing a version of Mama’s diaper-rash cream.
“Who do I have?” she asked, turning back the blanket to reveal a small,
round, sleepy face and a slick of light-brown hair down the middle of the
head.
“Charles-Claire,” said Fergus, and nodded at Marsali’s bundle. “That’s
Alexandre.”
“Hello there,” she said softly, and the baby smacked his lips in a thoughtful
sort of way and began to wiggle inside his wrappings. 
“Comment ça va?”
“Wah!”
“Oh, not that good, eh? Well, let’s see about it, then …”
TIRED AS THEY were, nobody wanted to go to bed. Brianna could feel
sleep gently creeping up from her tired feet and aching shins, over her knees
like a warm quilt. But there was much to be said, and after a lot of catching
up with the current state of things on the Ridge, plus the welfare of all the
people and animals there, they reached an explanation of their presence in
Charles Town.
“It was mostly Germain,” Roger said, smiling at the sleeping boy and then
at Marsali. “Once he’d had your letter, of course we had to come. And,um”—he darted a quick glance at Bree—“I think Jamie said he’d sent you a
note?”
That made Marsali look sharply at Fergus, who made an offhand “It’s
nothing” sort of gesture. Roger cleared his throat and continued. “But Charles
Town is on the way, after all.”
“On the way where?” Fergus had relaxed into something like bonelessness,
eyelids half shut against the smoke from the driftwood fire. Brianna thought
she’d never seen him this way before—completely at peace.
“To Savannah,” Roger replied, with a touch of pride that warmed Brianna
more than the fire. “Bree’s got a commission—to paint the wife of a rich
merchant named Brumby.”
One of Fergus’s brows twitched up.
“Congratulations, 
ma soeur.
 Savannah … is this Monsieur Alfred
Brumby?”
“Yes,” she said, surprised. “Do you know him? Or anything about him?”
“I see his name painted on any number of boxes and barrels on the
wharves, as they pass from Savannah to Philadelphia and Boston. He’s an
importer of molasses from the West Indies. And 
very
 rich in consequence, I
assure you. Charge him anything you like for his portrait; he won’t blink.”
Brianna rolled a sip of wine around her mouth, enjoying the slight
roughness on her tongue.
“Do I take it that ‘importer’ is a polite name for ‘smuggler’?”
“Well, no more than half the time,” Fergus said, with a slight Gallic shrug.
“It 
is
 still legal to import molasses into the colonies—but naturally, there is a
tax for doing so. And where you have taxes …”
“You have smugglers,” Roger finished, and belched slightly. “Pardon me.
So are you saying that Mr. Brumby is importing molasses 
and
 smuggling it?”
“Mais oui,”
 Marsali said, laughing. “He pays his taxes on the barrels
marked as molasses, and the barrels marked as salt fish or rice pass
unremarked—and untaxed. So long as the inspector doesn’t smell them …”
“And as Monsieur Brumby is shrewd enough to pay him off, he doesn’t,”
Fergus finished. He bent and fished about under the low table, coming out
with another bottle, this one unlabeled. “Speaking of smells,” he said,
squinting at Roger, “I do not wish to give offense by making personal
remarks, but …”
“It’s sauerkraut,” Brianna said apologetically. “Speaking of smuggling …”
She cleared her throat discreetly. She’d been on edge throughout theirjourney, in constant fear of the barrels breaking, leaking, falling to the
ground, or calling undue attention to themselves, but her father had—no
surprise—been right: nobody wanted to get near them. And now, safely
arrived, well fed, and half drunk, she was inclined to feel some pride in their
success.
When Roger mentioned the amount of gold that Jamie had sent, Fergus
pursed his lips in a soundless whistle, and he and Marsali exchanged a look,
tinged with warning.
“Da knows it’s dangerous,” Bree hastened to say. “He wouldn’t want you
to put yourselves in any danger. But if you—”
“Pfft,”
 Fergus said, and pulled the cork. “In these times, there’s little one
can do that 
isn’t
 dangerous. If I’m going to be killed for something, I should
like it to be something that matters. If it’s entertaining, so much the better.”
Bree, watching Marsali’s face as he made this airy statement, thought that
Marsali might have a few more private doubts, but she nodded, face sober.
“I’ll help him,” Roger assured Marsali, seeing her reservations. “Nobody
will suspect me of being an arms dealer. Or at least I hope they won’t …”
“Roger’s about to be fully ordained,” Bree said, seeing their puzzled looks,
and felt her usual affection and pride, tinged with fear, when the matter of
Roger’s calling arose. “That’s the other reason for us coming to Charles
Town. He has to meet with a—er—presbytery of ministers here, so they can
examine him and make sure he’s still fit to be one.”
“And I’m sure that being caught in possession of three dozen guns stolen
from the British navy will reassure them as to his moral character,” Fergus
said, and laughed like a drain.
“The British 
navy
?” Bree said, eyeing the collection of empty wine bottles
on the table.
“Well, they’re the only ones who probably have a lot of guns they aren’t
using all the time,” Marsali said, matching the Gallicness—
or should that be
Gallicity,
 Bree thought, her thoughts beginning to slur—of Fergus’s shrug.
“And if not, we will find someone who has.” Fergus ceremoniously refilled
all the cups, set down the bottle, and lifted his own drink.
“To liberty, 
mes chers.
 Sauerkraut and muskets!”
BRIANNA AND THE kids slept like the dead, sprawled on the floor of the
loft like victims of some sudden plague, fallen where they lay among thebarrels of varnish and lampblack and the stacks of books and pamphlets. In
spite of the long day, the emotional reunion, and the impressive amount of
wine drunk, Roger found himself unwilling to fall asleep at once. Not unable;
he could still feel the vibration of the wagon and the reins in his hands, and a
sort of hypnosis lurked in the back of his mind, urging him to drop into a
slow-moving swirl of rice paddies and circling birds, cobbled streets and tree
leaves moving like smoke in the dusk. But he held back, wanting to keep this
moment for as long as he could.
Destination. Destiny, if he could bring himself to think such a thing. Did
normal people, ordinary people, have a destiny? It seemed immodest to think
he did—but he was a minister of God; that was 
exactly
 what he believed: that
every human soul had a destiny and had a duty to find and fulfill it. Just at
this moment, he felt the weight of the precious trust he held, and wanted
never to let go of the great sense of peace that filled him.
But the flesh is weak, and without his making any conscious decision to do
so, he dissolved quietly into the night, the breath of his wife and his sleeping
children, the damped fire below, and the sounds of the distant marshes.68
Metanoia
Three days later …
ROGER’S APPOINTMENT TO MEET with the Reverends Mr. Selverson,
Thomas, and Ringquist, elders of the Presbytery of Charles Town, had been
arranged for three o’clock in the afternoon. Plenty of time to do a few errands
and brush his good black suit.
For the moment, though, he sat on the bench outside the printshop,
enjoying the morning sun and savoring the aftertaste of breakfast. Brianna
had made French toast, to accompany the normal parritch and ham, and while
Fergus had declared that no Frenchman would ever have conceived such a
dish, he’d admitted that it was delicious, rich and eggy and slathered with
some of the honey Claire had sent from her hives. It went some way to
compensate for the lack of tea or coffee; as an American-occupied city,
Charles Town had little of either. On the other hand, there was fresh milk,
taken in trade from a dairywoman with a taste for ballads and the lurid
confessions of felons about to be hanged.
Roger had read several of the latter screeds that Fergus had set aside for his
customer the night before and had been fascinated, mildly repelled—and
made somewhat uneasy.
All you that come to see my fatal end
Unto my final words I pray attend
Let my misfortune now a warning be
To everyone of high or low degree.
A stack of these broadsides had been left on the breakfast table; he’d
caught a glimpse of one headline as Germain had gathered them up and
tapped the pages tidily into order before putting them in his bag:THE TRIAL AND EXECUTION OF HENRY HUGHES
Who Suffered Death on the Twelfth of June, Anno Domini 1779
At the County Gaol, Horsemonger Lane, Southwark
For violating EMMA COOK, A Girl Only 8 Years Old
No stranger to the excesses of the daily press—the things Fergus printed
were in fact not that different in character or intent from the tabloid papers of
his own time—he had been struck by one factor peculiar to this time: to wit,
the fact that the condemned men (and the occasional woman) were always
accompanied by a clergyman on their journey toward the gallows. Not 
just a
private pre-execution visit to give prayers and comfort, but to climb Calvary
alongside the condemned.
What would I say to him,
 he wondered, 
if I should find myself called to
accompany a man to his execution?
 He’d seen men killed, seen people die,
certainly; much too often. But these were natural—if sometimes sudden and
catastrophic—deaths. Surely it was different, a healthy man, sound of body,
filled with life, and facing the imminent prospect of being deprived of that
life by the decree of the state. Worse, having one’s death presented as a
morally elevating public spectacle.
It struck Roger suddenly that he’d 
been
 publicly executed, and the milk
and French toast shifted at the sudden memory.
Aye, well … so was Jesus, wasn’t He?
 He didn’t know where that thought
had come from—it felt like something Jamie would say, logical and
reasonable—but it flooded him at once with unexpected feeling.
It was one thing to know Christ as God and Savior and all the other capital-
letter things that went with that. It was another to realize with shocking
clarity that, bar the nails, he knew exactly how Jesus of Nazareth had felt.
Alone. Betrayed, terrified, wrenched away from those he loved, and wanting
with every atom of one’s being to stay alive.
Well, now you know what you’d say to a condemned man on his way to the
gallows, don’t you?
He was sitting there in the hot sunshine, trying to digest everything from
French toast to the revelations of memory, when the printshop door opened
beside him.
“Comment ça va?”
 Fergus emerged with Germain and Jemmy in tow and
raised an eyebrow at Roger, who hastily removed the hand still curled into
his stomach.“Fine,” he said, getting up. “Where are you off to this morning?”
“Germain is taking the papers and broadsheets to the taverns,” Fergus said,
clapping his son on the back and smiling at him. “And if you agree, Jem will
go with him. A great assistance, and one I have missed sorely, 
mon fils,
” he
said to his son. Germain blushed but looked pleased, and stood up straighter
against the heavy weight of the canvas sack on his shoulder, filled with
copies of 
L’Oignon
 and sheaves of broadsheets and handbills advertising
everything from a ship captain’s desire for sailors to join a Profitable and
Happy Voyage to Mexico to a list of the 
Numerous Benefits of Dr. Hobart’s
Famous Elixir, Guaranteed to Provide Relief
 from a laundry list of
complaints, beginning with Constipation and Swelling of the Ankles. Roger
glimpsed 
Inflammation of,
 but the list of inflamed parts disappeared into the
recesses of Germain’s bag, leaving Roger to imagine the extent of Dr.
Hobart’s powers.
“Can I go, Dad?” Jem had a smaller bag on his shoulder and was pink with
excitement, though trying very hard to be grown up and dignified about the
job.
“Aye, of course.” Roger smiled at his son and swallowed all the words of
warning and good advice that rose to his lips.
“Bonne chance, mes braves,”
 Fergus wished the boys gravely, and Roger
stood shoulder-to-shoulder with him, watching them stride firmly away, each
with one arm wrapped protectively around his heavy bag to keep it from
swinging. Jem, for all that he was taller than his cousin, was still a boy—but
Germain seemed to have made one of those mysterious leaps by which
children somehow alter themselves within the space of a night and rise up as
a different version of themselves. The Germain of this morning was not
grown up, but you could see the nascent young man beginning to emerge
through his soft, fair skin.
Fergus sighed deeply, eyes fixed on his son as Germain disappeared
around the corner.
“Good to have him back?” Roger asked.
“More than you can imagine,” Fergus said quietly. “Thank you for
bringing him to us.”
Roger smiled, shrugging a little. Fergus smiled back, but then his gaze
seemed to lengthen, looking over Roger’s shoulder. Roger turned to look, but
the road was empty.
“When must you meet your inquisitors, 
mon frère
?” he asked.The word gave Roger a small qualm, but he didn’t think Fergus had used it
in anything more than its most literal sense.
“Three o’clock,” he answered. “Is there something you’d like me to do in
the meantime?”
Fergus looked him over carefully, but nodded, evidently finding his
appearance in shirtsleeves, shabby waistcoat, and slightly worn breeches
acceptable for whatever activity he had in mind.
“Come,” Fergus said, with a jerk of his head toward the distant water. “I
may possibly have found milord’s guns. Bring a small amount of gold.”
He and Fergus had—with great care and a little help from Jem and
Germain—decanted the sauerkraut into a variety of jars, bowls, and crocks in
order to retrieve the gold—“Well, we dinna want to waste it, do we?” Marsali
had said, reasonably—and hidden the gold in various places in the house. He
stepped into the kitchen and abstracted a slip of gold from under a large and
rather smelly cheese on top of the cupboard, hesitated for a moment, then
took two more, just in case.
A BIG DANISH Indiaman was engulfing its cargo at the foot of Tradd Street
as they passed. Boxes of salt fish, huge hogsheads of tobacco, bales of raw
cotton, and the odd trunk, wheelbarrow, or coop of feather-scattering
chickens in between, all lurched up the narrow gangway on the backs of
sweating, half-naked men, to disappear into the black mouth of an open
hatchway with the sporadic, gulping greed of a boa constrictor swallowing
rats.
The sight of it made Roger want suddenly to duck out of sight and hide in
the warehouse behind them. He remembered too well what it felt like to do
that—over and over and over and over, hands blistered to bleeding, the skin
flayed from your shoulders, muscles burning and the smell of dead fish and
tobacco enough to make your head swim under the hot sun. And he
remembered the sardonic eyes of Stephen Bonnet, watching him do it.
“Tote that barge, lift that bale—get a little drunk and you land in jail,”
Roger remarked to Fergus, trying to make light of the memory. Fergus
squinted at the heaving, staggering procession and shrugged.
“Only if you get caught.”
“Have you ever 
been
 caught?”Fergus glanced casually at the hook he wore in replacement of his missing
left hand.
“Not for stealing bales, 
non.
”
“What about guns?”
“Not for stealing 
anything,
” Fergus replied loftily. “Come, we want
Prioleau’s Wharf; that’s where he berths.”
“He?” Roger asked, but Fergus was already halfway down the narrow
street and he was compelled to walk fast to catch up.
Prioleau’s Wharf was a long, thin quay, and very busy, mostly with small
boats tying up to unload fish—the city’s fish market was near at hand, and
they were compelled to dodge small wagons and handcarts piled with
gleaming silver bodies—some of them still flapping in a last desperate denial
of death. The air was thick and humid, the smell of fresh fish and fish blood
visceral and exciting, and Roger’s memories of the 
Gloriana
’s and the
Constance
’s dank holds faded.
Fergus had dropped into a casual stroll and Roger did the same, looking to
and fro—though he had no idea who or what they were looking for.
“Bonjour, mon ami!”
 Fergus hailed friends and acquaintances all the way
down the wharf—he appeared to know everyone, and many of the men he
greeted waved or called back, though few stopped working. He was talking in
English, French—though French of a 
patois
 that Roger scarcely understood
—and something that might be some Creole tongue, which he understood
even less. He did gather, though, that they were in search of a man named
Faucette.
Shakes of the head greeted Fergus’s questions, for the most part, but one
squat black gentleman, nearly as broad as he was tall, paused in the act of
gutting a fish—still alive and flapping—and replied in the affirmative,
judging from his gestures, which ended in his pointing out to sea with his
bloody knife.
“There he is.” Fergus waved his thanks to the fisherman and, taking
Roger’s elbow, steered him farther down the pier.
The 
“he”
 in question was a small, nimble-looking boat with a single sail
that had just appeared from the far side of Marsh Island.
It was a fishing boat, bringing in its catch—a single fish, but a fish that
caused everyone nearby to drop what they were doing and rush to see it as
soon as the boat lowered its sail and drifted alongside the wharf.It was an enormous shark—quite dead, thank God—and longer than the
boat; the great gray body buckled in the middle, head and tail protruding over
prow and stern, the dreadful head—for it was a hammerhead shark—
goggling like some horrible figurehead. The boat rode so low in the water
that the wavelets from the quay lapped over the sides from time to time. The
crew—there were only two men, one black, one of mixed race—were
swarmed, both by gapers and by fishmongers bent on acquiring the prize.
“Well, this will take some little while,” Fergus remarked, displeased at the
hubbub. “On the other hand, it will perhaps render Monsieur Faucette
communicative—if he’s not too drunk to talk by the time I am able to get him
alone.” He exhaled audibly through his nose, thinking, then glanced at the
sun and shook his head.
“It will be hours. You’ll have to go, if you are to have time to change your
clothes before you meet the press-biters.”
“The—oh, aye,” Roger said, hiding a smile. After all, what else would you
call the members of a presbytery? “Well, then …” He reached into his
waistcoat pocket and withdrew a folded handkerchief, concealing the gold
slips inside it. “
Gesundheit.
 Er … I mean, 
À vos souhaits
.”
“À tes amours,”
 Fergus replied politely, delicately wiped his nose and
tucked the handkerchief into his pocket. 
“Bonne chance, mon frère.”69
More Entertaining Than Laundry
BRIANNA PULLED THE LEVER—Da had been right; it did take a good
bit of force—and watched the paper flatten on the inked type. She realized
she was holding her breath, and let it out deliberately as she pushed the bar
back. Marsali raised the frame and smiled at the page with its clear black
letters.
“There ye are,” she said, with a nod to Brianna. “Never a smudge. Ye’re a
natural.”
“Oh, I bet you say that to all the printer’s devils.” Notwithstanding,
Brianna felt a faint glow of accomplishment. “This is fun.”
“Well, it is,” Marsali agreed, peeling the paper off and carrying it carefully
to the cords that crisscrossed one side of the room, where fresh sheets were
hung for drying. “The first hundred times or so. After that …” She was
already laying a fresh sheet of paper in place. “It’s still more entertaining than
laundry, I’ll say that much.”
“And you with a nearly grown son 
and
 a husband who’s an ex-pickpocket.
I’ve seen some entertaining laundry, turning out men’s pockets … Jem had a
dead mouse in his, just day before yesterday. He 
said
 it was dead when he
picked it up,” she added darkly, pulling the bar again. “Speaking of laundry
—do you know where Roger and Fergus have gone? I’ve just brushed and
sponged Roger’s black suit so he can wear it this afternoon, to talk to the
elders, but he needs to be back in time to change.”
Marsali shook her head.
“I heard Fergus say something about ‘milord’s guns’ to Roger Mac, but
nothin’ about where he meant to find them.”
Bree’s heart gave a quick bump at the word 
“guns.”
“I hope Fergus doesn’t get Roger defrocked before he’s even ordained,”
she said lightly, hoping it sounded as though she were joking.“Dinna fash,” Marsali said comfortably, stretching up to hang another
freshly printed sheet. “Protestant ministers dinna wear frocks to start with.”
They both laughed, and the fresh sheet, caught by a breeze from the door,
suddenly wavered, came loose, and doubled on itself, just as Bree pulled the
lever.
“Horsefeathers!” she said.
Marsali leaned over and plucked the crumpled damp sheet out of its frame
with two fingers.
“There’s one for the kindling,” she remarked, dropping it into a large
basket, half full of ruined sheets. “Does it ever seem strange to ye, to be
marrit to a priest?”
“Well … yes. I mean, I sort of didn’t expect that. Not that I 
mind,
” she
added hastily. “I mean, it’s not as though he was going to be a—a—”
“Thief?” Marsali suggested, and her smile widened. “I kent what Fergus
was from the start—he told me—and it didna matter a bit. I’d have had him if
he’d said he was a highwayman and murdered folk on the road for their
coin.”
Brianna thought her mother had mentioned that Fergus 
had
 been a
highwayman at one point, but it seemed more tactful not to say so. After all,
he wasn’t doing that now—so far as she knew.
“Mind,” Marsali said, drawing a new sheet of paper from its quire and
sliding it into the press, “I was no but fifteen at the time, and besides, he was
helpin’ Da, and I didna mind 
him
 bein’ whatever he was. Ken, now I know
what the two o’ them were doing in Edinburgh, I’m no sure it wouldna be
safer for him to have kept on smuggling liquor, instead of carryin’ on with
the printing. Though I suppose either one can get a man hanged, these days.”
The press was a solid thing, but the satisfying thump when she pulled the
lever sent a vibration through metal and wood and straight down her
backbone.
“We call that the devil’s tail, did ye ken that?” Marsali said, nodding at the
lever. A peep from the twins’ big cradle by the hearth made both women
glance at it, suspending their motions for an instant, but no further noise
came, and they resumed the rhythm of their work.
Marsali smiled when Félicité ran in from the backyard, apron strings flying
and full of giggles, closely pursued by a red-faced Joanie, shouting things in a
mix of French and Gaelic, and Mandy, screeching happily as she brought upthe rear. They disappeared through the front door into the street, and Marsali
shook her head.
“Dinna ask questions ye dinna want to hear the answer to,” she said in
reply to Brianna’s unspoken look. “Nobody’s bleedin’ and I dinna think the
house is afire. Yet.”
“Da told me the ink pads are made of dog skin,” Brianna said, obligingly
changing the subject. “Is that true?”
“It is, aye. Ken dogs dinna sweat?”
“Yes. Lucky dogs.” She was sweating freely, as was Marsali. Even though
it 
was September, the air was thick as a sodden blanket, and her shift clung to
her like glue.
“Well, so. Ye’ve got wee pores in your skin, what the sweat comes out of,
and since dogs dinna sweat, they havena got those, so the skin is finer and
smoother, so better for puttin’ the ink on.”
Brianna turned one of the big ink-stained buffing pads over to look, though
having never seen an implement made of human skin, she wasn’t sure she’d
be able to tell the difference. The thought made a ripple of gooseflesh break
out on her forearms, though.
“It’s important?” Marsali asked, fixing the fresh page in place. “This
meeting Roger’s going to? I mean—he’s been ministering to folk for some
time now, on the Ridge—surely they wouldna make him stop?”
“Well, I do hope not,” Brianna said dubiously. “The thing is, though, last
time they just made him a Minister of the Word, and that means he was
supposed to be able to christen babies and bury people—and he’s certainly
been doing that. He was all set to be ordained, but then … things happened.
Technically, he probably shouldn’t have been marrying people, but he did it
—I mean, there was no one else to do it, and if he didn’t, they—the people
who wanted to be married—would just be … er … living in sin. So he did.
“But they 
had
 sort of passed him, last time; he 
did
 qualify to be a Minister
of the Word and Sacrament. It’s just that he missed being properly ordained
because Stephen Bonnet kidnapped me. And he, um …” She felt an
unpleasant feeling rising under her skin, something hot and cold together.
Roger had told her—once—about the man he’d killed, but had never
mentioned it again. Nor had she.
“I remember,” Marsali said, with sympathy. “But I dinna see how helping
catch a villain like that would make Roger Mac no fit to be a minister.”“Well, I’m sure they’ll see it that way, too.” 
They’d better,
 she thought
fiercely. She had a lurking fear that a Catholic wife might prove to be a
bigger impediment to Roger’s ordination than Stephen Bonnet’s affair had
been. On the other hand, Roger 
had
 told the first presbytery about her, and
while they’d hemmed and hawed quite a bit, they’d finally decided that being
married to a Catholic was not 
quite
 as bad as having a wife who was a known
murderess or a working prostitute. She smiled a little at the thought.
Their eventual acceptance had been accomplished by the persuasion of
Davy Campbell, who had a certain fondness for her and Roger, he having
married them, and then having taught Roger at his famous “log college,” to
fill in the gaps in his classical education. But Davy was 
at
 his college in
North Carolina, and thus of little use in the present situation beyond the letter
of support he’d sent.
If she was honest, though, she was less worried about the elders than about
her own ability to be a good wife for a minister. So far, it had been mostly all
right; she could keep Roger fed, clothed, and with a roof over his head, but
beyond that … what kind of help could she give him?
“Ye can stop now, 
a nighean.
”
“What?” Absorbed in her thoughts, she’d been working the press like an
automaton. Looking up, she saw the lines overhead thick with fresh pages,
and Marsali smiling as she reached across the bed of the press to pull out the
sticks of type.
“We’re done wi’ the first page. Why don’t ye go and see if the weans have
killed each other, while I set the next one? And bring me some beer while
ye’re at it, aye?”70
A Sword in My Hand
ROGER RETURNED TO THE printshop to find both his wife and Marsali
covered with ink and enmeshed in a cobweb of drying pages hung from the
crisscrossing lines strung across the back of the shop. Brianna made to
remove her inky apron in order to come and help him dress, but he waved her
back and climbed the ladder to the loft, where he found his suit—somewhat
worn at the edges and with the corner of the pocket darned, but definitely
black—and a clean, starched, brand-new white neckcloth hanging from a
hook under the owl-slits.
He dressed slowly and carefully, listening to the women’s talk and laughter
down below, and the high-pitched echo of the three little girls, who were
playing in the kitchen whilst keeping an eye on their baby brothers. It gave
him a sense of warmth and tenderness, and a sudden longing for a home of
their own. 
When we get back to the Ridge,
 he thought, 
maybe …
It had suited everyone’s convenience to live together in the New House
after their return, and it was a lot easier to take care of kids when there were
older children and other adults around to help—but maybe once he 
was
ordained … And at the thought, he superstitiously crossed his fingers, then
laughed to himself.
But it might be best. A large part of what he’d be doing would be talking to
people, and while he still meant to go round house-visiting on the Ridge, he
should have a place, maybe, with a wee room for a study, where he could talk
to folk in private, and where he could keep records of births and marriages
and deaths …
Thinking about the distant future lessened his apprehension of the more
immediate future, and he came down the ladder briskly, just as the bell of a
nearby church struck two.“You’re early,” Brianna observed, pausing to wipe sweat from her
forehead. “You look great, though!”
“Aye, ye do,” Marsali chimed in. “Just like a minister—only better-
looking. All the Presbyterian ministers I know are auld and crabbit and smell
like camphor.”
“They do?” Roger asked, amused. “How many do you know?”
“Well, one,” she admitted. “And he’s ninety-seven. But still—”
“Don’t get too close. You don’t have another clean shirt.” But Brianna still
came within touching distance, and hands safely crossed behind her back,
leaned far out to kiss him.
“Good luck,” she said, and smiled into his eyes. “It will be fine.”
“Aye. Thanks,” he said, meaning it, and smiled back. “I—think I’ll just sit
outside for a bit. Gather my thoughts.”
“That’s good,” Marsali said approvingly. “If ye went walkin’ about for an
hour, ye’d be wringing wet by the time ye got there.”
HE’D BEEN SITTING on one of the two benches outside—the one under the
patchy shade of a palmetto—for a quarter of an hour, trying hard 
not
 to think
too much, when Jem came wandering along the street, idly poking at things
with the stick in his hand.
When he saw his father, though, he dropped the stick and came to sit
beside him, swinging his feet. They sat together for a bit, just listening to the
buzz of cicadas and the shouts of fishmongers from a distant pier.
“Dad,” Jem said, diffident.
“Aye?”
“Will you be different? After you get ordained?” Jem looked up at this,
worry pinching the corners of his wide, soft mouth. 
God, he looks like Bree.
“No, mate,” Roger said. “I’ll always be your dad, no matter what. And I’ll
still be just me,” he added, as an afterthought.
“Oh. Well, I didn’t think ye’d 
stop,
 exactly …” A smile touched Jem’s
face like a stray sunbeam. “It’s only … what’s different? Because if 
nothing’s
different—why do you want to do it? Why is it important?”
“Ah.” Roger leaned back a little, hands on his knees. The truth was that he
rather expected to 
be
 different in some indefinable way, even though he also
knew with certainty that he’d be the same.“Well,” he said slowly, “part of it is that it’s formal. You ken Mairi and
Archie MacLean back home at the Ridge, aye?”
“Aye.” Jem was eyeing him dubiously, wondering if this was going to
make sense. Roger wondered that, too, but it was a legitimate question—and
one that he thought might need answering more than once.
“Well, see, we had their wedding at Easter, but they came to it with their
wee son, who was born in the autumn of last year. So they’d been living as
man and wife for more than a year, even though they weren’t married.”
“Were they no handfast?” Jem’s brow wrinkled, trying to recollect.
“Aye, they were. That’s sort of my point. They made a contract with each
other when they became handfast. Ye understand contracts?”
“Oh, aye. Grandda showed me the land deed the old governor gave him for
the Ridge, and he explained why that was a contract. Two … er … parties? I
think that’s what he said. The parties promise each other something and sign
their names to it.”
“Ye’ve got it.” Roger smiled and was happy to get a smile back in return.
“So then. Mairi and Archie had that contract, though it wasn’t written down,
and what it said—have ye seen anyone get handfast? No? Well, when two
people are handfast, they promise to live together as man and wife for a year
and a day, and to—do the things a man and wife do, in the way of taking care
of each other. And that’s a contract between them. 
But …
 when the year and a
day are up, then they can decide if they want to go on living as man and wife
or if they can’t abide each other and want to go their separate ways.
“So if they want to stay with each other … they do, but if there’s a minister
at hand to marry them, they do that, and it’s the same sort of contract, but
more … detailed … and it’s permanent. They promise to 
stay
 married.”
“Oh, is that what that means, ‘’til death us do part’?”
“Exactly.”
Jem was silent for a moment, turning this over in his mind. In the distance,
a church bell rang twice and then was silent: the half-hour bell.
“So ye’ve been handfast to the Presbyterians and now ye’re going to marry
them?” Jem asked, frowning a little. “Will Mam not mind?”
“No, she doesn’t,” Roger assured him, hoping it was true.
Another example occurred to him.
“Ye’ve seen your grandda ride out with his men now and then, aye?”
“Oh, aye!” Jem’s eyes grew bright at the recollection. “He says I can go
with them when I’m thirteen!”Roger swallowed his automatic 
“the hell you will,”
 and cleared his throat
instead. Jamie Fraser had gone on his first cattle raid at the age of eight; in his
view of life, as long as the boy’s feet reached the stirrups, why shouldn’t a
thirteen-year-old be capable of keeping public order, socializing with Indians,
and facing down Loyalist militias?
He’s got to learn sometime,
 he could hear Jamie saying, with that mild
tone that belied the stubborn conviction behind the words. 
Better early than
too late.
“Mmphm. Well. Ye’ve seen when they ride out, your grandda lifts his
sword or his rifle as the signal to start?”
Jem nodded enthusiastically, and Roger was obliged to admit that seeing
Jamie do that sent a small thrill down his own spine.
“Well, see, that’s the signal that the men are to follow him and go where he
leads them. If they come to a place where they need to go in a certain
direction, quickly, he’ll draw his sword and point it in the way they should
go, so they can all follow at once and not get lost.
“He’s still just who he is—your grandda, and your mam’s father, and a
good man—but he’s also got to be a leader, and when he does that, he wears
his leather waistcoat and he has his sword in his hand, so everyone 
knows
he’s the leader. He doesna have to stop and explain it to anybody.”
Jem nodded again, listening intently.
“So, that’s sort of what it’s like for me to be ordained. Folk will know that
I’m … a sort of leader. Being ordained is—my sword, in a way.” 
And with
luck, they might pay attention to what I tell them, now and then …
“Ohh …” Jem said, understanding dawning. “I see.”
“Good.” He wanted to pat Jem on the head, but instead shook his hand
briefly and squeezed it, then rose. “I’ll need to be off now, but I’ll be back by
suppertime.”
The smell of gumbo full of shrimp and oysters and sausage was seeping
out of the printshop, oddly mixed with the smells of ink and metal, but
enough to stir the gastric juices nonetheless.
“Dad?” Jem said, and Roger turned to look over his shoulder.
“Aye?”
“I think they should give you a real sword. You might need one.”71
Rolling Heads
THEY’D FINISHED THE MOST urgent printing jobs and got everyone fed
lunch—Germain and Jem had come back from their rounds with two loaves
of day-old bread from the bakery and a bowl of shrimp fricassee from Mrs.
Wharton’s ordinary.
“Mrs. Wharton says she wants the bowl back, Mam,” Germain said,
conscious of his dignity and responsibilities as a bearer of the printed word.
“I’m thinking we’ll have melon tonight—they’re in season—and if they’re
good, I’ll buy an extra one for ye to take back to her wi’ her bowl,” Marsali
assured him. “Now—the wee yins have just been fed; they’ll sleep for an
hour or two. You and Jem look after Mandy while we do the marketing, and
I’ll make ye bridies for your supper.”
Mandy was miffed at not being allowed to go to the market with the Big
Girls, but was substantially mollified by being given her own composing
stick and a bag of type with which to spell out words, along with the
assurance that Auntie Marsali would print whatever she made up onto a sheet
of paper that she could keep.
“And if either of you try to get her to spell bad words, I’ll tell both your
fathers and you won’t sit down for a week,” Brianna said to Jem and
Germain. Germain looked piously offended at the notion. Jem didn’t bother,
merely raising his brows at his mother.
“She knows every bad word I do already,” he pointed out. “Shouldn’t she
ken how to spell them right?”
Familiar with Jem’s techniques, she refused to be drawn into philosophical
discussion, and instead patted him on the head.
“Just don’t give her any ideas.”
“FISH LAST,” MARSALI said as they made their way down toward the
seafront. “Vegetables and fruit usually come in early in the morning, so we’ll
have to take what we can get at this time o’ day—but fish dinna keep the
same hours as farmers do, so boats come in anytime they’ve got a decent
catch, and our chances are still good. Besides, we dinna want to carry fish
longer than we have to, not in this weather.”
Fergus had brought home a sack of potatoes and a braid of onions before
breakfast, these taken in payment from some of his customers. Beans and rice
were kept in large quantities in the pantry. For now, they meant to scavenge
the produce markets for whatever fresh stuff was available, enjoying the fresh
air and sunshine while doing so.
Late in the day as it was, the market was still busy, but not thronged as it
likely had been at dawn. They made their way through stalls and wagons and
the cries of vendors trying to get rid of the last of their wares and go home,
sniffing the mingled scents of sun-warmed flowers, garlic, summer squash,
and fresh corn in the ear.
“What are ye askin’ for your okra?” Marsali inquired of one young
gentleman, fresh off the farm, judging from his smock and apron.
“A penny a bunch,” he replied, scooping up a bunch tied with string and
holding it under her nose. “Picked fresh this morning!”
“And rode here under a load of potatoes, from the looks of them,” Marsali
said, poking critically at a bruised green object. “Still, they’d make gumbo
…. Tell ye what, I’ll take three for a penny, and ye’ll be on your way home
the sooner.”
“
Three
 for a penny, she says!” The young farmer reeled, the back of his
hand pressed dramatically to his forehead. “Madam, would you see me
ruined?”
“It’s your choice, no?” Marsali said, clearly enjoying the show. “It’s one
more penny than ye’ll get if ye dinna sell it at all, and I dinna think ye will,
sae bashed as it is.”
The girls, who had plainly seen their mother bargain merchants out of their
stockings before, were shifting from foot to foot and looking round for more
interesting fare.
Félicité suddenly perked up.
“Mam! There’s a new wagon comin’ in! And he’s got 
melons
!”
Marsali at once dropped the questionable okra and hurried after her
daughters, who had sped ahead to get a good place by the wagon the momentit stopped.
“Sorry,” Bree said apologetically to the young farmer. “Maybe later.”
“Hmph,” said the young man, but he had already turned away, lifting a
bunch of limp green onions aloft in one hand, okra in the other, shouting,
“Gumbo tonight!” at an oncoming pair of shoppers with half-empty baskets.
People—mostly women, though there were a few men, apprentices or
cooks by their grease-stained smocks—were gathering quickly, pushing to
get their hands on the melons first. Joanie and Félicité had bagged a good
spot by the tailboard, though, where the melon farmer’s son was minding the
wares. Marsali and Bree reached the girls just in time to prevent a large
woman in a bonnet from shoving them out of the way.
Brianna poised herself with her bottom pressed firmly against the wagon
and prepared to repel the competition, while the girls stood on tiptoe next to
her, sniffing ecstatically. Bree drew a deep breath herself and gave an
involuntary small moan of delight. The smell of a hundred ripe, fresh-picked
melons was enough to make her light-headed.
“Mmm.” Marsali inhaled strongly and shook her head, grinning at Brianna.
“Enough to knock ye over, no?” She wasted no more time in sensual
wallowing, though, but put a hand on Joanie’s bony little shoulder.
“D’ye remember how I told ye to pick a ripe melon, 
a nighean
?”
“Ye knock on it,” Joanie said, but doubtfully. Nonetheless, she reached out
and tapped gingerly on a rounded shape. “Is that one good?”
Marsali rapped the same melon, sharply, and shook her head. “It’s one
ye’d buy if ye meant to keep it for a few days, but if ye want one fit to eat for
supper—”
“We do!” chorused the girls. Marsali smiled at them and rapped her
knuckles lightly against Félicité’s forehead.
“It should sound like that,” she said. “Not hollow—but like what’s inside
is softer than the outside.”
Joanie giggled and said something in Gaelic that Brianna interpreted as a
speculation as to whether her sister’s head was filled with parritch. Her own
maternal reflexes inserted a hip between the sisters before mayhem could
ensue, and she reached into the wagon at random and scooped up a melon,
inviting Joanie to try it.
Ten minutes of haggling and controlled chaos later, they made their way
out of the scrum, carrying eight prime melons among them. The rest of the
vegetables and fruit were acquired with relatively little incident, and aftercasting her eye over her hot and visibly wilting party, Marsali declared that
they would sit down by the river and eat one of the melons, as a reward for
their labors.
Brianna, who had a knife on her belt, did the honors and a blessed silence
descended, broken only by slurping noises and the spitting of seeds. The
atmosphere was liquid; her clothes clung to her and perspiration ran in
trickles from her bundled hair down the back of her neck and dripped from
her chin.
“How does anybody live here in the summertime?” she asked, wiping her
face on a sleeve and reaching for another slice of melon.
Marsali shrugged philosophically.
“How does anybody live through the winter in the mountains?” she
countered. “Sweat’s better than frostbite. And here, there’s plenty of food
year-round; ye’re no livin’ off venison shot six months ago and pickin’
mouse droppings out of what corn ye’ve saved from the squirrels.”
“That’s a point,” Brianna admitted. “Though I’d think the army eats a good
deal of what’s available, don’t they?” She nodded toward a column of
marching Continental soldiers, coming down the street toward the drilling
ground at the edge of town, muskets over their shoulders.
“Mmphm.” Marsali waved to the officer at the head of the column, who
took off his hat and bowed to her as they passed. “I feel a deal safer wi’ them
here, and they’re welcome to whatever they need.”
Something in her tone made Brianna’s scalp itch, and she thought suddenly
of the fire in Philadelphia. Her mother said that no one knew whether it had
been an accident or …
She choked that thought off.
“Do you have much trouble? With Loyalists, I mean?”
“Can we open another, Mam? Pleeease?” Joan and Félicité were shiny-
faced with melon juice, but looking hungrily at the remaining heap.
“Speak o’ the devil,” Marsali muttered, but not to her daughters. Her eyes
were fixed on a pair of men who had come out of a tavern on the far side of
the street. They were young but full-grown and looked like workmen, their
clothes rough and grubby at the edges, and one carried a canvas sack over
one shoulder. They paused outside the tavern, looking up, and Brianna saw
that they were inspecting the sign, this being a piece of canvas tacked over
the original sign.The canvas bore a rather unskilled rendering of a soldier in white wig and
enormous epaulets sporting huge loops of yellow lace, and a caption
informing passerby that this tavern was The General Washington. Bree had
just time to wonder what the original name of the place had been, prior to the
occupation of the city, before the young man with the bag had reached into it
and emerged with a handful of ripe tomatoes. He shoved these into his
companion’s hands, scooped out another handful of tomatoes for himself, and
hurled them at the sign overhead, bellowing, “God save the King!” at the top
of his voice.
“God save the King!” his friend echoed. His aim was less sure than the
first young man’s, and two of his tomatoes splattered against the front wall of
the tavern, while another fell to the roadway and smashed on the cobbles.
A corner of the canvas sign had come loose under the assault and now
flopped down, revealing enough of the sign underneath as to make it a good
bet that the place had previously been known as The King’s Head.
“I’ll find out their names, Mam. So you can put them in the paper,” Joanie
said in a business-like voice, and hopping to her feet started purposefully
across the street.
“Joanie! 
Thig air ais an seo!
” Marsali also leapt to her feet, just in time to
seize Félicité by the arm and keep her from following her sister. “Joanie!”
Joanie heard and hesitated, looking back over her shoulder, but the young
vandals, who had rearmed themselves with more tomatoes, heard too.
Flushed with excitement, they ran across the street, flinging tomatoes wildly
at Joanie, who screamed in panic and raced for her mother.
“Back off!” Brianna shouted at the top of her own voice, just in time to
catch a tomato smack in the middle of her chest, where it exploded in a
splotch of red juice and slimy seeds. “What do you morons think you’re
doing
?”
Marsali had shoved the girls behind her and was standing her ground, fists
clenched at her sides, white with fury.
“How dare ye attack my daughter?” she bellowed.
“Ain’t you the printer’s wife?” one young man asked. He’d lost his cap
and his hair was standing up in matted spikes, sweat streaming down his face
from heat and excitement. He narrowed his eyes at Marsali, then her girls.
“Yes, you are! I know you, damned rebel 
bitch
!”
“Friggin’ mudlarks,” his friend said, panting. He wiped his brow on a
sleeve, then pushed the sleeve up, showing a reasonably brawny arm. “Let’sthrow ’em all ’n the river. Teach the printer to mind his manners.”
Bree drew herself up to her full height—she had a good four or five inches
on both young men—and took a step forward.
“You little pipsqueaks clear off,” she said, as menacingly as she could.
They looked at her, surprised, and burst into laughter.
“Another rebel bitch, eh?” One young man grabbed her by the arm, fast
and hard, and at the same moment, the young man with the bag let it drop off
his shoulder and, gripping the strap, swung it and hit her on the side of the
head.
She lost her balance, staggered, and fell. Squishy contents notwithstanding,
the bag was heavy, and her nose and eyes watered from the sudden impact.
The young men were hooting with laughter. The girls were both yelping and
Marsali was trying to keep them behind her, hovering in obvious hopes of
being able to kick one of the miscreants. She wasn’t able to get close to them
before one had stooped and grabbed Brianna’s ankles, yanking her legs up.
“Grab her shoulders!” he shouted at his friend, who promptly did just that.
They half-dragged, half-carried her down the bank, behind the screen of
willows that edged the river. She was struggling but couldn’t breathe. Her
lungs didn’t work and she couldn’t find purchase with hands or feet from
which to strike them.
“Buinneachd o ’n teine ort!”
 There was a sharp cry, and the man holding
her shoulders dropped her.
Her lungs filled and she jerked her feet free and rolled away, scrambling
up onto her knees, groping for a stone, a branch, anything with which to
fucking 
hit
 somebody.
Marsali was breathing hard, teeth clenched, Brianna’s knife in her hand.
Brianna’s eyes were still watering, but she made out Joanie and Fizzy on the
bank above, each with a melon in her hands, and as she struggled to her feet,
Félicité flung her melon as hard as she could. It struck the ground well short
of the young men but rolled slowly downhill, coming to rest at the foot of a
shrub of some kind.
The vandals roared with laughter, one of them dancing toward Marsali,
feinting as though to grab the knife, slapping at her with his other hand as she
hesitated.
Bree had got her body back and she rose, a solid rock in one hand, and
pasted the jerk who’d held her ankles in the back with it, as hard as she could.The rock thunked home and he made a high-pitched noise and dropped to his
knees, cursing breathlessly.
His friend looked back and forth between Marsali and Brianna, then
stepped away, careless.
“You best tell your husband to mend his ways and mind what he prints in
that paper, missus,” he said to Marsali. The glee of destruction had left him,
though the anger hadn’t. He waved a hand at the girls, pressed close together
in the shade of a willow. “You got a passel o’ punkin-headed young’uns.
Might be as you could spare one, eh?”
Without warning, he darted forward and kicked the melon on the ground,
bursting it into juice, seeds, and broken shards.
Brianna was frozen again, but so was everyone. After a long, long
moment, the young man she’d hit with the rock got to his feet, gave her an
evil look, then jerked his head at his friend. They turned and left, pausing
only to pick up the canvas bag and shake the pulp of smashed tomatoes out
onto the ground.72
A Prayer to St. Dismas
ROGER STEPPED OUT OF the Reverend Selverson’s house into the sound
of drums. He was in such a flurry of spirits that for a moment he had no
notion of what he was hearing, nor why. But as he stood blinking in the light,
he saw a Continental soldier come round the corner and walk toward him, not
marching, merely walking in a business-like way, a large drum slung to the
side, so as not to impede his stride, and his cadence every bit as pedestrian as
his aspect.
A sense of motion in the streets, unhurried footsteps, and as the drummer
passed him without a glance, he saw men coming round the same corner,
some in uniform, strolling and talking in small groups, and he realized that
they were coming from Half-Moon Street, from the taverns and eating
houses. This was the evening drum—
surely it’s not called “reveille” at
night? Oh, no; it’s “retreat”
—that summoned soldiers to return to their
quarters, to eat, and to rest at end of day.
The printshop was in the St. Michael district, while the Reverend
Selverson’s house was on the other side of the city. That’s why he hadn’t
noticed the evening drum before; the army camp was on this side.
Even with this explanation, he felt a certain stirring at the sound of the
drum. And why shouldn’t he? he thought. He was being summoned, too.
Smiling at the thought, he put on his hat and stepped into the street.
He didn’t go back to the printshop at once, eager though he was to tell
Bree his good news. He needed to be alone for a bit, to open his overflowing
heart to God, and make a minister’s promises.
In late afternoon, the heat of the day had pressed the town flat. Only his joy
could have made him oblivious to it; even so, the air was like breathing
melted butter and he made his way to the waterfront, hoping for a breeze. The
waterfront was never deserted, at any hour of the day or night, but at this timeof day, most of the ships at anchor in the harbor had been unloaded, their
goods receipted, the customs paid, and the sweating longshoremen retired to
the nearest place of refreshment—which happened to be the Half-Moon
tavern. He was tempted to slake his thirst before embarking on his private
devotions—he hadn’t been unloading ships in this heat, thank God, but he
wasn’t used to the coast and its tropical fugs, either—but there were
priorities.
His priorities suddenly altered when he saw Fergus, who stood at the end
of the quay, looking out across the water, this shimmering under the low sun
like the surface of a magic mirror.
He heard Roger’s footsteps and turned to greet him, smiling.
“Comment ça va?”
“Ça va,”
 Roger replied nonchalantly, but then broke into an enormous
involuntary grin.
“Ça va très bien?”
 Fergus asked.
“More 
bien
 than you can imagine,” Roger assured him, and Fergus clapped
him on the shoulder.
“I knew it would be well,” he said, and then, digging his hand into his
pocket, he came out with a handful of coins and folded warehouse
certificates. “Half of this is yours—to buy a new black coat,” he said, looking
critically at Roger’s present garment. “And a white neckcloth with the—” His
hand and hook both smoothed his upper chest, indicating the presence of a
Presbyterian minister’s white lappets.
Roger stared at the money, then at Fergus. “You made book on my passing
the interview? What were the odds?”
“Five to three. 
Pas mal.
 Will you be ordained here, then?” He frowned
slightly. “It should be all right if it’s soon.”
“I think it will be in North Carolina, maybe at Davy Caldwell’s church—or
maybe here, if we can get enough elders to come. But what do you think is
about to happen?”
“I am a 
journaliste,
” Fergus said, with a slight shrug. His eyes were fixed
on the masts of a distant ship, anchored out in the harbor beyond the river.
“People talk to me. I know a few things that I would not put into the
newspaper.”
“Such as?” Roger’s heart, still happy, had given an extra thump.
Fergus turned his back on the shimmering water and gave the quay a
quick, casual—but very thorough—glance.“I managed at last to get Monsieur Faucette more or less to himself, and
while he was somewhat elevated in spirit, he was still making sense. Have
you heard of the island of Saint Eustatius?”
“Vaguely. It’s out there somewhere.” He waved an arm in the general
direction of what he thought was the West Indies.
“Oui,”
 Fergus said patiently. “It belongs to the Dutch. And the Dutch
make and sell arms—on Saint Eustatius. Monsieur Faucette was born on the
island and calls there regularly. His mother is a Dutchwoman and he has
family there still.”
“So you knew Monsieur Faucette, and he—”
“Non.”
 Fergus shook his head. “I knew a shark fisherman from
Martinique. He was caught up in a bad storm and his boat damaged; one of
the merchantmen picked him up and they brought him here.”
Roger’s elation of spirit didn’t disappear, but it receded quickly from the
front of his mind. He and Brianna had discussed both the necessity of telling
Fergus and Marsali what the future held—
might
 hold, he corrected himself
uneasily—and when might be the best time to do that. In the joyous flurry of
reunion and the heart-stopping imminence of his interview with the
presbytery (the memory made his heart bounce high, in spite of the
impending conversation), neither of them had wanted to venture onto the
perilous ground of prediction … but clearly, it was time.
“When?” Roger asked warily. He was trying to recall the exact sequence of
events that Frank Randall had described. The Siege of Savannah was going to
happen soon—in early October—but was going to fail, remaining in British
hands. But then came the Siege of Charles Town, and that one was going to
succeed—leaving that city also in British hands.
“I spoke with him a week ago,” Fergus said, and smiled. “I bought the
story of his adventures for sixpence, and we became friends. I bought him
rum and we became 
frères de coeur.
 He spoke only French, you see, and
while that is not uncommon here, real French people are. He hadn’t talked
freely with anyone for six months.”
“And what did he freely tell you?” Roger’s fizz had died down again,
pushed into the background by curiosity—and a small sense of dread.
“That he spoke a ship somewhere in the Windward Islands—a sloop, he
said, a private boat. They had hauled to—are you impressed at my knowledge
of nautical terms?”
“Very,” Roger said, smiling.“Well, it was a lot of rum we drank.” Fergus glanced wistfully at the Half-
Moon, but he also had priorities and turned back to Roger.
“Anyway, they had stopped to catch fish; there were schools of … tunny
fish, I believe he said. The owner of the sloop drank rum with him, too, and
told him that the French were sending a fleet in support of the Americans; he
had seen the fleet and heard about them in a bar on Barbados—” He waved
his hook, seeing Roger’s expression. “Don’t ask me how word came to be
there; you know how gossip works.
“And,” he went on, “that their plan was to go to New York but that they
were aware of the British’s machinations, to sever Philadelphia and Boston
and New York from their food, so to speak.” He gestured with his hook from
the nearby warehouses to a stretch of ripening fields across the river.
“So if it should happen that the British were already coming south,
D’Estaing—he’s the French admiral,” he explained, “D’Estaing will sail at
once to the south. And if what he told me is correct, the French ships will
come 
here.
”
Roger swallowed and wished he’d listened to his baser urges and had that
drink first. “Actually,” he said, “they’re going to Savannah. The Americans
are going to attack Savannah. Quite soon.”
Both of Fergus’s dark brows quirked up at that. Roger coughed.
“So that’s where the French are going,” Roger said. “To support General
Lincoln’s troops at—”
“But General Lincoln is 
here
!”
Roger waved a hand, still coughing.
“For the moment,” he agreed. “And he’ll leave a garrison here, of course.
But he’s taking a lot of men to Savannah. They won’t succeed, though,” he
finished, feeling apologetic. “But 
then
 they’ll come back here. And then
General Cornwallis—I think it’s Cornwallis—will be coming down from
New York. Clinton and Cornwallis will besiege the city and take it. And …
erm … I’m thinking that perhaps you and Marsali might think of not being
here when that happens?”
Fergus’s eyes were as close to round as they could possibly get.
“I mean,” Roger said. “It’s not like you can easily hide.”
That made Fergus smile, just a little.
“I have not forgotten how to become invisible,” he assured Roger. “But it’s
much more difficult to make a wife and five children disappear. And I cannot
leave Marsali to run the newspaper alone, not with two infants to feed and thetown alive with soldiers.” He wiped a sleeve across his sweat-shiny face,
blew out his cheeks, and sat down on a stack of white-dusted crates crudely
labeled 
Guano
 with a slapdash brush.
“So.” He gave Roger a sidelong glance. “You are telling me that the
British will possess 
both
 Savannah and Charles Town?”
“For a while. Not permanently—I mean, you, er, 
we
 will in fact win the
war. But not for another two years.”
He saw Fergus’s throat move as he swallowed and the hairs rise on his lean
forearms, bared by turned-back sleeves.
“You … um … Bree said she thought you … er … knew,” he said
carefully. “About—Claire, I mean. And, um, us.” He sat down beside Fergus
on the crate, careful to lift the skirts of his black coat away from the white
dust.
Fergus shook his head—not in negation, but as one trying to shake its
contents into some pattern resembling sense.
“As I said,” he replied, the smile returning briefly to his eyes, “I know a lot
of things I don’t publish in the newspaper.” He straightened up, hand—and
hook—on his knees.
“I was with milord and milady during the Rising, and you know”—he
raised a brow in question—“that milord hired me in Paris, to steal letters for
him? I read them—and I heard milord and milady talk. In private.” A brief
smile twitched his mouth and disappeared.
“I didn’t truly believe it, of course. Not until the morning before the battle,
when milord gave me the Deed of Sasine to Lallybroch and bade me take it to
his sister. And then, of course … milady vanished.” His voice was soft, and
Roger could see what he hadn’t realized before—the depth of Fergus’s
feeling for Claire, the first mother he remembered. “But milord would never
say that she was dead. He didn’t talk about her—but when someone pushed
him—”
“His sister?” Thought of Jenny made Roger smile. So did Fergus.
“Yes. He would never say that she was dead. Only … that she was gone.”
“And then she came back,” Roger said quietly.
“Oui.”
 Fergus looked at him, thoughtfully examining his face, as though
to make sure of the man he was talking to. “And plainly, Brianna and you are
… what milady is.” A thought struck him, and his eyes widened. “
Les
enfants.
 Are they …?”
“Yes. Both of them.”Fergus said something in French that was well beyond Roger’s ability to
translate, and then fell silent, thinking. He reached absently between the
buttons of his shirt, and Roger realized that he was touching the small medal
of St. Dismas that he always wore. The patron saint of thieves.
Roger turned away, to give him some privacy, and looked out across the
river, then farther, to the harbor itself and the invisible sea beyond. Oddly
enough, the sense of peace with which he’d left the Reverend Selverson’s
house was still with him, immanent in the drifting clouds of a mackerel sky,
just going pink round the edges, and the quiet lapping of the water against the
pilings beneath them.
Immanent, too, in the still figure of Fergus, hook gleaming on his knee and
his shadow growing long across the quay. 
My brother. Thank you for him,
Roger thought toward God. 
Thank you for all the souls you’ve put in my
hand. Help me take care of them.
“Well, then.” Fergus sat up straight and reached into his bosom for a large
ink-stained handkerchief, with which he wiped his face. “Wilmington, do you
think? Or New Bern?”
“I’m not sure.” Roger sat down beside him on the crate and took out his
own handkerchief, freshly washed this morning, now grubby with the day’s
efforts. “There weren’t a lot of Scots there …” He broke off and cleared his
throat. It was harsh with so much talking today, and explaining Frank—let
alone his book—was well beyond his powers at the moment. “I think perhaps
the British had a go at New Bern—some officer named Craig, he was
Scottish—but if so, it’ll be quite late in the war.”
“Scots?” Fergus raised one brow at that, then brushed it away. “
C’est bien
faite.
 Perhaps Wilmington, then. Do you know when the British will arrive
here?”
Roger shook his head.
“In the spring sometime, May, maybe. I don’t remember exactly when.”
Fergus sucked his lower lip for a moment, then nodded, decision made. He
took his hand away from the medal.
“Perhaps Wilmington, then. But not yet.” He stood up and stretched
himself, lean body arched toward the sky.
The air was still like treacle, but Roger’s spirit was refreshed.
“Then let’s have a pint of something and you can tell me where the guns
are.”
“You’re sitting on them. But by all means, let’s have a drink.”73
Stand by Me
ROGER’S ARRIVAL AT THE printshop with Fergus, Roger looking
slightly dazed but enormously happy, caused so much commotion that it was
some time before people could stop asking questions long enough for him to
answer some of them.
“Yes,” he said at last, his white neckcloth taken off and carefully hung
from one of the drying lines in the printshop, to avoid loss or the possibility
of dirty fingerprints. “Yes,” he said again, and accepted a glass of cooking
sherry—that being the most festive beverage available at the moment. “It’s
official. All three of them agreed. I’ll be formally ordained in a church, and
that may need to wait ’til spring—but I’ve been accepted as suitable to be a
Minister of the Word and Sacrament.”
“Is that as good as being the Pope?” Joanie asked, staring at her uncle in
newfound awe.
“Well, I don’t get a fancy hat or a shepherd’s crook,” Roger said, still
grinning, “but otherwise … aye. Just as good. 
Slàinte!
” He toasted Joanie and
then the rest of them, and downed the sherry.
“Mind,” he said, his voice hoarse and eyes watering slightly, “it was a near
thing for a bit.” He coughed and waved away the proffered sherry bottle.
“Thanks, no, that’s enough. Everything went down well, all through the
Latin, Hebrew, and Greek, knowledge of Scripture, and evidence of good
character—even having a Catholic wife didn’t give them more than a
moment’s pause.” He grinned at Brianna. “As long as I could swear in good
conscience that I should never allow ye to persuade me into Romish
practices.”
Brianna laughed. She was still trembling inwardly from the experience on
the riverbank, but that seemed trivial, drowned by her joy in Roger’s
happiness. Firelight gleamed in his black hair and gave his eyes a greenspark. He glowed, she thought, he really did. 
Like a firefly dancing under the
trees.
“What Romish practices did they have in mind?” she asked. She’d been
sipping brandy, and now handed him her glass. “Slaughtering infants on the
altar and drinking their blood?”
“No, just conspiring with the Pope, mostly.”
“To do 
what
?”
“Ye’d have to ask the Pope,” he said, and laughed. “No, really,” he said,
“the only thing that was a serious problem to them was the singing.”
“The singing?” she asked, puzzled. “Granted, Catholics sing—but so do
you.”
“Aye, that was the problem.” His amusement came down a notch, but it
was still there. “I dinna ken how they found out, but they’d heard that I sang
hymns during services in church on the Ridge.”
“And they thought ye shouldna?” Marsali said, frowning. “Presbyterians
dinna sing?”
“Not in kirk, they don’t. Not now.”
There was the briefest disturbance in the air at the words 
“not now.”
Brianna saw Fergus and Marsali look at each other and neither one changed
their expressions of tolerant amusement, but she’d felt it, like the prick of a
thorn.
They know.
 She and Roger had never discussed it, but of course they did.
Fergus had lived with her parents before the Rising and at Lallybroch after
Culloden—when her mother had gone. And of course Young Ian and Jenny
knew. Did Rachel? she wondered.
Roger didn’t act as though anything had happened; he was going on to tell
what the various ministers had said about the sinful practice of singing on a
Sunday, let alone in kirk! With imitations of each of the ministers’
pronouncements.
“So how did you answer these remarks?” Fergus asked. His face was
flushed with laughter, and his hair had lost its ribbon and come mostly out of
its plait, 
streaming over his shoulder in dark waves streaked with silver.
Sharp-featured, and with deep-set eyes, he looked to Brianna like a wizard of
some sort—maybe a young Gandalf, prior to turning gray.
“Well, I said that given the condition of my voice—and I told them how
that happened …” He touched the white rope scar, still visible across his
throat. “… I admitted to error, but said I didna think anything I’d done inchurch could possibly qualify as song. And I admitted to doing lined singing,
the call and response—but that’s a legitimate thing to do in a Presbyterian
kirk. And in the end, it was really only the Reverend Selverson who was truly
concerned about it, and the others overbore him. Oddly enough,” he added,
holding out his glass for whatever was being poured at the moment, “it was
your da who made the difference.”
“As he often does,” Brianna said dryly. “What on earth did he do this
time?”
“Just being who he is.” Roger leaned back, relaxed, and his eyes met hers,
still amused but quieter, with a softness in their depths that said he’d like to
be alone with her. “The Reverend Thomas made the point that as I was
Colonel Fraser’s son-in-law, my being a fully ordained minister was bound to
have a beneficial influence on the colonel and thus indirectly on a great many
other souls, your da being their landlord. And the Reverend Selverson, as it
turns out, actually knows your da and thinks well of him, despite him being a
Papist, so …” He held out a hand, flat, and tilted it to show the turning of
opinion in his favor.
“Well, Da’s a man that could use a priest, more than most,” Marsali said.
Everyone laughed, and so did Brianna, but she couldn’t help wondering what
her mother might have to say about that.
“IT’S ONLY TWO dozen guns,” Roger said, shucking his black coat in the
loft before dinner. “But they’re rifles, not muskets. I’ve no notion of their
quality, because they’re coated with grease and wrapped in canvas and buried
under two hundred or so pounds of Jamaican bat guano, but—don’t laugh,
I’m not joking.”
“I’m not,” she said, laughing. “Where on 
earth
 did they come from? Here,
give me that, I’ll take it down and hang it in the airing cupboard—it smells
like …”
“Bat guano,” he said, nodding as he handed her the limp, damp coat. “And
sweat. A lot of sweat.”
She eyed his torso, and the white shirt now pasted to it, and turned to fetch
a fresh—well, dry at least—shirt from the trunk.
“The guns?” she prompted, handing it to him.
“Ah.” He pulled the wet shirt off with a sigh of relief and stood for a
moment, arms outstretched, letting the faint breeze off the river wash hisnaked flesh with coolness. “Oh, God. Guns … Well. Ye recall Fergus telling
us about your Mr. Brumby importing half his molasses and smuggling the
other half?”
“I do.”
“Well, it appears that molasses isn’t the only thing Mr. Brumby smuggles.”
“You’re kidding!” She stared at him, halfway between delight and dismay.
“He’s running guns?”
“And likely anything else that will make him a profit,” he assured her,
worming his way into the folds of the fresh shirt. “Your potential employer
appears to be one of the biggest smugglers in the Carolinas, according to one
Monsieur Faucette, who dabbles himself.”
“But Lord John thinks he’s a loyal Tory—Brumby, I mean.”
“He may actually 
be
 a Tory,” Roger said, turning back a cuff. “Though his
loyalty is quite possibly open to question. We don’t know what he was
planning to do with the guns, once he got them—but it isn’t likely that the
British army is depending on Brumby to get them arms.”
Bree poured water into the ewer and handed him a towel, then closed the
trunk lid and sat on it, watching as he swabbed sand and salt and the dust of
Charles Town from his face and dried his loosened, sweat-soaked hair.
“So you’re saying the guns you and Fergus just acquired came from Saint
Eustatius?”
“So says Monsieur Faucette, under the influence of a generous prompting
of rum and gold. I don’t know how reliable information obtained by bribery
may be, but I do know—or rather, Fergus does—that most professional
smugglers are just that. Professionals, I mean; most of them aren’t doing it in
order to support one side of the war against the other; they make money
where they can, and often enough, from both sides. And as it happened, I’d
given Fergus sufficient gold that he was in a position to grease Monsieur
Faucette, who … er … facilitated a meeting between Fergus and the owner of
a small trading vessel, who had just brought the guns to Charles Town from
Saint Eustatius via Jamaica. 
Et voilà,
” he ended, shaking out the towel with a
flourish.
“Awriiiiiight,” Bree said, grinning. “So, if Mr. Brumby is really running
guns for the Americans, at least we aren’t hurting him by stealing them to
give them to Da.”
“I’m trying really hard not to consider the morality of the situation in any
depth,” he said dryly, dropping the folded towel on the trunk beside her. “I’dlike to at least make it through ordination before the Presbytery of Charles
Town finds out about it.”
His wife made an obliging gesture, drawing her fingers across her lips in a
zipping motion.
“So, what did you and Marsali do today?” he asked, to change the subject.
To his surprise, it was her face that changed.
“It—I don’t know how to say it, exactly.” She sent him a sidelong look,
half puzzled, half ashamed. He sat down on a keg of varnish, leaned forward,
and took her hand, long-fingered and cold, clasping it between his own. He
didn’t try to say anything, but smiled into her eyes.
After a moment, she smiled back, though it was only a brief shadow at the
corner of her mouth. She looked away, but the elegant, ink-stained fingers
turned and linked with his.
“I was embarrassed,” she said, finally. “I haven’t been afraid of a man in a
long time.”
“A man? Who? What did he do?” His own grip had tightened on hers at
the thought of anyone hurting her.
She shook her head, looking away. Her cheeks were flushed.
“Just a pair of young … jerks. 
Loyalist
 jerks, no less.” She told him about
the louts who had defaced the tavern’s sign and attacked her and Marsali.
“They didn’t really hurt us. They knocked me over—one of them pulled
my feet out from under me, the bastard, and then they started dragging me
toward the river, saying they’d thr—throw me in.” Her voice had thickened
suddenly, and he heard the rage in it.
“There were two of them, Bree. You couldn’t have stopped them, together
like that.” 
Jesus. If I’d been there, I’d have—
She shivered briefly and squeezed his hand hard.
“That—” she started, but had to stop and swallow. “That’s what Da said to
me. After Stephen Bonnet raped me. That I couldn’t have stopped him, even
if I’d fought.”
“You couldn’t,” he said at once. She looked down at her hand, and he saw
that he’d squeezed it so hard that her fingers, which had been grasping his,
had sprung loose under the force of his grip and were sticking out of his solid
grasp like a bundle of crayons. He cleared his throat and let go.
“Sorry.”
She gave a small laugh, but not with any sense of humor in it.“Yes,” she said after a moment. “That’s pretty much what Da did, only a
lot rougher and on purpose.” The color had risen high in her cheeks, and her
eyes were fixed on her hands, now clasped in her lap. “I wanted to kill him.”
“Stephen Bonnet?”
“No, Da.” She gave him a wry half smile. “He didn’t care. That’s what he
was trying to make me do—try to kill him—so I’d believe I couldn’t do it,
and so I’d have to believe that I 
couldn’t
 have done it. He humiliated me and
he scared me and he didn’t mind if I hated him for it, as long as I understood
that it wasn’t my fault.
“And I understand what you’re telling me, too,” she said, “I do.” And met
his gaze straight on. “The thing is, though, I can usually make even men back
up a little, or at least stop for a moment, and then I can either steer them into
something else or make them go away. I mean—” She looked down her body
and waved a hand. “I’m taller than most men, and I’m strong. When I’ve had
trouble with some man on the Ridge, I’ve been able to face them down. So
when that didn’t work this afternoon, I was—I didn’t expect that,” she ended
abruptly.
It wasn’t a situation where tact would be helpful. He’d got a grip on his
own fury; he couldn’t do anything about the boys—unless he saw the little
bastards, and God help them if he did—but Brianna … he could maybe do
something for her.
“On the Ridge,” he said carefully, “it’s not just your own physical presence
—intimidating as that is to some men,” he said, with a brief grin. “When a
man backs down, sometimes it’s down to you, all right—but sometimes it’s
because your da is standing behind you.” He shrugged, careful not to add 
or
me.
 “Metaphorically, I mean.”
She flushed red, her face drawing inward, and he made a conscious effort
not to start back. A Fraser in an unleashed temper was a substance to be
treated with caution, whether it was Mandy or Jamie. Easier if they were
small enough that you could pick them up and take them somewhere quiet, of
course, and/or threaten to smack their bottoms …
Luckily, while Jamie and Claire were as distinctive as night and day in
terms of their personalities, both of them were logical and fair-minded, and
their daughter had inherited both those traits.
She made a soft rumbling noise in her throat and drew a deep breath, her
face relaxing.“I know that,” she said, and raised her brows in brief apology. “I knew it, I
mean. I hadn’t thought about it, though.”
“You 
did
 kill Stephen Bonnet,” he pointed out, in palliation. “He wasn’t
afraid of your da.”
“Yes, after you and Da caught him and tied him up for me and the good
citizens of Wilmington staked him out in the river.” She snorted. “It wouldn’t
have mattered if I was scared stiff.”
“You were,” he said. “I was there.” He’d rowed her out over the
shimmering brown water, in the early afternoon, in a small boat smeared with
fish scales and the mud that made the river brown.
She’d sat across from him, the pistol in her pocket, and he could see her
arm in memory, rigid as iron as she’d clutched the gun, and the small pulse in
her throat, beating like a hummingbird’s. He’d wanted urgently to tell her
again that she didn’t have to do this; that if she couldn’t bear the idea of
Stephen Bonnet drowning, then he’d do it for her. But she’d made up her
mind, and he knew she would never turn back from a job she thought was
hers. And so they’d rowed out into the harbor, in a silence louder than the
screams of waterbirds and the lap of the incoming tide and the echo of a
gunshot not yet fired.
“Thank you,” she said softly, and he saw that her eyes glistened with tears
that she wouldn’t let fall because she hated to be weak. “You didn’t try to
stop me.”
“I would have, if I thought there was any chance ye’d listen,” he said
gruffly, but both of them knew it wasn’t true, and she squeezed his hand, then
let go and took a deep breath.
“Then there was Rob Cameron,” she said, “and the nutters who were lying
in wait at Lallybroch, wanting to take the kids. I couldn’t have fought off the
nutters all by myself—and thank God for Ernie Buchan and Lionel Menzies!
But I did smack Rob on the head with a junior cricket bat and laid him out
cold.” She glanced at him with the flicker of a real smile. “So there.”
“Well done,” he said softly, and managed with some effort to suppress
both his resurgent rage at Cameron and his guilt for not being there. “My
braw lass.”
She laughed, and wiped her nose on the back of her free hand.
“I already knew you were a good husband,” she said. “But you’ll be a
great
 minister.”She leaned forward then and he took her in his arms, feeling her weight
warm and heavy with her trust.
“Thanks,” he said softly, against her hair. It was smooth and warm on his
lips. “But I can’t be either one of those things alone, aye?”
For a moment, she was silent. Then she pulled back enough to look at him,
her face tear-streaked but solemn now, and beautiful.
“You won’t be alone,” she said. “Even if God’s not there when you need
Him, I’ll be there—standing just behind you.”74
The Face of Evil
ROGER CLIMBED THE LADDER to the loft, surprising his wife, who was
crawling about on her hands and knees.
“What are you looking for?” he asked.
“Mandy’s sock,” she replied, sitting back on her heels with a small groan.
“You know how people say something or other is a backbreaking job? That’s
not hyperbole when it comes to laundry. What are 
you
 looking for?”
“You.” He glanced over his shoulder, but the printshop below was vacant
at the moment, though he could hear voices in the kitchen. “Fergus asked me
to go with him on an errand, and he asked me to bring a knife. So I thought
I’d give you this for safekeeping—you know, in case we’re going to meet a
highway robber and get his life story for the front page,” he added, trying to
make a feeble joke of it. His wife was having none of his humors, and heaved
herself to her feet with a hand on a barrel of varnish, her eyes fixing him with
a look of dark-blue suspicion.
She kept her eyes on him while taking the paper from his hand and
unfolding it, glancing away only to read it.
“What is this?”
“It’s a warehouse certificate. You’ve seen them before, surely? Your da
has a fistful of them in his strongbox.”
“I have,” she said, giving him a pointed look. “Why do you have a
warehouse certificate to a warehouse in Charlotte?”
“Because so far as either I or Frank Randall knows, there won’t be any
significant fighting in Charlotte. That’s where I sent the, um, guano. I thought
nobody would notice, and nobody did.”
She gave the certificate a careful look, and he saw her note that he’d put
her name on it as well as his. Under the circumstances, she didn’t seem to
find that comforting.“So,” he said heartily, “we’ll be back before supper. Oh—and Mandy’s
sock is over there, under the candle snuffer.”
FEELING THAT IT didn’t behoove a not-quite-ordained minister to walk
about in a black coat with a large knife on his belt in plain view, Roger 
put on
his second-best coat, this being a rather shabby brown number with a visible
mend in the sleeve and wooden buttons. Fergus viewed this with approval.
“Yes, very good,” he said. “You look as though you could do business.”
The tone of his voice made it clear what kind of business he meant, but Roger
assumed this to be a joke.
“Oh, so I’m meant to be your henchman?” He fell into step next to Fergus,
who was wearing the same clothes he wore for printing, but with a blue coat
little better than Roger’s over them.
“We will hope it doesn’t come to that,” Fergus said thoughtfully. “But it’s
as well to be prepared.”
Roger stopped abruptly and grabbed Fergus’s sleeve, bringing him to a
halt.
“Would you care to tell me just who we’re going to see? And how many of
them?”
“Only one, so far as I know,” Fergus assured him. “His name is Percival
Beauchamp.”
That didn’t sound like the eighteenth-century version of a gangster, a
dangerous pirate, or a smuggler of uncustomed goods, but names could be
deceiving.
“A soldier brought me a note last week,” Fergus said, presumably in
explanation. “He was not in uniform, but I could tell. And I think he was
from the British army, which I considered to be unusual.”
Very unusual. Though there 
were
 occasional red-coated soldiers to be seen
in Charles Town now and then, these usually being messengers bound for
General Lincoln’s headquarters, presumably with threatening missives urging
the general to consider his situation.
Fergus waved the matter of the note-bearing soldier aside for the moment.
“The note was from Monsieur Beauchamp, saying that he was in residence
in Charles Town for a short time and would request the honor of a brief visit
at his 
hôtel.
”“Do you know this Beauchamp?” Roger asked curiously. The name rang a
faint bell. “He can’t be a relative of Claire’s, can he?”
Fergus gave him a startled glance.
“Surely not,” he said, though his tone wasn’t quite that sure. “It isn’t an
uncommon French name. But, yes, I know him.”
“I gather it isn’t altogether a cordial acquaintanceship?” Roger touched the
knife on his belt; it was the Highland dirk that Jamie had given him, an
impressive foot-long bit of weaponry with a carved hilt bearing the name of
St. Michael and a small image of the archangel. He rather admired the
capacity of Catholics to sincerely seek peace while pragmatically
acknowledging the necessity for occasional violence.
A brief look of amusement flitted across Fergus’s saturnine features.
“Non,”
 he said. “But let me tell you. This Beauchamp has tried to speak
with me several times, offering assorted things—but chiefly, offering me the
truth—or what he says is the truth—about my parents.”
Roger glanced at him.
“Even an orphan must have 
had
 parents at one time,” Fergus said, lifting
one shoulder in a shrug. “I have never known anything about mine, and I take
leave to doubt that Monsieur Beauchamp does, either.”
“But if that’s the case, why pretend he does?”
“I don’t know, but I suppose we’re about to find out.” Fergus sounded
grimly resigned to the prospect. He squared his shoulders, preparing to go on,
but Roger’s hand hadn’t left his sleeve.
“Why?” Roger said quietly. “Why talk to him at all?”
The Adam’s apple bobbed in Fergus’s lean throat as he swallowed, but he
met Roger’s eyes straight on.
“If I must lose my livelihood here, if I can no longer be a printer—then I
must find a new place, or a new way to support my family, to protect them,”
he said simply. “It may be that Monsieur Beauchamp will show me such a
way.”
THE MYSTERIOUS MONSIEUR Beauchamp’s address was a grand house
on Hasell Street, and Fergus’s knock upon the door was answered by a butler
whose livery probably cost more than Bonnie the printing press. This worthy
gave no sign of wondering why two vagabonds should have appeared on hismaster’s doorstep, but upon hearing Fergus’s name, bowed low and ushered
them inside.
It was a hot day outside, and the thick velvet drapes at the windows were
drawn to keep as much heat out as possible. They kept out all daylight as
well, and the parlor into which they were shown was so dark that the single
lamp on a table near the window glowed like a pearl inside an oyster.
Roger thought it was rather like being inside an oyster himself: surrounded
by a slick, oppressive moistness, the constant touch of mucus on the skin.
Granted, the room in which they had been shut was not as searing as the
glaring cobblestones outside, but it wasn’t a hell of a lot cooler, either.
“Like being poached, instead of fried,” he whispered to Fergus, mopping
his face with the lace-trimmed handkerchief he’d forgotten to exchange for a
workman’s bandanna. Fergus blinked at him in momentary confusion, but
before Roger could explain, the door opened and Percival Beauchamp walked
in, smiling.
Roger didn’t know what he’d been expecting, but this chap wasn’t it.
Beauchamp wasn’t French, for one thing. When he greeted them—with great
courtesy—accepted Fergus’s introduction of Roger, and thanked them
effusively for coming, his voice was that of an educated Englishman—but
not one educated at Eton or Harrow. Roger thought that the traces of an
underlying accent came from somewhere near the edges of the Thames—
Southwark, or maybe Lambeth? He was dressed in the height of Paris style—
or at least Roger assumed that must be what it was, with six-inch cuffs, a
yellow silk waistcoat embroidered with swallows, and a lot of lace. He wore
his own hair, though, dark and very curly, casually tied back with a plum-
colored silk ribbon.
“I thank you for your kind attention, messieurs,” he said again. “Allow me
to send for wine.”
“Non,”
 Fergus said. He pulled an ink-stained handkerchief from his pocket
and wiped the sweat pooling in his deep eye sockets. “This place is like a
Turkish bath. I have come to hear what you have to say, monsieur. Say it.”
Beauchamp pursed his lips as though about to whistle, but then relaxed,
still smiling, and gestured them to a pair of ornately brocaded chairs near the
empty hearth. He also went to the door and, in spite of Fergus’s refusal,
ordered some refreshments to be brought.
When a tray of pastries with a decanter of iced negus had been delivered,
he asked the butler to pour out a glass for each of them and then sat downfacing them. His eyes flicked over Roger, but all his attention was for Fergus.
“I said to you on a previous occasion, monsieur, that I wished to acquaint
you with the facts of your birth. These are … somewhat dramatic, and I am
afraid that you may find some of them distressing. I apologize.”
“Tais-toi,”
 Fergus said roughly. Roger didn’t understand all of what he
said next, but it seemed to be an invitation to Beauchamp to shit something or
other—possibly the truth?—out of his backside.
Beauchamp blinked, but sat back, took a sip of wine, and patted his lips.
“You are the son of le Comte Saint Germain,” he said, and paused, as
though expecting a reaction. Fergus just stared at him. Roger felt a small
rivulet of sweat run down the seam of his back like water from a melting ice
cube.
“And your mother’s name was Amélie Élise LeVigne Beauchamp.” Roger
heard Fergus’s sudden intake of breath.
“You know that name?” Beauchamp sounded surprised but eager. He
leaned forward, his face intent, nacreous in the lamplight.
“J’ai connu une jeune fille de ce nom Amélie,”
 Fergus said. 
“Mais elle est
morte.”
THERE WAS A moment’s silence, broken only by the distant, bustling hum
of the house’s domestic staff.
“She 
is
 dead.” Beauchamp’s voice was gentle, but Fergus jerked a little, as
though stung by a wasp. Beauchamp drew a long, careful breath, then leaned
forward.
“You knew her, you said.”
Fergus nodded, once, a jerky movement quite unlike him.
“I knew her by name. I did not know she was my mother.” He caught
Roger’s look of surprise from the corner of his eye and turned to face him,
turning a shoulder to Beauchamp, the bringer of unwelcome news.
“There are many children born in a brothel, 
mon frère,
 despite unceasing
attempts to prevent them. Those pretty enough to be salable within a few
years are kept.”
“And the others?” Roger asked, not wanting to hear the answer.
“I was pretty enough,” Fergus replied tersely. “And by the time I did not
bruise easily, I could take care of myself on the streets.” Looking down,
Roger could see that the toes of Fergus’s shoes were dug hard into the carpet.“Because there are children, there are whores with milk. Those who had—
lost a child—would sometimes nurse other 
bébés.
 If a whore was called to
attend a customer and her child was hungry, she would hand him to another
jeune fille.
 The little ones called any whore 
‘Maman,’
” he said quietly,
looking down at his feet. “Anyone who would feed them.”
He seemed indisposed to say anything else. Roger cleared his throat, and
Beauchamp looked at him as though surprised to find him still there.
“How—and when—did Amélie Beauchamp die?” Roger asked politely.
“During an outbreak of the morbid sore throat,” Beauchamp said, in the
same tone. “I—we—don’t know exactly when.”
“I see.” Roger glanced at Fergus, who was still staring at the branching
pattern of the figured carpet, saying nothing. “And, um, Monsieur le Comte?”
Percival Beauchamp seemed to relax a little at this question.
“We don’t know that, either. Monsieur le Comte has often disappeared
from Paris for varying lengths of time: sometimes days, sometimes months—
now and then for a year or more, with no hint as to where he has been. But
the last time he was seen was more than twenty years ago, and the
circumstances of his disappearance so remarkable that the probability that he
really 
is
 dead this time is sufficient that a magistrate would undoubtedly
declare him to be defunct, should a petition to that effect to be filed by his
heir.”
Damp with sweat as his hair was, Roger still felt it rise on his neck.
Probably so had Fergus, who looked up sharply at this news.
“Unless my understanding of the law in France has changed of late, a
bastard cannot inherit property. Or when you say 
‘heir,’
 are you talking of
someone else?”
Beauchamp smiled at him, an evidently genuine smile of happiness, and,
picking up a small silver bell from the tray of refreshments, rang it. Within
moments, the door opened, letting in a welcome draft of air and light from
the hallway, as well as a tall gentleman in a fine gray suit—but a suit of
English cut, not French. Roger thought he must be a lawyer; he looked the
part, with a leather folder tucked beneath one arm.
“Mr. Beauchamp,” he said, with a nod toward Percival. “And you, sir,
must be Claudel, if I may use your original name.”
“You may not, sir.” Fergus was sitting bolt-upright and was getting his feet
under him, clearly meaning to walk out. Roger thought that was likely a goodidea and began to rise himself, only to be stopped by the newcomer, who held
out a quelling hand, and with the other laid down his folder and opened it.
There was only one document inside, old, from its stained and yellowed
appearance. It bore a large red-wax seal, though, and multiple signatures,
signed with such flourishes that it looked as though a tiny octopus had dipped
its legs in ink and walked across the page.
At the top of the document, however, the writing—in French—was clear
and clerkish.
Contract of Marriage
Made this Day, the Fourteenth of August, Anno Domini Seventeen-
Thirty-Five, between Amélie Élise LeVigne Beauchamp, Spinster, and
Leopold George Simòn Gervase Racokzì, le Comte St. Germain
“You aren’t a bastard,” Percival Beauchamp said, smiling warmly at
Fergus. “Allow me to congratulate you, sir.”
FERGUS KNITTED HIS brows, staring at the document, then flicked a
sideways glance at Roger. Roger made a small 
hem
 noise in his throat,
signifying willingness to follow any lead Fergus chose, but otherwise
remained still. He regarded the iced negus; the decanter and glasses were
filmed with condensation, and water droplets were beginning to slide down
the curved glass. It would have gone down a treat in this steam bath.
Beauchamp and the lawyer were each holding a glass of the cold sugared
port, eyes fixed expectantly on Fergus, ready to toast their revelation.
Fergus straightened up and got his feet under him.
“I may or may not be a bastard, gentlemen, but I am most certainly not a
child.”
Roger thought that was a good exit line, and also got his feet under him,
but Fergus didn’t stand up. He leaned forward and deliberately picked up a
glass of the negus, which he passed under his nose with the air of a king
compelled to inspect a chamber pot.
“Here,” he said to Beauchamp, who was watching this with his mouth
slightly open. “Exchange glasses with me, 
s’il vous plaît.
” Despite the overt
politeness, it wasn’t a request, and Beauchamp, eyebrows nearly touching his
hairline, obliged. Fergus silently indicated that Roger should likewiseexchange drinks with the lawyer and this was done, Roger wondering—not
for the first time—
What the hell?
Fergus sat back in his chair, relaxed, and lifted his glass.
“To honesty, gentlemen, and honor among thieves.”
Beauchamp and the lawyer exchanged a nonplussed look, but then blinked
and murmured the toast, glasses lifted an inch or so. Roger didn’t bother with
the toast, but sipped and found the negus as good as he’d thought it might be.
It slid beguilingly down his parched throat, cold and warming at the same
time.
“Regardez,”
 Fergus said, as the glasses came down. The air was perfumed
with ruby port and the spices used in the negus; the air in the sweltering 
salon
became a little more tolerable.
“Since you are so familiar with my personal affairs, gentlemen, I presume
you are aware that Lord Broch Tuarach employed me for a time in Paris, to
obtain for him an assortment of useful documents. I therefore have seen many
such things as that.” He lifted his glass to indicate the marriage contract on
the table, infusing his voice with a touch of scorn.
“Milord Broch Tuarach also produced such documents, from time to time,
as situations arose requiring them. I have seen it done, gentlemen, time upon
time, and so you will give me leave to express some doubt regarding the …
véracité
 of this particular document.”
One part of Roger’s mind was admiring Fergus’s performance, while
another was noting in an abstract way that Jamie Fraser could never have
been a forger: left-handed, but forced from childhood to write with his right
hand—and that hand very recently crushed, at the time Fergus must be
referring to. On the other hand, Fergus himself was a very accomplished
forger, but he supposed that wasn’t something Fergus wanted to get around
Charles Town society ….
The lawyer looked as though he’d been taxidermized by someone who
hated him, but Beauchamp spluttered negus and began to protest. Fergus
looked at Roger, who obligingly put back his coat to show his knife and set
his hand on the hilt, keeping his face impassive.
Beauchamp froze. Fergus nodded approvingly.
“Just so. And so, gentlemen … say for the sake of argument that persons
less discerning than I might accept the truth of this document. What did you
propose to do, had I been willing to do that? Plainly, you had something inmind—something that Monsieur le Comte’s heir might accomplish for you,
eh?”
Color was coming back into Beauchamp’s face, and the lawyer lost a little
of his stuffing; they exchanged glances and some decision was made.
“All right.” Percival Beauchamp sat up straight and touched a linen napkin
to his port-stained lips. “This is the situation.”
The situation, as explained by Beauchamp with minor interruptions from
the lawyer, was that the Comte St. Germain, a very wealthy man, had owned
—well, still 
did
 own, technically—a majority of the stock of a syndicate
investing in land in the New World. The main asset of this syndicate was a
large piece of land in the very large area known as the Northwest Territory.
Fergus managed to look as though he knew exactly what this was, and
quite possibly he did, but it rang only faint bells of recognition for Roger. It
was a lot of land in the far north and was part of what the French and Indian
War had been fought over. And the British had won, he was pretty sure of
that.
Evidently the French—or some portion of the French, whom Beauchamp
referred to obliquely as “our interests”—were not so sure.
And now that France had officially entered the war in alliance with the
Americans, Beauchamp’s “interests” had it in mind to take the first steps
toward securing at least a foothold on the Territory.
“By establishing Mr. Fraser’s claim to it?” Roger hadn’t said anything to
this point, but sheer astonishment compelled him. The lawyer gave him an
austere look, but Beauchamp inclined his head gracefully.
“Yes. But the claim of an individual alone would not likely stand against
the rapacity of the Americans. Therefore, our interests will assist Mr. Fraser
in establishing colonists upon his land—French-speaking colonists, who
would thus provide substance for a claim by France, once the war is over.
“Whereupon,” Beauchamp concluded, “our interests would purchase the
land from you—for a significant sum.”
“
If
 the Americans win,” Fergus said, sounding skeptical. “If they don’t, I
fear your ‘interests’ will be in a precarious position. As would I.”
“They’ll win.” The lawyer hadn’t spoken since greeting them, and his
voice gave Roger a start. It was deep, and assured, in contrast with
Beauchamp’s light charm.
“You’re a rebel, are you not, Mr. Fraser?” The lawyer raised a brow at
Fergus. “That is certainly the impression given by your newspaper. Have youno faith in your own cause?”
Fergus raised his hook and scratched delicately behind one ear.
“I assume you have noticed that the streets are filled with Continental
soldiers, sir. Should I put my family in danger by advocating their confusion
in print?”
He didn’t wait for an answer to this question, but rose suddenly to his feet.
“
Bonjour,
 messieurs,” he said. “You have given me much to think about.”
ROGER FELT A strong inclination to be somewhere else, and thus didn’t
question Fergus’s plunging suddenly into a narrow alley between two houses,
running down it, and zigging through a gate into the backyard of what
appeared to be a brothel, judging from the laundry hanging limply in the
humid air. He 
was
 somewhat surprised when Fergus, with a cordial word to
two black maidservants folding sheets, went up the back steps and entered the
house without knocking.
“Mr. Fergus!” cried a young lady, running down the hall toward him. The
girl—God, she couldn’t be more than twelve, could she?—flung herself
affectionately into Fergus’s arms, kissed him on the cheek, and then turned
her head coquettishly toward Roger.
“Oo, you’ve brought a friend!”
“Allow me to introduce my brother, the Reverend, mademoiselle.
Reverend—Mademoiselle Marigold.”
“Of course she is,” Roger said, collecting his wits just in time to bow to the
lady, who received his homage with a demure downward sweep of her
shadowed eyelids.
“We get quite a number of Reverend gentlemen, sir,” she assured him,
laughing gaily. “Don’t be shy. Remember, we’ve all seen one before.”
“One …” he began, rather stunned.
“Why, one clergyman,” she said, dimpling. “At least!”
She was dressed rather sedately—
for a brothel,
 his mind amended. Which
is to say, she was covered, even to her feet, which were clad in smart leather
boots. He didn’t have time to consider what her function in the establishment
might be—too expensively dressed to be a maid—before Fergus set her
gently but firmly on her feet.
“Is the second-floor parlor available, 
chérie
?”Roger had a moment to notice that the girl was black, of a pale coffee color
and with hair like smooth coils of molasses taffy. She was also somewhat
older than he’d thought—perhaps in her late teens, and with a shrewd glint
behind the playful air.
“If you don’t need it more than an hour,” she said. “Someone’s coming at
four o’clock.”
“That will be sufficient,” Fergus assured her. “We only require a place to
sit down and collect ourselves. Though I suppose a glass of wine might not
be out of the question?”
She looked at him for a moment, head on one side like a bird estimating
whether that fallen leaf might hide a juicy worm, but then nodded, matter-of-
factly.
“I’ll send Barbara up with it. 
Adieu, mon brave,
” she said, and, kissing her
fingertips, applied them briefly to Roger’s surprised cheek before skipping
off down the hall—which, he saw, was not unlike that of the house they had
just come from, though the art on display was considerably better.
“Come,” Fergus murmured, touching his arm.
The second-floor parlor was a small, charming room, with French doors
opening onto a small balcony, and long lace curtains that barely stirred in the
heavy air when they stepped in.
“I am a son of the house, so to speak,” Fergus said, sitting down with a
brief wave of the hand toward the door.
“I didn’t ask,” Roger murmured, and Fergus laughed.
“You needn’t ask if Marsali knows about this place, either,” he assured
Roger. “I won’t say I have no secrets from my wife—I think every man must
require a few secrets—but this is not one of them.”
Roger’s heart was beginning to slow down, and he fished out a semi-clean
handkerchief with which to mop his face. He found himself avoiding the tiny
patch Miss Marigold’s fingers had touched, and scrubbed it briefly before
putting the hankie away.
“The men we have just left,” Fergus said, dabbing his own face. “I
recognize them.”
“Yes?”
“The fop—this is Percival Beauchamp, though I believe he used another
name—perhaps more than one. He has approached me more than once with a
similar taradiddle—that I was the son of a highborn man, had title to land—”
He made a very French grimace of disdain, and Roger, already entertained byhis pronunciation of “taradiddle,” made a similar grimace in order to keep
from laughing.
“Now,” Fergus went on, hunching closer and lowering his voice, “at that
time, he was attending the Comte de La Fayette as some sort of aide-de-
camp. I dismissed him—I had met him once before 
that,
 and refused to speak
with him then—and he went so far as to threaten me. 
Chienne,
” he added,
with contempt.
“Chienne?”
 Roger asked, careful with the pronunciation. “You think he’s
a 
female
 dog?”
Fergus looked surprised.
“Well, there are other words,” he said, and wrinkled his brow as though
trying to summon a few, “but surely you noticed …?”
“Er …” A wave of heat that had nothing to do with the atmosphere rose
behind Roger’s ears. “Actually, no. I just thought he was a, um, Frenchman.
Ornamental, you know?”
Fergus burst out laughing.
Roger coughed. “So. Ye’re saying that Percival whatever-he’s-calling-
himself is what people in Scotland might call a Nancy-boy. D’ye think that’s
got anything to do with … the present situation?”
Fergus was still simmering with mirth, but he shook his head.
“
Oui,
 but perhaps only because a man with such tastes—when they are
known, and plainly they are—cannot be trusted, because he is always subject
to the threat of public exposure. You must look at the man who controls
him.”
Roger felt a touch of uneasiness. Well, in honesty, he’d 
been
 uneasy since
they walked into the house on Hasell Street.
“Who do you suppose that is?”
Fergus glanced at him in surprise, then shook his head in mild reproof.
“I tell you, 
mon frère,
 you require a great deal more experience in the
fields of sin, if you hope to be a good minister.”
“Ye’re suggesting that I send for Miss Marigold and ask for lessons?”
“Well, no,” Fergus said, giggling slightly. “Your wife would—but that’s
not what I meant. Only that your own goodness, which is undeniable”—he
smiled at Roger, with a warmth in his eyes that touched Roger deeply—“is
one thing, but to help those of your flock who lack that goodness, you need to
understand something of evil and thus the struggle that afflicts them.”“I wouldn’t say you’re wrong,” Roger said warily. “But I know more than
one man of the cloth who’s got himself in serious trouble while seeking that
sort of education.”
Fergus lifted one shoulder, laughing.
“You can learn a great deal from whores, 
mon frère,
 but I agree that
perhaps you should not make such inquiries alone. Still,” he said, sobering,
“that’s not what I meant by evil.”
“No. But you said you’ve had passages with this Percival before. He didn’t
strike me as—”
“He’s not. He’s a whore; he has likely been one all his life.” Seeing
Roger’s expression, he didn’t smile, but one corner of his mouth lifted.
“What is it they say? ‘It takes one to know one.’”
Roger felt a sudden contraction of his stomach muscles, as though he’d
been lightly punched. He’d known that Fergus had been a child-whore in
Paris, before encountering Jamie Fraser, who had engaged him as a
pickpocket—but he’d forgotten.
“Monsieur Beauchamp is too old to sell his arse, of course, but he will sell
himself. From necessity,” Fergus added dispassionately. “A person who has
lived like that for a long time ceases to believe that they have any value
beyond what someone will pay for.”
Roger was silent, thinking not so much of the recent Percival Beauchamp
but of Fergus—and of Jane and Fanny Pocock.
“When you say 
‘evil,’
 though …” he began slowly.
“There were only two men in that room,” Fergus said simply. “Besides us,
I mean.”
“Jesus.” He tried to think what the tall man had said or done that might
have given Fergus the conviction—and it 
was
 a conviction, he could see that
much in Fergus’s face—that the man was evil. “I can’t even remember what
he looked like.”
“In my experience, the Devil seldom walks up and introduces himself to
you by name,” Fergus said dryly. “All I can tell you is that I know evil when
I see it—and I saw it on that man.”
Fergus stood up and went to the window, pulling back the lace curtain to
look out. He drew a large black bandanna out of his pocket and wiped his
face with it. “So the ink stains don’t show,” he said briefly, seeing Roger
notice.
“So what do you plan to do about … this? If anything?”Fergus exhaled strongly through his long French nose.
“You tell me that the city will soon fall to the British. These 
crétins
 offer
me ridiculous daydreams. But”—he raised a monitory hook to stop Roger
butting in—“they do have money, and they do mean business. I just don’t
know what 
sort
 of business, and the guardian angel on my shoulder thinks I
don’t want to find out.”
“Wise man, your guardian angel.”
Fergus nodded and was still, staring at the river in the distance as it went
about its murky business. After a moment, he glanced at Roger.
“Brianna told Marsali that Lord John Grey had promised her a military
escort to see her safely to Savannah.”
“Yes. But we don’t need it. No one’s going to bother a wagon full of
children and sauerkraut.”
“Nonetheless.” Fergus stood up and shucked his coat, plucking the soaked
linen of his shirt away from his chest. “Will you ask your wife to send a note
to Lord John at once, please? Ask him to send his escort as soon as possible.
We’re coming with you. I think the printing press might draw notice.”75
No Smoke without Fire
BRIANNA WOKE SUDDENLY, IN the disoriented state that occurs when
you’ve gone to sleep in a strange place and don’t recall immediately where
you are. She’d been dreaming—of what? Her heart was racing, and any
minute it was going to—
Damn!
 The wings started fluttering in her chest, like a flock of agitated
bats trapped in her shift. She sat up, cursing under her breath, and struck
herself hard in the chest, in hopes of startling her heartbeat back into
regularity; sometimes that worked. Not this time. She swung her feet out of
bed, planted them on the cold, damp floorboards, and took a deep breath,
only to cough and let it out with a gasp.
“Roger!” she whispered as loudly as she could, trying to not wake the
children to panic, and shook him by the arm. “Roger! Get up—I smell
smoke!”
She remembered now where they were. They were sleeping in the loft, and
with her eyes no longer clouded by sleep, now she could 
see
 the smoke she
was smelling, white wisps slipping over the edge of the loft like ghosts,
moving silently but with a horrifying speed.
“Jesus Christ!” Roger was up, naked and disheveled; she could see him in
the dim cloud-glow from the owl-slits. “Bloody hell—go down and rouse
everybody. I’ll grab the kids.” He was moving even as he said it, snatching a
shirt off a stack of cheap Bibles.
A scream of pure terror from below split the air, followed by an instant of
stunned silence, and then a 
lot
 of yelling, in French, English, and Gaelic, plus
piercing shrieks from the babies.
“They’re roused,” she said, and pushing past Roger ran to scoop up
Mandy, who was sitting up in her nest of quilts, squint-eyed and cross.
“You too noisy,” she said accusingly to her mother. “You woke me up!”Brianna repressed the urge to say, 
“You can sleep when you’re dead,”
 and
instead grabbed Esmeralda and shoved her into Mandy’s arms. She could
hear Roger, behind her, trying to rouse Jemmy, who was dead to the world
and planned to stay that way. “Come on,” she said to Mandy, who was slowly
picking some sort of fuzz off her shift. “You can do that later. Hold on!”
With Mandy whining and clinging to her neck like a cranky gibbon and
Esmeralda a solid lump mashed between them, she made her way one-handed
backward down the ladder, bare toes curling to keep a grip on the foot-worn
rungs. The smell of smoke was stronger now, but not choking, not yet …
Tendrils rose past her toward the ceiling, coiling in slow-growing clouds
under the beams as she looked up.
“Get out, get 
out
!” someone was bellowing, louder than the rest, and as she
hit the bottom of the ladder and turned, she saw Germain, wild with fear and
furious with it, pulling one of his screaming sisters—by her hair—toward the
door, kicking at the other who was scrambling round on the floor, evidently
looking for something. 
“Va-t’en, j’ai dit!”
 he was shouting. “Move, 
salope
!
MOVE!”
“Germain!”
Marsali, white-faced, had both babies in her arms, a leather bag pressed
between them. Germain heard her and turned, his face ten years older than he
was, drawn with terror and determination.
“Je ne laisserai pas ça se reproduire,”
 he said to Marsali, and shoved
Félicité hard toward the door, then bent and yanked Joanie off the floor,
wrestling her outside as she wailed and struggled. There was a sudden loud
crack and a thump; Brianna turned to see Roger and Jem in a heap on the
floor, the ladder skewed sideways, a rung hanging loose where it had given
way under their combined weights.
“Get up, Da! Mama, Mama!” Jem ran to her and clung. She grabbed him
with one arm and hugged him hard, then let go and pushed him toward the
open door. Damp night air whooshed into the room, a welcome freshness—
and an instant danger, Bree saw, seeing the smoke whirl up in a frenzy as the
cold air touched it. Roger was crouched on one knee at the foot of the ladder,
trying to stand.
“Take Mandy outside,” she said to Jem, who was standing in the middle of
the floor, looking lost. 
“Now.”
 And thrusting Mandy and Esmeralda into his
arms, she ran to Roger and grabbed his arm, got a shoulder under it, and
managed somehow to get him on his feet, and then they were shuffling 
andstaggering like people in a three-legged race, bumping off counters and
knocking over tables, books, papers …
My God, the whole place will go up like a torch …
And then they were outside in the street, all of them coughing, crying,
touching each other, counting noses again and again.
“Where’s Fergus?” Roger asked, his voice rasping.
ROGER FOUND FERGUS a few moments later, at the back of the
printshop, stamping out the last fragments of a small fire that had been built
against the back door. The door itself was charred at the bottom, but the only
remaining traces of the fire were a large black spot on the ground, a few
scattered chunks of graying ember, and a small cloud of ashes and flecks of
half-burnt paper that flew around Fergus’s stamping feet like a cloud of
black-and-white moths.
“Merde,”
 Fergus said, noticing Roger.
“Mais oui,”
 Roger replied, coughing slightly from the drifting smoke.
“One of your competitors?” He nodded at the half-burnt door, where
someone had painted the words 
NEXT TIME
 in dripping whitewash.
Fergus shook his head, teeth clenched. His hair was standing on end and,
like Roger, he wore nothing but a nightshirt, though he’d had the presence of
mind to put on his boots before running outside. The fire was out, but Roger
felt the heat from the smoking door on his bare legs.
“Loyalists,” Fergus said briefly, and coughed hard. Roger felt the tickle of
smoke in his own throat and cleared it hard in hopes of quelling it; coughing
still hurt.
“Marsali and Bree and the wee’uns are all right,” Roger said. Fergus
nodded, cleared his throat, and spat into the ashes.
“I know,” he said, with a slight relaxation of his hard-lined face. “I heard
them cursing. 
Les femmes sauvages.
”
Roger hadn’t noticed the cursing, but he didn’t doubt it.
“Have they tried before?” he asked, lifting his chin at the paint-smeared
door. Fergus lifted one shoulder in a Gallic shrug.
“Letters. Filth. A bag full of dead rats. Another bag with a live serpent—
luckily it was a rattlesnake and not a cottonmouth. Marsali heard it before she
picked the bag up.”“Jesus Christ.” It was something between a curse and a prayer, and Fergus
nodded, appreciating both.
“Les enfants savent qu’il ne faut rien toucher près de la porte,”
 he said
matter-of-factly. He took a deep, slow breath and shook his head at the door.
“This is—” His lips tightened and he glanced at Roger. “You know—milady
and milord told you, I expect. What … happened to our little one. Henri-
Christian.” The name came hesitantly, as though it had been a long time since
Fergus had spoken it aloud.
“I do,” Roger said, a lump in his throat making the words come out low
and choked. He cleared it, hard. “Fucking cowardly wankers!”
“If you care to call them that.” Fergus was white around the mouth.
“Cowards, certainly. 
Canaille!
” He kicked the door so hard that it juddered in
its frame. Recovering from shock and panic, Roger found his own anger
rising.
“Those 
shits
! Setting a fire where your family lives, your kids!” 
And mine
…
“As a warning, it’s much more effective than anonymous notes pushed
under the door.” Fergus was breathing heavily and stopped to cough, shaking
his head. He glared at Roger, eyes bloodshot with smoke. “If I find out who
did this, I will tie them in a sack, row them out to sea, and throw them alive
to the sharks, I swear it by the name of God and 
la Virgine.
”
“I’ll help ye do it.” He’d have to, he thought; Fergus couldn’t row with one
hand.
“Merci.”
 Fergus glanced bleakly at the corner of the house; the shrieks and
crying of frightened children in the street on the other side had died down,
smothered in the sounds of running footsteps and exclamations. “I 
will
 find
out,” he said, suddenly calm. “But now I must go to Marsali.” 
Jesus, what the
thought of another fire will have done to him and Marsali … the little girls …
He felt his blood go cold in his veins at the thought. Fergus was watching his
face. He nodded, his own face sober now, and together they went to find their
wives and children.
THERE WAS A lot of clishmaclaver going on outside the printshop. Dawn
was an hour off and there was barely enough light to see Marsali and Bree
and all the kids, withdrawn to the far side of the street and huddled together
in the dark like a herd of small bison.Germain, with Jemmy stoutly by his side, was standing in front of the
women and children, fists clenched and his face, too, looking as though he
couldn’t decide whether to cry or pound somebody. Fergus exhaled through
his teeth, clapped Germain on the shoulder, and went to take one of the twins
from Marsali, who had them both in a death grip. Fergus said something very
quiet to her in French, and Roger turned tactfully to Bree, who had sat down
on the wooden sidewalk and gathered all three little girls around her. Fizzy
was clinging to Bree’s shift and sniffing, and Joanie, who tended to be
practical, was braiding Mandy’s hair.
“Ye all right?” Roger said, and rested his hand on Brianna’s head, her hair
cool and damp in the morning fog off the harbor.
“Nobody died,” she said, and managed a small, shaky laugh. “Do you
know what happened?”
“Sort of. Tell ye later, though.”
Other people were coming, some in their nightclothes, others on their way
from or to work: bakers, tavern keepers, laborers, fishermen. Two whores
hung about under a tree, whispering to each other and glancing from the
printshop to the family.
Rather to Roger’s surprise, Fergus made no attempt at secrecy. He told
everyone in turn exactly what had happened—and what he intended to do to
the 
maudit chiens
 who had attacked his family and livelihood.
Roger, catching on, searched the faces as the light began to seep slowly
through the fog, looking for anyone who seemed maliciously pleased, or too
knowing. Everyone seemed honestly shocked, though, and one tall,
handsome middle-aged woman who by her dress could be nothing other than
the landlady of a prosperous tavern came up to Marsali and urged her to bring
the babes along and come and have a bite of breakfast.
“On the house,” she added, looking at the children and quite obviously
reckoning up the cost of their appetites.
“Well, I thank ye kindly, Mistress Kenney,” Marsali said. She glanced at
Fergus and coughed a little. “If ye’ll give us a moment to go and put some
clothes on?”
The remark caused Roger to realize that he was standing in the street
barefoot, wearing nothing but a shirt. He helped collect the children, and as
they started to trickle back across the street toward their threatened home, he
saw that Marsali was carrying several slugs of type, evidently snatched fromthe type-case, under one arm. They looked heavy, and she let him take them
from her, sighing with relief as he did.
“Ye do wonder what ye’d take, if the house was afire,” he said, trying to be
humorous.
“Aye, well,” Marsali said, tucking in the blanket wrapped around the twin
she was holding. “It smells that wee bit better than sauerkraut, aye?”
Four days later …
BRIANNA TOOK A handful of the dress she meant to wear and lifted it
cautiously to her nose. She’d hung it on a peg in the airing cupboard, along
with Marsali’s working dress and apron, hoping for the best. The cupboard
itself was no more than a large box like a coffin stood on end, built against
the bedroom wall and pierced with dozens of holes through the outside wall,
to let the night air dispel as much of the scent of lampblack, varnish, ink,
cooking grease, and infant spit-up as possible before the garments were
resumed the next morning.
“All right?” Marsali inquired, tousled blond head emerging from her night-
freshened shift.
“Well, it doesn’t smell very 
much
 like sauerkraut,” Bree said, inhaling
strongly, and Marsali gave the breath of a laugh and reached into the
cupboard, snagging her work gown, a butternut-gray homespun in a severe
cut that made Brianna think privately of a Civil War uniform.
“Ye’ll be aired out fine by the time ye reach Savannah,” Marsali assured
her. “And the soldiers willna care.” She handed Brianna a couple of petticoats
and went on with her own dressing, fingers rapid with tapes, laces, and
buttons. It was just before dawn and they were talking in whispers, not to
wake the children before they had to. Downstairs, shuffling and muffled
thumps and sniggers signaled Roger’s and Fergus’s preparations for the day.
The soldiers Lord John had sent were already outside; Brianna had seen
them from the loft where the MacKenzies had been sleeping, a small group of
men who stood together in the alley behind the shop. They’d taken up station
a little distance from the house, smoking pipes that glowed briefly in 
the dark
as they moved, and were murmuring to one another, shadowy figures
noticeable as soldiers only by the long black shapes of their muskets, stacked
together against a wall that had just begun to emerge from the night.She couldn’t see them from the bedroom—window taxes being what they
were, the only windows in the house were the large front windows of the
printshop—but a faint scent of tobacco reached her through the holes of the
airing cupboard and she exhaled sharply. It would be a long time before she
quit smelling sauerkraut, but at least the reeking barrels wouldn’t be
accompanying her and the kids to Savannah. Both whisky and the remaining
gold, neatly repackaged as a crate of salt fish, had been discreetly spirited
away to a warehouse whose owner was a Son of Liberty, and while she still
had a few of the thin gold slips sewn into her clothes, it wasn’t enough gold
to be really suspicious, even if someone discovered one of the slips.
Nowhere near enough to buy guns,
 she thought, and shivered, though
Marsali had just poked up the bedroom fire. A muffled squawk from the next
room made Marsali put down the poker and hurry off, loosening her freshly
donned stays as the milk surged into her breasts—Bree saw the wet patches
spring out on Marsali’s shift; she could feel it in sympathetic memory, her
own nipples swelling against her stays.
“Mam?” said Jemmy, sticking his head into the room. The new fire caught
the gleam of his hair and shadowed his bones, and quite suddenly she saw
what he would look like, grown. Quick humor and a latent fierceness showed
in his face, and the sight of it struck her to the heart.
Warrior. Oh, God …
She closed her eyes and sent a quick passionate plea to the Virgin Mother.
Please! Keep him out of it!
A calming thought came, perhaps in response. 
Two years.
 Almost exactly
two years to the Battle of Yorktown and the end of the war. Only two years.
Jem was nine, and eleven would still be much too young to fight. She pushed
away the sudden vision of a drummer boy …
“Yes, honey?” she said, tucking in the ends of her fichu. “Are you and
Mandy ready?”
He shrugged. How was he supposed to know?
“Dad says will you need one of the pistols?” He spoke casually; it was no
big deal. She’d been armed all the way from the Ridge and thought little of it
—but now there were soldiers outside, enemy soldiers, waiting to take her
and her children away.
“Tell him yes,” she said. “I think I’d better have one.”76
A Thief in the Night
Fraser’s Ridge
JAMIE WOKE UP HARD, his heart pounding and his mind full of shredded
dreams. There was a faint memory of fury; he’d been fighting, wanting to
fight someone … but it wasn’t anger pulsing through him, or not entirely …
It was still black dark, the shutters closed and the air warm and bitter with the
smell of ash from the smoldering hearth.
“Mmmf …” Claire stirred briefly beside him, then relaxed back into sleep
with a sigh.
“Sassenach,” he whispered, and put a hand on the warm round of her hip.
He felt guilt at rousing her, but his need of her was overwhelming.
“Ng?”
“I need to—” he whispered, already sliding down behind her, fumbling
through the bedclothes, her night rail, his shirt—he rose up and yanked the
shirt off, threw it on the floor, and then lay down again, pulled up her shift
and put an arm over her, clutching her to him, urgent.
She gave a sleepy huff of surprise, but then made a small, accommodating
movement of her naked backside and relaxed again, opening to him.
She was surprisingly slippery, as though she’d shared his lustful dream,
and perhaps she had … He came into her as slowly as he could, but he
couldn’t wait.
“I’m sorry,” he whispered into her hair, moving in her, unable to think, to
talk …. “I have to …” She wasn’t quite awake, he could tell, but her body
was compliant, yielding to his importunity. He quit talking and buried his
face in her hair, holding her tight and rocking hard, her back hot against his
chest and his cold skin rippling with gooseflesh as he felt the surge come and
yielded to it, shuddering and gasping as it pulsed through him.“I’m sorry,” he whispered again, a few moments later. She reached back,
groping blindly, found his leg, and patted him briefly. She yawned, stretched
a little, and curled back into sleep, her bare bottom snug and warm in the
damp curve of his thighs.
He fell asleep as though he’d been pitched headfirst down a well and slept
without dreaming until he woke just before dawn—before the roosters.
He lay quiet, watching the faint light begin to glow between the shutters
and enjoying the momentary sense of deep peace. Claire was still asleep, her
breathing slow and even and her hair pouring over the pillow like smoke. The
sight of her shoulder, bare where her night rail had slipped off, brought back
the sense of that midnight urgency, and he felt a mingled sense of shame and
exultation.
He hadn’t bothered looking for his shirt in the night, and his own shoulders
were cold, the smoored fire not yet stirred. Moving carefully, so as to let her
sleep while she could, he drew the quilt up over both of them, and lay still,
eyes half closed.
His mind felt as lazy as his body, not forming real thoughts, but letting idle
bits of fancy and memory drift through like leaves borne along on the current
of a Highland burn. And among the remembered bits of dreams recalled, he
saw a face. Black-rimmed spectacles, an open, searching face from the back
of a book …
A face that rose above his own, without spectacles, searching, trying to fix
his gaze, to make him look, look at what—
His eyes sprang open in shock. Outside, the first rooster began to crow.
“WHY DID YE never tell me that Frank Randall looked like Black Jack?”
Jamie asked abruptly.
“What?” I’d wondered what was bothering him; he’d gone out before I
was dressed and without his breakfast. Now it was past noon, he hadn’t been
fed lunch, and he’d walked into my surgery without hesitance or greeting to
ask me 
this
?
“Well …” I tried to gather my thoughts enough to frame a coherent
answer; plainly he needed as much truth as I could give him. “Well, to begin
with—he didn’t, really. I mean—the first time I met Jack Randall, I was
startled by the resemblance”—
and a few times thereafter
—“but that seemed
to wear off. It’s—it 
was,
” I corrected myself, “only a superficial physicalresemblance, and once I was acquainted with Jack Randall …” A surprisingly
cold sensation centered itself on the back of my neck, as though the
gentleman in question were standing behind me, eyes fixed on me. “He didn’t
remind me of Frank at all.”
I looked him over carefully. He’d been quite as usual the night before—or
more so; he’d made love to me in my sleep, silently, quickly, and vigorously,
and then had clasped me to his bosom and gone instantly to sleep with a
murmured “
Taing, mo ghràidh.
 I’m sorry.”
I’d fallen back asleep myself, almost at once, feeling a pleasant fricative
glow in my inward parts and the slow, steady thump of his heart against my
back. It wasn’t that he’d never done anything like that before, but it had been
some time since he had.
“Besides,” I said slowly, “you’ve seen that photo of Frank on his book.
Didn’t you see the resemblance for yourself then?”
“No.” He seemed to realize that he was looming over me, and with an
impatient gesture, he pulled out one of my stools and sat down.
“No,” he repeated. “And now I’m wondering why not. It’s maybe what ye
say—that what … Frank is—what he was,” he corrected himself, “shows in
his face. Jack Randall hid himself, but once ye’d seen him look at ye like …
what he was … ye’d never see him otherwise, no matter how fine his clothes
or how civil his manner.”
“Yes.” I shivered involuntarily and reached for my green shawl, wrapping
it round my shoulders as though it might be some protection from the
memory of evil. “But—why did the family resemblance strike you 
now
?”
“Mmphm.” The three remaining fingers of his right hand drummed
soundlessly on his knee, and I could feel his struggle to put what he felt into
words.
“Did something … happen?” I asked cautiously, thinking of that hasty
midnight coupling. That seemed the only mildly unusual event I could recall,
but I failed entirely to see any connection.
Jamie sighed.
“Aye. Maybe. I dinna ken for sure. It’s just … I was dreaming.” He saw
me react to that and made a slight calming gesture. “Not one of the bad ones.
Just bits of nonsense. I dreamed I was reading a book—well, I 
had
 been
reading it, just before I came to bed.”
“Frank’s book, you mean.”“Aye. What I was reading in the dream didna make any sense, but—it went
in and out, ken, like dreams do? And it began to seem that the book was
talkin’ to me, and then it was the man himself—just wee bits of conversation
and then I’d be reading again, or … I was somewhere else.”
He rubbed a hand hard over his face; I couldn’t tell whether he was trying
to erase the dream or bring it to the surface.
“I was looking into his face—seeing his eyes behind the spectacles. Kind.
Decent. Tellin’ me things about history. And then I saw Jack Randall, sitting
back behind his desk, lookin’ at me, mild and civil, like he might have been
askin’ did I want sugar in my tea, but what he was asking was whether I’d
rather be buggered or flogged to death.”
I leaned forward and took his hand; his fingers curled round mine at once
and squeezed lightly in reassurance. It 
hadn’t
 been “one of the bad ones,” the
dreams that left him sweating and unable to be touched.
“You knew it was a dream, then?” I ventured. “You weren’t … er … living
in it, I mean?”
He shook his head, his eyes on the floor.
“No, but it was then I suddenly realized how much they looked alike, and I
woke up wondering why ye’d never mentioned that.”
“Frankly, I—” I smiled, despite myself, and started over. “I mean, at first, I
didn’t see any need, and later, I thought you might be … upset. Or worried.
To know that the man I’d been married to looked so much like Jack Randall.”
He nodded a little, considering that.
“I might have been. And as ye say—nay point, after all. Ye were mine.”
He lifted his head as he said this, and while there was warmth in his eyes,
his mouth had firmed in a very determined way.
“Oh!” I said, suddenly face-to-face with exactly what I’d blindly
experienced in the musky depths of the night before. He’d wakened with
Frank in his mind and had promptly laid claim to me. “So 
that’s
 why you
kept saying you were sorry!”
He gave me a look in which sheepishness was mingled with a certain
defiance.
“Well, I felt bad for wakin’ ye, but … I had to—to—” He made a brief but
very explicit gesture with his thumb in the palm of my hand, which brought
warm blood flooding to my face.
“Oh,” I said again. I noticed that he wasn’t asking if I’d minded. A moot
point, since I hadn’t. I folded my fingers around his large, warm thumb.“Well.”
He smiled at me, leaned forward, and kissed my forehead.
“Claire,” he said softly. “You are my life. 
Fuil m ‘fhuil, cnàmh mo
chnàimh.
” You are Blood of my Blood, and Bone of my Bone. “If Frank felt
as much for ye and kent I’d taken ye from him—and he did know I had—
then he had good cause to try to damage or kill me.”
Sheer astonishment silenced me for a moment.
“You think—I mean … no.” I shook my head, hard. “
No.
 Even if you’re
right about that book—and I 
don’t
 think you are—how could he possibly
know that Brianna would bring it to the past and that you’d see it? Beyond
that … how could anything in a book kill you?
“And besides,” I added firmly, sitting up straight and folding my hands on
my knee, “whatever resemblance your dream showed you, Frank was 
nothing
like Jack Randall. He was a very good man. More important, he was an
historian. He couldn’t—he really couldn’t—write something that he knew
was false.”
Jamie was regarding me with a slight smile.
“I notice ye’re not saying that he didna value ye as much as I do.”
I would have given a lot to be able to make an appropriate Scottish noise in
response to this, but some things were beyond my capabilities. Instead, I
reached out and took his maimed hand between mine, lightly tracing the thick
white scar where his fourth finger had been. I cleared my throat.
“You sent me back to him,” I said, trying to keep my voice from breaking.
“When you thought it would be dangerous for me and the baby to stay. He
knew you weren’t dead, and didn’t tell me.” I lifted his hand and kissed it.
“I’m going to burn that bloody book.”77
City of Brotherly Love
Philadelphia
IAN FOUND THE HOUSE where Uncle Jamie had told him, at the end of a
ragged dirt lane off the main road from Philadelphia. Uncle Jamie had said it
was a poor household, and it looked it. It also looked deserted. A few early
snowflakes were falling in a desultory sort of way, but there was no chimney
smoke. The yard was overgrown, the roof 
sagged, half its shingles split or
curled, and the door looked as though whoever lived there was in the habit of
entering the house by kicking it in.
He swung down from his horse but paused for a moment, considering. His
uncle’s instructions were clear enough, but from the things Uncle Jamie
hadn’t
 said, it was also clear that Mrs. Hardman might have occasional male
visitors of a possibly dangerous disposition, and Ian wasn’t wanting to walk
into anything unexpected.
He tied the gelding loosely to a small elm sapling that leaned drunkenly
over the lane and walked quietly into the brush beyond it. He meant to come
up to the house from the rear and listen for sounds of occupation, but as he
rounded the corner of the house, he heard the faint sound of a baby’s cry. It
wasn’t coming from the house but from a dilapidated shed nearby.
No sooner had he turned in that direction than the cry ceased abruptly, cut
off in mid-wail. He kent enough about babes by now to be sure that the only
thing that would shut an unhappy child up so abruptly was something stuffed
in its mouth, whether that was a breast, a sugar-tit, or someone’s thumb. And
he didn’t think this Mrs. Hardman would be feeding her wean in the shed.
If someone had stopped the baby crying, they’d likely already seen him.
He’d taken the precaution of loading and priming his pistol at the end of the
lane, and now drew it.“Don’t shoot! Don’t shoot!”
The words were not shouted but hissed, somewhere around the level of his
knees. He glanced down, startled, and beheld a young girl, crouched under a
bush, a ragged shawl around her shoulders for warmth.
“Ah … I suppose ye’d be Miss Hardman?” he asked, putting his pistol
back in his belt. “Or one of them?”
“I am Patience Hardman.” She hunched warily, but met his eyes straight
on. “Who is thee?”
He’d got the right place, then. He squatted companionably in front of her.
“My name is Ian Murray, lass. My uncle Jamie is a friend o’ your mother’s
—if your mam’s name is Silvia, that is?”
She was still looking at him, but her face had frozen in an expression of
dislike when he mentioned Uncle Jamie.
“Go away,” she said. “And tell thy uncle to stop coming here.”
He looked her over carefully, but she seemed to be in her right mind.
Homely as a board fence, but sensible enough.
“I think we may be talkin’ of different men, lassie. My uncle is Jamie
Fraser, of Fraser’s Ridge in North Carolina. He stayed with your family for a
day or two sometime past—” He counted backward in his head and found an
approximation. “It would ha’ been maybe two weeks before the battle at
Monmouth; will ye have heard o’ that one?”
Evidently she had, for she scrambled out of the bush in such a hurry as to
snag both limp brown hair and ratty shawl and emerged covered with dead
leaves.
“Jamie Fraser? A very large Scottish man with red hair and a bad back?”
“That’s the one,” Ian said, and smiled at her. “Will your mam be at home,
maybe? My uncle’s sent me to see to her welfare.”
She stood as though turned to stone, but her eyes darted toward the house
behind him and then toward the shed, with something between excitement
and dread.
“Who is thee talking to, Patience?” said another little girl’s voice, and what
must, from her resemblance to Patience, be Prudence Hardman poked a
capped head out of the shed, squinting nearsightedly. “Chastity has eaten 
all
the apples and she will 
not
 be quiet.”
Chastity wouldn’t; there was another high-pitched scream from the shed
and Prudence’s head vanished abruptly.Not a babe, then; if Uncle Jamie had met Chastity on his visit, she might be
nearly two by now.
“Is your mother in the house, then?” Ian asked, deciding that he could wait
to meet Chastity.
“She is, Friend,” Patience said, and swallowed. “But she is—is occupied.”
“I’ll wait, then.”
“No! Just—I mean—thee must go away. Come back—
please
 come back—
but go now.”
“Aye?” He eyed the house curiously. He thought he heard vague sounds
within, but the breeze rustling in the surrounding trees made it hard to tell
what was going on. 
Not that I couldna guess, wi’ the lassies out here
shiverin’ in the shed …
But if Silvia Hardman was entertaining a caller, it might be best to wait
until the man had left. Still, it troubled him to go away and leave the wee
girls in such a state. Perhaps he could feed them, at least—
While he havered, though, Chastity took things into her own hands,
screaming like a catamount and apparently kicking Prudence in the shins, for
Prudence shrieked, too.
“Ow! Chastity! Thee bit me!”
Patience jerked, then ran for the shed, calling, “Be quiet, be quiet!” in an
urgent voice, glancing frantically over her shoulder.
The door of the house was jerked open, slamming back against the wall
within, and a large man wearing nothing but unfastened breeches came out, a
leather belt in his hand and fury on his face.
“Goddamn you chits! You come out here! I’m gonna give you all what-for
and I mean it!”
“Mr. Fredericks! Please, please—come back! The girls didn’t mean to—”
Without a second’s hesitation, Mr. Fredericks turned and slapped the
woman behind him across the face with his belt.
Behind Ian, Patience let out a scream of pure rage and lunged for the
porch. Ian caught her with an arm around her waist and put her behind him.
“Go to your sisters,” he said, and shoved her toward the shed. “Now!”
“Who the devil are you?” Fredericks had come off the porch and was
advancing on Ian, sandy hair ruffled like a lion’s mane and a look on his
broad red face that made his intentions clear.
Ian drew his pistol and pointed it at the man.
“Leave,” he said. “Now.”Fredericks snapped the belt so fast that Ian scarcely saw it; only felt the
blow that knocked the gun from his hand. He didn’t bother trying to pick it
up, but grabbed the end of the belt as it rose for another blow and jerked
Fredericks toward him, butting him in the face as he stumbled. Ian missed the
nose, though, and Fredericks’s jawbone slammed into his forehead, making
his eyes water.
He tripped Fredericks, but the man had his arms round Ian’s body and they
both went down, landing with a thud among the dead leaves. Ian grabbed a
handful and smashed them into the man’s face, grinding them into his eyes,
and got his own leg up in time to avoid being kneed in the balls.
There was a lot of screaming going on. Ian got hold of Fredericks’s ear and
did his best to twist it off while kicking and squirming. He heaved and rolled
and got on top then, and got his hands round Fredericks’s throat, but it was a
fat throat, slippery with sweat, and he couldn’t get a good grasp, not with the
man hammering his ribs with a fist like a rock. 
Enough of this foolishness,
said the Mohawk part of him, and he took his hand off Fredericks’s throat,
grabbed a sturdy stick from the litter on the ground, and drove it straight into
the man’s eye.
Fredericks threw his arms wide, went stiff, gasped once or twice, and died.
Ian moved off the man’s body, slowly, his own body pulsing with his
heartbeat. His finger hurt—he’d jammed it—and his hand was slimy. He
wiped it on his breeches, recalling too late that they were his good pair.
The screaming had stopped abruptly. He sat still, breathing. The
snowflakes were coming down faster now, and melted as they touched his
skin, tiny cold kisses on his face.
His eyes were closed, but he dimly perceived footsteps, and opened them
to see the woman crouching beside him.
There was a wide red welt across her face; her upper lip was split and a
trickle of blood had stained her chin. Her eyes were bloodshot and horrified,
but she wasn’t screaming, thank Christ.
“Who—” she said, and stopped, putting her wrist to her wounded mouth.
She looked down at the dead man on the ground, shook her head as though
unable to believe it, and looked at Ian.
“Thee should not have done this,” she said, low-voiced and urgent.
“Did ye have a better suggestion?” Ian asked, getting some of his breath
back.“He would have left,” she said, and glanced over her shoulder as though
expecting his nemesis to appear. “When he—when he had finished.”
“He’s finished,” Ian assured her, and moving slowly, got up onto his
knees. “Ye’ll be Mrs. Hardman, then.”
“I am Silvia Hardman.” She couldn’t keep her eyes off the dead man.
“He’s Friend Jamie’s nephew, Mummy,” said a small, clear voice behind
him. All three girls had clustered behind their mother, all of them looking
shocked. Even the little one was round-eyed and silent, her thumb in her
mouth.
“Jamie,” Silvia Hardman said, and shook her head. The dazed expression
was fading from her face, and she dabbed at her swelling lip with a fold of
the tattered wrapper she wore. “Jamie … 
Fraser
?”
“Aye,” Ian said, and got to his feet. He was battered and stiff, but it wasn’t
hurting much yet. “He sent me to see to your welfare.”
She looked incredulously at him, then at Fredericks, back at him—and
began to laugh. It wasn’t regular laughing; it was a high, thin, hysterical
sound, and she put a hand over her mouth to stop it.
“I suppose I’d best get rid of this—” He toed Fredericks’s body in the
thigh. “Will anyone come looking for him?”
“They might.” Silvia was getting her own breath back. “This is Charles
Fredericks. He’s a judge. Justice Fredericks, of the City Court of
Philadelphia.”
IAN REGARDED THE dead Justice for a moment, then glanced at Mrs.
Hardman. Bar that moment of unhinged laughter, she hadn’t been hysterical,
and while she was paler than the grubby shift she wore, she was composed.
Not merely composed, he noted with interest; she was grimly intent, her gaze
focused on the body.
“Will thee help me to hide him?” she asked, looking up.
He nodded.
“Will someone come looking for him? Come here, I mean?” The house
was isolated, a mile at least from any other dwelling, and a good five miles
outside the city.
“I don’t know,” she said frankly, meeting his eyes. “He’s been coming
once or twice a week for the last two months, and he’s—he 
was,
” she
corrected, with a slight tone of relief in her voice, “a blabbermouth. Oncehe’d got his—what he came for—he’d drink and he’d talk. Mostly about
himself, but now and then he’d mention men he knew, and what he thought
of them. Not much, as a rule.”
“So ye think he might have … boasted about coming here?”
She uttered a short, startled laugh.
“Here? No. He might have talked about the Quaker widow he was swiving,
though. Some … people … know about me.” Dull red splotches came up on
her face and neck—and looking at them, Ian saw the darker marks of bruises
on her neck.
“Mummy?” The girls were all shivering. “Can we go inside now,
Mummy? It’s awful cold.”
Mrs. Hardman shook herself and, straightening, stepped in front of the
dead man, at least partially blocking the girls’ view of his body.
“Yes. Go in the house, girls. Build up the fire. There’s—some food in a
valise. Go ahead and eat; feed Chastity. I’ll be in … presently.” She
swallowed visibly; Ian couldn’t tell whether it was from sudden nausea or
simple hunger at mention of food; the shadow of her bones showed in her
chest.
The little girls sidled past the body, Patience with her hands over
Chastity’s eyes, and disappeared into the house, though Prudence lingered at
the door until her mother made a shooing gesture, at which she also vanished.
“I think we canna just bury him,” Ian said. “If anyone should come here
looking for him, a fresh grave wouldna be that hard to find. Can ye get him
dressed, d’ye think?”
Her eyes went round, and she glanced at the body, then back at Ian. Her
mouth opened, then closed.
“I can,” she said, sounding breathless.
“Do that, then,” he said. He looked up at the sky; it was the color of
tarnished pewter and still spitting a few random snowflakes. He could feel
more coming, though; there was a sense of the North Wind on the back of his
neck.
“I’ll be back before the evening comes,” he said, turning toward his horse.
“Pack what ye can. That horse is his, I expect?” There was a fine-looking bay
gelding twitching his ears under the sparse shelter of a leafless tulip tree;
clearly it didn’t belong to the Hardman household.
“Yes.”“I’ll need to use that one to move the body. But I’ll bring another to help
carry you and your bairns.”
Silvia blinked and pushed a lank strand of hair behind her ear.
“Where are we going?”
He grinned at her—reassuringly, he hoped.
“I’m takin’ ye to meet my mother.”
IAN TOOK A bit of time riding toward Philadelphia. There was no shortage
of suitable places for what he had in mind, but it was more than likely that
he’d have to do it in the dark. Once he’d found it—a thicket of mixed oak and
pine, with a towering single pine behind it that would be visible against even
the night sky—he dismounted and scrabbled about until he found what he
wanted. This he stuffed into his saddlebag and spurred up along the
Philadelphia road.
He managed to hire a sturdy horse with a kind eye from a farm two miles
out and returned with it to find the Hardmans wearing everything they
possessed, with the remainder of their meager belongings wrapped up in a
ratty quilt tied with string. Mrs. Hardman, he noticed, had a crudely made
knife with a string-wrapped handle thrust through her belt. This seemed
slightly odd for a professed Friend, but then he realized that it was likely her
only knife, used for chopping vegetables, butchering, and digging in the
garden. Likely she’d never considered stabbing anyone with it.
If she had, he thought, grunting with effort as he and Silvia manhandled
the Justice over the saddle of his own horse, this fellow would have died long
before now.
“All right,” he said, jerking the rope that bound the corpse tight. “Mrs.
Hardman—”
“Call me Silvia, Friend,” she said. “And thee is Ian?”
“I am,” he said, and patted her shoulder gently. “Ian Murray. Can ye ride at
all, Silvia?”
“I haven’t, for some years,” she said, biting her lip as she examined the
horse he intended for her. “But I will.”
“Aye. This fellow doesna seem a bad sort, and ye won’t be galloping at all,
so dinna fash too much about it. So. You’ll ride him, wi’ Prudence behind ye
and Chastity before.” He thought the three of them together didn’t equal his
weight, and he was not a burly man.“Wait a moment. Thee should take this, I think.” Silvia reached down and
picked up a leather valise from the ground. It wasn’t new but had clearly been
a piece of some quality in its prime. It smelled of apples.
“Och,” he said, realizing. He glanced at the Justice’s horse, which wasn’t
at all happy with its burden, but not disposed to create a ruckus—not yet,
anyway. “It’s his?”
“Yes. He—brought us food. Every time he came.”
Her eye lingered on the awkward shape, but her face was unreadable.
“That’s no a bad epitaph,” he told her, taking the valise. “When my time
comes, I hope mine is as good. Mount up. I’ll take care of this.”
He helped her up, then lifted Prudence, who squealed with excitement, and
Chastity, who just stared, round-eyed, and sucked her thumb hard.
“Patience, ye’ll come wi’ me, aye?” He tied the bundle of possessions at
the back of his saddle, boosted Patience up in front, then swung up behind
her, a rope to the bridle of the Justice’s horse in one hand. He clicked his
tongue to the horses and the grim little cavalcade lurched off into the lightly
falling snow. None of the Hardmans looked back.
Ian did, feeling obscurely that a place where people had dwelt for a long
time deserved at least a word of farewell.
The house was small and gray and beaten, its hearth cold and the fire long
dead. And yet it had sheltered a family, had witnessed a meeting of the
Continental generals, had given Uncle Jamie refuge when he needed it.
“Bidh failbh ann a sith,”
 he said quietly to the house. “Go back to the
earth in peace. You have done well.”
Patience clutched the pommel like grim death and he could feel her
shivering against him, despite the several layers of flimsy garments she wore.
“Have ye ever been on a horse before, lass?”
She nodded, breathless.
“Daddy would put me and Pru up on his nag now and then. But we never
did more than walk round the yard.”
“Well, that’s something. Ehm … your father’s dead, I take it?”
“Maybe,” she said sadly. “Mummy thinks the militia shot him because
they thought he was a Loyalist. Me and Pru think maybe Indians took him.
But he’s been gone since before Chastity was born, so he’s likely dead.
Otherwise, don’t you think he would have got free and come back to us?”
“I do,” Ian assured her. “But ken, Indians can be good folk. I’m a Mohawk,
myself.”“Thee is?” She turned round in the saddle to stare at him, with a
combination of interest and horror.
“I am.” He tapped the tattooed lines that ran across his cheekbones. “They
adopted me, and I lived wi’ them for some time. I stayed wi’ them willingly,
mind—but I did come back to my family at last. Maybe your da will do the
same.”
And if he did,
 he wondered, looking at the wraithlike shapes of Silvia
Hardman and her daughters on the horse ahead of him, 
what would he do
when he found out the shifts his absence had put his wife to?
And what shifts has Emily been put to, without a man? She’d have people,
though …
 A Mohawk woman would never be alone in the way Silvia
Hardman was alone, and that thought comforted him slightly.
When they reached the Philadelphia road, he dismounted carefully, led his
horse up to Silvia’s, and tied a neck rope to the pommel of her saddle, in case
Patience should lose hold of the reins.
“Ye’ll go on ahead,” he said to Silvia, and pointed down the road, which
was broad, clear, and empty in the waning light. “Ye mustn’t be anywhere
near me while I’m taking care of Mr. Fredericks.”
She shuddered at the name, casting a haunted glance back at the humped
shape on the third horse’s back.
“With luck, I’ll catch ye up within half an hour,” he said. “There’s nay
moon, but it’s a snow-lit sky; I think ye’ll be able to see the road, even after
full dark. If anyone offers to molest ye, tell them your husband is behind ye
and ride on. Give them your bundle if they want it, but don’t let them get ye
off the horses.”
“Yes.” Her voice was high with fear, and she coughed to lower it. “We
will. We won’t, I mean. Thank thee, Ian.”
HE TOOK THEM half a mile down the Philadelphia road, to be sure they
could manage the horses. They were only walking, but ye never kent when
something might happen, and he warned them about paying attention and
keeping hold of the reins.
Patience’s eyes were round as saucers when he slid off and tucked the reins
into her hands.
“Alone?” she said, in a very small voice. “I’m riding … 
alone
?”“Not for long,” he assured her. “And your mam will be holding the rope.
I’ll be back, quick as I can.”
He untied Fredericks’s horse then and led the gelding in the other
direction, well past the lane that led to the Hardman cottage. It was beginning
to snow in earnest, but the flakes were small and hard and only skittered
across the hard-packed road, the wind making thin white lines on the dirt.
Being in the open, in possession of a fresh corpse, was never comfortable,
but it was particularly uneasy work when in the vicinity of white people, who
were inclined to think everyone’s private business was also theirs. Luckily,
the cold weather had kept the body from swelling, and it wasn’t making eerie
noises yet.
There it was: the tall pine, black against the snow-lit sky. He’d trampled
down a patch of brush on his previous visit and now led the horse carefully
into it, and between two close-spaced saplings. The horse was suspicious, but
did follow, and one of the saplings gave way with a crack.
“Good, 
a charaid,
” he murmured. “Nay more than another minute, all
right?”
Beyond the scrim of oak and pine saplings, the land plunged down into a
small ravine. He’d counted the steps to the edge of it on his first visit, and a
good thing; the light was poor and the ravine full of brush and straggly small
trees.
He tied up the horse a safe distance from the edge, then untied Fredericks
and hauled him off, dropping him to the ground with a thud like a killed
buffalo. Ian dragged the late Justice to the edge of the ravine, then went back
to 
the foot of the big pine to retrieve the broken dead branch he’d selected
earlier. The stick he’d used before was clearly from a fruit tree; he pulled it
out and put it in his pouch for later disposal.
He wondered whether there was a Gaelic charm or prayer to cover the
disposal of the body of someone ye’d murdered, but if there was, he didn’t
know it. The Mohawk had prayers, all right, but they didn’t bother much wi’
the dead.
“I’ll ask Uncle Jamie later,” he said to Fredericks, under his breath. “And if
there is one, I’ll say it for ye. For now, though, ye’re on your own.”
He felt his way over the cold, hard face, located the empty eye socket, and
drove the sharp end of his branch into it as hard as he could. The scrape of
bark and wood on bone and then the sudden yielding raised the hairs across
his shoulders and down his arms.Then he dragged the body to the edge of the ravine and pushed it over. For
a moment, he feared it wouldn’t move, but it slid on the pine needles and,
after a long moment, rolled almost lazily, once, twice, and disappeared into
the brush at the bottom with a muffled 
crunch
 that was scarcely to be heard
above the rising wind.
He was tempted to keep the horse; if anyone noticed it, he could just say
he’d found it wandering on the road. But if he—and the horse—were to
remain in company with Silvia Hardman and her weans in Philadelphia, it
was too dangerous, and he took the horse back to the road and bade it
farewell with a slap on the rump. He watched it go, then turned round and
began to jog up the road in the thickening snow.78
Thee Smells of Blood
IAN HAD COME IN quietly—
like an Indian,
 Rachel thought—sometime
past midnight, crouching by the bed and blowing softly in her ear to rouse
her, lest he startle her and wake Oggy. She’d hastily checked the latter, then
swung her feet out of bed and rose to embrace her husband.
“Thee smells of blood,” she whispered. “What has thee killed?”
“A beast,” he whispered back, and cupped her cheek in his palm. “I had to,
but I’m no sorry for it.”
She nodded, feeling a sharp stone forming in her throat.
“Will ye come out wi’ me, 
mo nighean donn
? I need help.”
She nodded again and turned to find the cloak she used for a bedgown.
There was a sense of grimness about him, but something else as well, and she
couldn’t tell what it was.
She was hoping that he hadn’t brought the body home with the expectation
that she would help him bury or hide it, whatever—or whoever—it was, 
but
he 
had
 just killed something he considered to be evil and perhaps felt himself
pursued.
She was therefore taken aback when she followed him into the tiny parlor
of their rooms and found a scrawny woman with a battered face and three
grubby, half-starved children clothed in rags, pressed together on the sofa like
a row of terrified owls.
“Friend Silvia,” Ian said softly, “this is my wife, Rachel.”
“Friend?” Rachel said, astonished but heartened. “Thee is a Friend?”
The woman nodded, uncertain. “I am,” she said, and her voice was soft,
but clear. “We are. I am Silvia Hardman, and these are my daughters:
Patience, Prudence, and little Chastity.”
“They’ll be needing something to eat, 
mo chridhe.
 And then maybe—”“A little hot water,” Silvia Hardman blurted. “Please. To—to wash.” Her
hands were clenched on her knees, crumpling the faded homespun, and
Rachel gave the hands a quick look—possibly she had helped Ian in his
killing? The stone was hard in her throat again, but she nodded, touching the
smallest of the little girls, a pretty, round-faced babe somewhere between one
and two, more than half asleep on a sister’s lap.
“Right away,” she promised. “Ian—get thy mother.”
“I’m here,” Jenny said from behind her. Her voice was alert and interested.
“I see we’ve got company.”
RACHEL WENT AT once to the sideboard and found bread and cheese and
apples, which she distributed to the two older girls; the little one had fallen
sound asleep, so Rachel lifted her gently and took her into the bedroom,
where she tucked her in beside Oggy. The little girl was grimy and thin, her
dark curls matted, but she was otherwise in good condition, and her sweet
round face had an innocence that Rachel thought her sisters had long since
lost.
The why of 
that
 became apparent directly.
Jenny had ignored food and brought Silvia Hardman hot water, soap, and a
towel. Silvia was washing herself, slowly and thoroughly, her brows drawn
together in concentration, looking at nothing.
Ian glanced briefly at her, and then explained the situation to Rachel and
his mother simply and bluntly, despite the presence of the children. Rachel
glanced at the little girls and raised her brows at her husband, but he merely
said, “They were there,” and continued.
“So I got rid of him,” he concluded. “Ye dinna need to ken how or where.”
One of the girls let out a little sigh of what might have been relief or sheer
exhaustion.
“Aye,” Jenny said, dismissing this. “And ye couldna leave them where
they were, in case someone came looking for the man and found him too
close.”
“Partly that, aye.” Despite the hour and the fact that he had spent the
previous day and half the night engaged in what must have been very
strenuous activity, Ian seemed wide awake and in full possession of his
faculties. He smiled at his mother. “Uncle Jamie told me that if Friend Silvia
was to be in any difficulty, I was to take care of it.”Silvia Hardman began to laugh. Very quietly, but with a distinct edge of
hysteria. Jenny sat down beside her, put her arm around Silvia’s shoulders,
and Silvia stopped laughing abruptly. Rachel saw that her hands, still wet and
slippery with soap, were shaking.
“Does thee believe in angels, Rachel?” Silvia asked. Her voice was low
and slightly distorted because of her swollen lip.
“If thee means Ian or Jamie, they would firmly abjure any such
description,” Rachel said, smiling reassuringly and trying not to look away
from the wide bruise that cut across Silvia’s face and made her eyes look
strangely disconnected from the rest of her features. “But having known them
both for some time, I do think God occasionally finds some use for them.”79
Too Many Women
IN THE MORNING, JENNY took charge of the children so that Rachel
could go with Silvia Hardman to talk to the “weighty Friends”—which was
as far as a Quaker would go in attributing status to anyone—who were
presently in charge of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting, and see whether some
provision of housing, work, or money might be arranged for the Hardmans’
succor. Ian would have accompanied them, but both Rachel and Silvia
expressed doubt that his presence would be helpful.
“I don’t plan to mention the beast that thee killed,” Rachel had said to him
privately. “Thus, thy testimony is likely to cause more trouble, not less.
Besides, thee has business of thy own, does thee not?”
“Not my own, no,” he said, and kissed her briefly. “But I promised Auntie
Claire I’d pay a visit to a brothel on her behalf.”
She didn’t turn a single dark-brown hair.
“Don’t bring home a whore,” she advised him. “Thee already has too many
women.”
Elfreth’s Alley was not bad, as alleys in a city went. Hardly a proper alley
at all, Ian thought, skirting a small heap of vomit on the bricks. It was wide
enough that you could drive a wagon down it, and several of the houses had
polished-brass doorknobs. Mother Abbott’s did, even though this was the
back door of the establishment. But naturally the back door of a whorehouse
would be used as much—if not much more than—the front.
There were two young whores sitting on the back steps, wrapped in cloaks,
and he wondered whether they were there as advertisement or only taking a
breath of air. It was crisp out and their breaths rose in white wisps, vanishing
as they talked. One of them spotted him, and they stopped.
The taller one eyed him briefly, then leaned back, one elbow on the step
behind her, and let her cloak fall back from one shoulder, showing a glimpseof pink skin above her shift, and the rounded weight of her breast through it.
He smiled at her.
Her face changed, and he realized that she’d just noticed his tattoos. She
looked wary, but she didn’t look away.
“Good day to ye, mistress,” he said, and her eyebrows shot up at his
Scottish accent. Her friend sat up straight and stared hard at him. He came to
a stop in front of them, tilted back his head, and looked up. The house rose
above him, three stories of solid red brick.
“A good house, is it?” he asked. The whores exchanged glances, and he
saw the short one shrug slightly, relinquishing him to her taller comrade, who
straightened up but left her cloak hanging carelessly open. The cold made her
nipples poke out, round and hard under the thin cotton.
“Very good indeed, sir,” she said, and gave him a practiced smile. She got
her feet under her, preparing to rise. “Will you come in and have a drink to
take the chill off?”
“Maybe,” he said, smiling at her. “But I meant, is it a good place for you
ladies?”
Their faces went blank, and they stared up at him, mouths hanging open in
astonishment. The short one, with disheveled blond hair, recovered first.
“Well, it’s better nor doin’ it out of a carriage, or havin’ a pimp what sends
you into drinkin’ barns and boxing rings, I’ll say that much.”
“Trixie!” The tall brown-haired lass kicked at her companion and rose to
her feet, smiling at him. “I’m Meg. It’s a good, clean house, sir, and the girls
are all clean. Healthy … and well fed.” She cupped a hand under her very
healthy breast in illustration.
He nodded and reached into his pouch, withdrawing his purse, plump with
coin.
“I’m healthy, too, lass.”
The short one tossed her head.
“That’s as may be. Everyone says Scotchmen are mean.”
Her tall friend kicked her again, harder.
“Ow!”
“Scotsmen are canny, lass, not mean,” Ian said, ignoring this byplay. “We
want value for money, aye—but if it’s value we get …” He tossed the purse
lightly, catching it in his palm so the money chinked.
The tall lassie came down the steps and stopped in front of him, close, her
cold nipples near enough that he imagined them pressing against his barechest and felt the hairs there prickle.
Forgive me, Rachel,
 he thought.
“Oh, I can promise you value, sir,” she said, smiling through the wisps of
her breath. “
Whatever
 you desire.”
He nodded amiably, looking her frankly up and down.
“What I want, lass, is a girl with a good bit of experience.”
Her face changed at that, and he saw that he’d frightened her a little.
Maybe not a bad thing.
“D’ye have any girls who’ve worked in the house for … oh, say, five years
at least?”
“Five 
years
?” the short one blurted. She scrambled to her feet, and at first
he thought she meant to flee, but she just wanted a closer look at him. She
looked him over with as much frankness as he’d displayed with her friend,
but with an air of fascination as well.
“What on earth can a whore 
do
 that takes five years to learn?” She sounded
as though she truly wanted to find out, and he looked at her with more
interest. She might think he was a pervert, but she was game, and he was that
wee bit shocked to find it aroused him more than Meg’s nipples. He cleared
his throat.
“I’d like to ken the answer to that one, too, lass,” he said, smiling at her.
“But what I want just now is a girl who kent Jane Pocock.”80
A Word for That
THE STREETS OF PHILADELPHIA were filled with food—at least they
were when the British army wasn’t occupying the city. It wasn’t, at the
moment, and there were pies for sale, both meat and fruit, big salt-dusted
German 
Bretzeln
 carried on sticks like a ring-toss, fried fish, sugar-dusted
crullers, stuffed cabbage leaves, and buckets of beer, all available within
footsteps of the building where the Philadelphia Yearly Meeting of the
Society of Friends conducted most of its business.
Unfortunately, most of the available food wasn’t of a style or shape that
would make throwing it against a wall very satisfying. Fuming, Rachel
glanced to and fro, and settled on an apple seller.
“Here,” she said, handing one of the yellow-and-pink fruits to Silvia
Hardman. Silvia looked at it in surprise, then lifted it uncertainly toward her
mouth.
“No,” Rachel said. “Like 
this
!” And turning on her heel, she drew back her
arm and flung the apple as hard as she could against the trunk of a massive
oak tree that stood in the park where they’d gone to gather themselves. The
apple exploded into bits and juice, and Rachel drew a satisfied breath.
“Imagine it is the head of Friend Sharpless,” she advised Silvia. “Or
perhaps that oaf Phineas Cadwallader.”
“Oh, him, to be sure.” Silvia’s face was as flushed as the apple, and with a
little 
umph!
 she hurled her fruit at the tree, but missed.
Rachel ran to fetch it back, then guided Silvia closer to the tree.
“Put thy fingers 
so,
” she said, “then draw thy arm back and fix thy eye
firmly upon the spot thee has chosen. Then throw, but do not let thine eye
stray.”
Silvia nodded and, taking a fresh grip upon the apple, faced the tree with
the fire she should have shown to Friend Cadwallader, and let fly.“Oh.” She made a small sound of pleased surprise. “I didn’t think I could.”
She laughed, but self-consciously, looking over her shoulder. “I suppose this
is sinfully wasteful, but …”
“Ask the squirrels if they think so,” Rachel advised, nodding toward one of
these creatures, who had rushed down the trunk of the tree within seconds of
the first impact and was now on the ground, stuffing itself with the fragments
of their bombardment. Silvia looked, then glanced around. At least a dozen
more were bounding across the grass, tails bushy with purpose.
“Well, then,” she said, and drew a deep breath. “Thee is right. I feel much
calmer.”
“Good. Can thee eat?” Rachel asked. “I’m starved. Perhaps we might have
a pie and discuss what to do next.”
The calmness at once disappeared from Silvia’s face, replaced with pale
apprehension, but she nodded and obediently followed Rachel back onto the
street.
“I should not have gone,” Silvia said, pausing after a bite or two of her
beef-and-onion pie. “I knew what they would say.”
“Yes, thee told me, but I didn’t want to believe it.” Rachel bit into her own
pie, frowning. “That people who profess charity and the love of Christ could
speak in such a way! No wonder thy husband turned his back upon them.”
“Gabriel wasn’t one to stand what he thought of as interference,” Silvia
agreed ruefully. “But thee can see their point, surely? I am in fact exactly
what they said—a whore.”
Rachel wanted to contradict her on the spot, but having opened her mouth
to do so, paused, then took another bite of flaky pastry and gravy.
“Thee had no choice,” she said, after chewing and swallowing.
“Mr. Cadwallader appeared to think I had,” Silvia said, a little tartly. “I
should have married again—”
“But thee didn’t know whether thy husband was dead! How could thee
marry?”
“—or come to the city and turned my hand to laundry or needlework—”
“Which wouldn’t pay thee enough to feed thyself, let alone thy daughters!”
“Perhaps Friend Cadwallader hasn’t found occasion to discover what the
life of a laundress is like,” Silvia said. She finished her pie, and her bony
shoulders slumped a little, relaxing in the late-afternoon sun. “I suppose we
must look for the light within him and Friend Sharpless, mustn’t we?”“Yes,” Rachel said reluctantly. “But I may require a few more apples and a
bottle of beer before such a search might be effective.”
Silvia laughed, and Rachel’s heart rose to hear it. Silvia Hardman was
battered, no doubt of it—but not yet broken.
“Still, it would have been good to be part of a meeting once again,” Silvia
said wistfully. “I have not had such company or support in many years.”
Rachel swallowed her last bite and took hold of Silvia’s hand. It was
slender, callused, and ill-used, bearing the burns and scars of unrelenting toil
and many small household disasters.
“Wherever two or more of you are gathered in my name, there am I,”
Rachel said, and pointed at Silvia, then herself. “One. Two.”
Silvia smiled, despite herself, and her true nature—kind and humorous—
peeped out behind the wariness in her eyes.
“Then thee is my meeting, Rachel. I am blessed.”
IAN 
CAME BACK from his visit to Elfreth’s Alley in something of a brown
study, oblivious to the shouts of dairymaids and beer sellers.
He’d thought he might have to expend considerable time and money in
order to get the inhabitants of the brothel to talk, but the mere mention of
Jane Pocock’s name had opened floodgates of gossip, and he felt as one
might after being washed overboard from a ship and carried ashore in a flurry
of foam and sharp debris.
Now he wished he had paid more attention to Fanny’s drawing of her
sister.
The loudly stated opinion of Mrs. Abbott, the madam, was that Jane
Pocock had been strange, plainly 
very
 strange, demented and probably a
practitioner of Strange Arts, and how it was that neither she nor any of her
girls had been murdered in their beds, she did 
not
 know. Ian wondered why a
young woman with such skills would have been working as a whore, but
didn’t say so, under the circumstances.
It took some time for the talk about the murder of Captain Harkness to die
down, but Ian Murray did ken his way around a brothel, and when the flow
diminished, he at once ordered two more extortionately priced bottles of
champagne.
This altered the air of accommodation to something more focused but less
vituperative, and within half an hour, Mrs. Abbott had retreated to hersanctum and the whores had reached their own silent accommodation
amongst themselves. He found himself on the red velvet sofa common to
such establishments, with Meg on one side and Trixabella on the other.
“Trix was friends with Arabella—Jane, I mean,” Meg explained. Trix
nodded, doleful.
“Wish I hadn’t been,” she said. “That girl hadn’t any luck at all, and that
kind of thing can brush off on you, you know. What are those things on your
face?”
“Can it?” Ian touched his cheekbone. “It’s a Mohawk tattoo.”
“Ooh,” said Trix, with slightly more interest. “Was you captured by
Indians?” She giggled at the thought.
“Nay, I went of my own accord,” he said equably.
“Well, me too,” Trix said, with an uptilted chin and a wave of the hand
presumably meant to draw his attention to the relatively luxurious nature of
her place of employment. “Not Arabella, though. Mrs. Abbott got her and her
sister off a sea captain what didn’t have the scratch to pay his bill. Those girls
were indentures.”
“Aye? And how long ago was that? Ye canna have been here more than a
year or two yourself.” In fact, she looked to have been in the trade for a
decade, at least, but minor gallantries were part of the expected 
pourparlers,
and she laughed and batted her eyes at him in a practiced manner.
“Reckon it would have been six—maybe seven—years ago. Time flies
when you’re havin’ fun, or so they say.”
“Tempus fugit.”
 Ian filled her glass and clinked his against it, smiling. She
dimpled professionally, drank, and went on.
“Mind, I wasn’t but two years older than Jane …” Bat-bat. “Mrs. Abbott
wouldn’t’ve bothered with them, save they were pretty, both of ’em, and Jane
was just about old enough to … um … start.”
Ian was counting back; six years ago, Jane would have been about the age
Fanny was now. 
Old enough …
After a few accounts of harrowing initial experiences in the trade, he
managed to drag the conversation back to Jane and Fanny.
“Ye said a sea captain sold the girls to Mrs. Abbott. Do either of ye by
chance recall his name?”
Meg shook her head.
“I wasn’t here,” she said. “Trix …?” She lifted a brow at her friend, who
frowned a little and pressed her lips together.“Has he come back here—since?” Ian asked, watching her closely. She
looked startled.
“I—well … yes. I only saw him twice, mind, and it’s been a long while, so
I maybe don’t recall his name for sure.”
Ian sighed, gave her a direct look, and handed her a golden guinea.
“Vaskwez,” she said without hesitation. “Sebastian Vaskwez.”
“Vas—was he a Spaniard?” Ian asked, his mind having smoothly
transmuted her rendering to “Sebastiàn Vasquez.”
“I don’t know,” Trix said frankly. “I’ve never had a Spaniard—knowin’-
like, I mean—wouldn’t know what they sound like.”
“They all sound the same in bed,” Meg said, giving Ian an eye. Trix gave
her friend a withering look.
“He sounded foreign-like, no doubt about 
that.
 And no talking through his
nose or that 
gwaw-gwaw
 sort of thing Frenchies do. I’ve had three
Frenchmen,” she explained to Ian, with a small showing of pride. “Was a few
of ’em in Philadelphia while the British army was here.”
“When was the last time Vasquez came here?” he asked.
“Two … no, maybe close to three years ago.”
“Did he go with Jane then?” Ian asked.
“No,” Trix said unexpectedly. “He went with me.” She made a face. “He
stank of gunpowder—like an artilleryman. He wasn’t one, though; they’ve all
got it ground into their skin and their hands are black with it, but he was
clean, though he smelled like a fired pistol.”
A thought occurred to Ian—though thinking was becoming difficult. He
wasn’t bothered by the fact that his body was taking strong notice of the girls,
but arousal seldom did much for the mental faculties.
“Could ye tell if he was still a sea captain?” he asked. Both girls looked
blank.
“I mean—did he mention his ship, or maybe say he was taking on crew,
anything like that? Did he smell of the sea, or—or—fish?”
That made them both laugh.
“No, just gunpowder,” Trix said, recovering.
“Mother Abbott called him ‘Captain,’ though,” Trix added. “And ’twas
clear enough he weren’t a soldier.”
A few more questions emptied both bottles, and it was clear that the girls
had told him all they knew, little as it was. At least he had a name. There
were sounds in the house, opening doors, heavy footsteps, men’s voices andwomen’s greetings; it was just past teatime and the cullies were beginning to
come in.
He rose, arranged himself without shame, and bowed to them, thanking
them for their kind assistance.
At the bottom of the stairs, he heard Trix call down to him and looked up
to see her leaning over the rail of the landing above.
“Aye?” he said. She glanced round to make sure there was no one near,
then scuttled down the stairs and took him by the sleeve.
“I know one thing more,” she said. “When Mother Abbott went to sell
Arabella’s maidenhead, she hadn’t one, so they had to use a bladder of
chicken blood.”
SILVIA SENT HER girls off with a tray loaded with food, to eat in the
bedroom. Then she sat down at the table, where Jenny and Rachel had laid
out thick slices of bread on which to serve the bacon and beans, they having
no more than the two warped wooden plates that had been provided with their
rooms.
Ian thought the smell of food might be enough to knock him over; he
couldn’t recall the last time he’d eaten—he thought it might have been
yesterday sometime, but he’d been too busy to notice. He broke off a corner
of bread with a good bit of beans cooked with bacon and onions on it,
shoveled it into his mouth, and made an involuntary sound that caused all the
women to look at him.
“Ye sound like a starving wolf, lad,” his mother said, raising her brows.
Rachel laughed, and Silvia smiled, very gingerly. She ate the same way,
owing to her split lip, and he thought, from the tentative way she chewed, that
a couple of her teeth might have been loosened as well. If he’d had any
compunction about killing Judge Fredericks—and he hadn’t—it would have
vanished on the spot.
He felt much the same toward the so-called Friends of the Yearly Meeting.
Rachel had told him a good bit about the nature of Quaker meetings, and he
understood that while anyone was welcome to sit and to worship with them,
it was a different thing to be part of the meeting: people were accepted only
after consideration and conference.
There was something akin to the way a clan worked in this; there was an
expectation of obligation that went both ways. So he could understand, hesupposed, why the Friends of Philadelphia hadn’t simply scooped Silvia into
their bosoms. Still, he resented them for it.
“Friends are ideally meant to be compassionate, peaceable, and honest,”
Rachel said, frowning. “This does 
not
 mean that they reserve judgment, nor
that they don’t possess strong opinions, which they are, of course, welcome
to express.”
“And they gossip?” Ian asked. Rachel sighed.
“We do. I mean,” she added, “we discourage anything in the way of ill-
natured gossip, spreading scandal or personal disparagement—but by the
nature of a meeting, everyone knows everyone else’s business.”
“Aye.” Ian scraped a last bit of bread around the rim of the pot, salvaging
the rest of the succulent juice. “Well, Friend Silvia’s business is none of
theirs. Do ye have a notion what ye’d like to do, or where ye want to go,
lass?” he asked, addressing Silvia. “We’ll help ye do it, regardless.”
“I wish to go with you,” Silvia blurted. A red tide surged up her thin neck
and blotched her cheeks. “I know I haven’t any right to ask you—but I do.”
Rachel at once looked at Ian, and so did his mother. Well, he was the man,
and it was his fault they were here, so he supposed he had a right to decide
how many women he could reasonably juggle. Still …
“I do not wish to remain in Philadelphia,” Silvia said. She’d got hold of
herself and her voice was steady. “Since Yearly Meeting knows who I am—
both by name and reputation,” she added, with a slight note of bitterness, “I
will find no acceptance here. Any meeting that took me in would soon realize
their mistake. And while I could earn a living as an actual whore, I will not
on any account expose my daughters to such a life.”
“Aye,” Ian said reluctantly. “I suppose ye’re right, but—we’re bound for
New York, lass, and the country of the Hodeenosaunee.”
“That’s the Iroquois League,” Rachel put in. “More specifically, we’re
bound for a small town called Canajoharie, inhabited by the Mohawk.”
“I suppose I might find a place somewhere before we reach Canajoharie.
But if not—have the Mohawk any objection to whores?” Silvia asked, a small
frown creasing the flesh between her brows.
“They dinna really have a word for that,” Ian said. “And if they dinna have
a word for something, it’s no important.”
Oggy, who had been having an earnest conversation with his toes, looked
up at this point, said “Da” very clearly, and then returned to his toes.
Ian smiled, then sighed deeply and addressed his son.“Three women and three wee lassies. I’m sure ye’ll be as much aid to me
as ye can, 
a bhalaich,
 but there’s no help for it. I’ll need another man.”81
Still Imminent
IT HAD BEEN ONE of those beautiful autumn days when the sun is bright
and warm at its zenith, but a chill creeps in at dawn and dusk and the nights
are cold enough to make a good fire, a good thick quilt, and a good man with
a lot of body heat in bed beside you more than welcome.
The good man in question stretched himself, groaning, and relapsed into
the luxury of rest with a sigh, his hand on my thigh. I patted it and rolled
toward him, dislodging Adso, who had alighted at the foot of the bed, but
leapt off with a brief 
mirp!
 of annoyance at this indication that we didn’t
mean to lapse into immobility just yet.
“So, Sassenach, what have ye been doing all day?” Jamie asked, stroking
my hip. His eyes were half closed in the drowsy pleasure of warmth, but
focused on my face.
“Oh, Lord …” Dawn seemed an eon ago, but I stretched myself and eased
comfortably into his touch. “Just chores, for the most part … but a man
named Herman Mortenson came up from Woolam’s Mill in late morning to
have a pilonidal cyst at the base of his spine lanced and evacuated; I haven’t
smelled anything that bad since Bluebell rolled in a decayed pig’s carcass.
But then,” I added, sensing that this might not be the right note on which to
begin a pleasant autumn evening’s 
rencontre,
 “I spent most of the afternoon
in the garden, pulling up peanut bushes and picking the last of the beans. And
talking to the bees, of course.”
“Did they have anything interesting to say to ye, Sassenach?” The stroking
had edged over into a pleasant massage of my behind, which had the salutary
side effect of causing me to arch my back and press my breasts lightly against
his chest. I used my free hand to loosen my shift, gather one breast up, and
rub my nipple against his, which made him clutch my arse and say something
under his breath in Gaelic.“And, um, how was 
your
 day?” I asked, desisting.
“If ye do that again, Sassenach, I’m no going to answer for the results,” he
said, scratching his nipple as though it had been bitten by a large mosquito.
“As for what I did, I built a new gate for the farrowing sty. Speakin’ o’ pigs.”
“Speaking of pigs …” I repeated, slowly. “Um … did you go into the sty?”
“No. Why?” His hand moved a little farther down, cupping my left
buttock.
“I’d forgotten to tell you, because you’d gone to Tennessee to talk to Mr.
Sevier and Colonel Shelby and didn’t come back for a week. But I went up
there”—the sty was a small cave in the limestone cliff above the house—“a
week ago, to fetch a jar of turpentine I’d left there from the worming, and—
you know how the cave curves off to the left?”
He nodded, his eyes fixed on my mouth as though reading my lips.
“Well, I went round the corner, and there they were.”
“Who?”
“The White Sow herself, with what I assume were two of her daughters or
granddaughters … the others weren’t white, but they had to be related to her
because all three of them were the same size—immense.” Your average wild
hog stood about three foot at the shoulder and weighed two or three hundred
pounds. The White Sow, who was not a wild hog herself but the product of a
domestic porcine line bred for poundage, was a good deal older, greedier, and
more ferocious than the average, and while I wasn’t as good as Jamie at
estimating the weight of livestock, I would have clocked her at six hundred
pounds without a moment’s hesitation. Her descendants weren’t much
smaller.
The sense of placid malignity had frozen me in place, and my skin rippled
into instant gooseflesh at the memory of those small dark-red intelligent eyes,
fixed on me from the pale bulk in the shadows of the cave.
“Did she go after ye?” Jamie ran a concerned hand over the curve of my
shoulder, feeling the goose bumps. I shook my head.
“I thought she would. Every second I was there, and every second it took
me to inch my way back into the light and out of the cave, I thought she was
going to heave to her feet—they were all sort of … reclining in the matted
straw—and run me down, but they just … looked at me.” I swallowed, and a
new wave of horripilation ran down my arms.
“Anyway,” I finished, nudging closer to his warmth, “they didn’t eat me.
Maybe she remembers that I used to feed her scraps—but I don’t know thatshe feels that kindly toward 
you.
”
“I’ll take my rifle when I go up there,” he promised. “If I see them, we’ll
have meat for the winter.”
“You bloody be careful,” I said, and nipped the flesh of his shoulder. “I
don’t think you could get all three before one of them gets you. And I rather
think that killing the White Sow might be bad luck.”
“Bah,” he said comfortably, and rolled over, pinning me to the mattress
with a whoosh of down feathers. He lowered his head and nibbled my
earlobe, making me squirm and muffle a shriek.
“Tell me about the bees,” he said, breathing warmly into my ear. “It may
settle ye enough to fix your mind where it belongs, instead of on pigs.”
“You 
asked,
” I said, with dignity, refusing to address the question of where
my mind belonged. “As for the bees … I thought they’d hibernate, but Myers
says they don’t, though they do stay inside their hives when it gets cold. But
there are still late flowers in the garden, and they’re still at work. Just before I
came down tonight—it was starting to get dark—I found two of them, curled
up together in the cup of a hollyhock, covered in pollen and holding each
other’s feet.”
“Were they dead?”
“No.” He’d moved off me but was still imminent. His hair was loose, soft
and tumbled, sparking red and silver in the firelight, and I brushed it behind
his ear. “I thought they were, the first time I saw it, but I’ve seen it several
times since, and they’re just sleeping in the flowers. They wake up when the
sun warms them and fly off.
“I don’t know whether it’s something like camping out for them, or
whether they just get too tired to make their way back to the hive or are
caught out by the dark and lie down where they can,” I added. “You mostly
see single bees doing it, though. Seeing two of them together like that … it
was very sweet.”
“Sweet,” he echoed, and threading his fingers through mine kissed me
gently, tasting of smoke and beer and bread with honey.
“Do you know why they’re called hollyhocks?”
“No, but I suppose ye’re going to tell me.” One big hand ran down the side
of my neck and delicately grasped my nipple. I returned the favor, enjoying
the rough feel of the hairs around his.
“The Crusaders brought it back to England, because you can make a salve
of its root that’s particularly good for an injury to a horse’s hocks. Apparentlycrusading is hard on the hocks.”
“Mmm … I wouldna doubt it.”
“So,” I whispered, flicking my thumbnail lightly, “‘Holly’ is an old
spelling of ‘Holy’—for the ‘Holy Land’?”
“Mmphm …”
“And ‘hock’—well, for ‘hocks.’ What do you think of that?”
A subterranean quiver rippled through his body, and he lay down on top of
me and eased both hands under my hips. His breath tickled warmly in my ear.
“I think I should like to sleep in a flower wi’ you, Sassenach, holding your
feet.”
I reached to put out the candle and my mind settled where it belonged, in
the warm heart of the firelit darkness.
I SLEPT THE sleep of the gardener, physical exhaustion leavened by
tranquility, and dreamed—little wonder—of weeds. I was yanking them out
of the ground at the foot of a vast bank of blooming pea vines, tossing the
weeds over my shoulder and hearing them plink on the ground like coins,
then realizing that it was raining …
I rose slowly out of my dream of slugs and rain-wet vegetables to realize
that Jamie had got up and was using the tin chamber pot, having withdrawn
to a polite distance by the window to do so. Knowing that his grandfather, the
Old Fox, had suffered from an enlarged prostate, I was inclined to listen—as
tactfully as possible—in case of any adverse indications, but the sound was
reassuringly strong and well defined, and I closed my eyes and pretended to
have just wakened when he crawled back into bed.
“Mm?” I said, and patted his arm. He lay down, sighing, and took my
hand.
“What’s today?” he said. “Or what will it be, when the sun comes up?”
“What is—oh, you mean what’s the date? It’s October the seventh. I’m
sure, because I wrote down October sixth in my black book when I did my
notes after supper. Why?”
“A few more days, then. It’ll be the eleventh.”
“What happens on the eleventh?”
“According to your damned first husband, that’s when the Americans will
lift their siege on Savannah.” He made a low, disgruntled noise in the back of
his throat. “I should never have let Brianna go!”I paused for a minute before answering, not sure of the ground.
“The city won’t be invaded,” I said, though I was uneasy, too. 
If we believe
Frank’s book, and I suppose we must …
 “And you couldn’t have stopped her,
you know.”
“I could,” he said stubbornly. “Or,” he added more fairly, “I could have
stopped Roger Mac. And she wouldna go without him. And now the whole
family’s there, God damn it.” He moved his legs restlessly, rustling under the
covers.
“Yes,” I said, taking a deep breath. “They are. Including William.”
He stopped fidgeting abruptly and breathed through his nose for a bit.
“Aye,” he said at last, reluctantly. “I shouldna have done it, though—sent
Bree into danger. Not even for William’s sake.”
A throaty call from a sleepy dove in the trees outside announced that the
dawn was coming. No point in trying to soothe Jamie back to sleep, even if it
was possible, and it wasn’t. His uneasiness was catching. I knew he was only
second-guessing himself; all this had been discussed beforehand. Roger and
Bree knew when the battle would happen—and that the city would not be
taken. Even so, they’d have had time enough to leave the city, if things
seemed too dangerous. And … despite his current edginess, Jamie did, in
fact, trust John Grey to see them safe—or as safe as anyone could be, in a
time like this.
“Jamie,” I said softly, at last, and touched his hand lightly. “No place is
safe now. Not Savannah. Not Salisbury or Salem. Not here.”
He grew still. 
Not here.
“No,” he said softly, and squeezed my hand. “Not here.”82
Jf Special
JAMIE CAME INTO THE surgery with three bottles of whisky cradled in
one arm and another gripped with his free hand.
“Oh—presents?” I asked, smiling.
“Well, this one’s yours—or for your patients, at least.” He set the bottle in
his hand on my counter, amidst the scatter of dried herbs, mortar and pestle,
bottles of oil, and stacks of gauze squares. I dusted crumbs of goldenseal off
my hands, picked it up, pulled the cork, and sniffed.
“I take it this is not the Jamie Fraser Special,” I said, coughing a little, and
put the cork back in. “It smells like paint remover.”
“I might be offended at that, Sassenach,” he said, smiling. “Save that I
didna make it.”
“Who did?”
“Mr. Patton. Husband of Mary Patton, who makes gunpowder in
Tennessee County.”
“Really?” I squinted at the bottle, which was squat and square. “Well, I
suppose one might need a dram at the end of the day, if you’ve spent said day
grinding powder that might blow you to kingdom come at any moment. I do
hope nobody there is drinking it to steady their nerves 
before
 going to work.”
“The man doesna drink whisky himself,” Jamie informed me, setting the
other bottles on the table. “Only beer. Which accounts for the taste of it, I
suppose. He’s selling it to the folk who come for his wife’s powder. Or so he
says.”
I glanced at him.
“You think he’s selling it to the Indians?” The Powder Branch of the
Wautauga River, where the Patton powder mill was located, was very near
the Cherokee Treaty Line. Jamie lifted one shoulder briefly.“If he isn’t now, he soon will be. Unless his wife stops him. She’s a good
bit wiser than he is—and most of the money is hers. She buys land with it.”
“Well, that does sound prudent.” I looked at the three bottles stood on my
surgery table. “Are those also from Mr. Patton’s still?”
“No,” he said, in a tone of mingled pride and regret. “These 
are
 the Jamie
Fraser Special—the last three bottles. There are two more small kegs in the
cave, and maybe one or two more back in the rocks—but that’s the end, until
I can brew again.”
“Oh, dear.” The malting shed had been destroyed by the gang that had
attacked the Ridge, and the thought of it made my stomach knot. The still
itself had been damaged, too, but Jamie had been putting it in order, in the
brief interstices of house building. “And then it still needs to be aged.”
“Ach, dinna fash,” he said, and picking up one of the Special bottles
uncorked it and poured a dram into one of my medicine cups, which he
handed me. “Enjoy it while ye can, Sassenach.”
I did, though my enjoyment of the dram was tempered by the knowledge
that whisky was our main source of income. Granted, he likely had more of
the lesser vintages—did whisky have a vintage? Possibly not …
Jamie interrupted these musings by reaching into his sporran, from whence
he withdrew a small wooden object.
“I almost forgot. Here’s the wee bawbee ye asked me for.”
It was a cylinder, roughly two inches in diameter, three inches long, and
tapered so that it was wider at the top. It had been carefully sanded and
rubbed with oil, the sides glossy smooth, and the edges beveled and
smoothed as well.
“Oh, that’s lovely, Jamie—thank you!” He’d made it from a piece of rock
maple, and the grain swirled beautifully around the curve of the wood.
“Aye, nay bother, Sassenach,” he said, clearly pleased that I admired it.
“What is it meant for, though? Ye didna tell me. Is it a toy for Amanda, or a
teether for Rachel’s bairn?”
“Ah. No. It’s—” I stopped abruptly. I’d turned the object over in my hand
and saw that he had—as he usually did with things he made—scratched his
initials, 
JF,
 into the bottom of the piece.
“What’s wrong, 
a nighean
?” He came to look, and taking my hand in his,
turned it over so the peg lay exposed in my palm.
“Er … nothing. It’s just … Um. Well.” I could feel my ears getting warm.
“It’s a, uh, present for Auld Mam.”“Aye?” he looked at it, baffled.
“Do you happen to remember Roger telling me he’d been visiting up there
and talked to her and she told him that when she, er, visited the privy, her …
womb … fell out into her hand?”
He looked up at me, startled. Then his eyes returned to the thing in my
hand.
“It’s, um, called a pessary. If you insert it into the—”
“Stop right there, Sassenach.” He took a deep breath and blew it out
slowly, lips pursed.
“It’s really beautiful,” I assured him. “And it will be perfect. It’s just—I
thought—maybe having your mark on it would make her feel … self-
conscious?” It had also occurred to me that Auld Mam, being Not Quite
Right in the Head, might, conversely, feel special, singled out by Himself.
Which was well and good, but might easily lead to her removing the pessary
in company to show it off.
He gave me a look, reached out, and delicately tweezed the pessary from
my palm with two fingers.
“Not nearly as self-conscious as it would make 
me,
 Sassenach, I tell ye. I’ll
sand it off.”83
The Forefeather of a Great Horned Owl
Royal Colony of New York
Early October 1779
RACHEL’S FINGERS TREMBLED, TYING the knot of Oggy’s clout, and
the end slipped out of her left hand, the clout came apart, and Oggy’s small
penis, exposed to cold air, instantly stiffened and sent a jet of steaming urine
a good three feet in the air, narrowly missing her face.
Ian, sitting on the bed half dressed beside his son, laughed like a loon.
Rachel gave him a look of annoyance, and he stopped laughing, though the
grin stayed on his face as he took the damp cleaning rag from her hand. He
slid down onto the floor and began mopping up, saying something to Oggy in
Mohawk. The words seemed to burrow under her skin, itching.
He’d been talking to Oggy in Mohawk more and more as they crossed into
New York, drawing ever nearer to Canajoharie. Not that she blamed him.
Patience and Prudence were enchanted by the sound of the language and
could now say a number of useful things, including “Don’t kill me,” “Give
me food,” “No, I don’t want to lie with you,” and “I belong to Wolf’s
Brother, of the Wolf clan of the Kahnyen’kehaka, and he will castrate you if
you molest me.”
She could hear them solemnly practicing these remarks in the next room,
where Jenny was helping Silvia to get everyone dressed in what passed for
their best. For today, they would reach Canajoharie.
She felt as though she’d swallowed a half pint of musket balls, these
rolling heavily in her stomach. They had worried—well, she had—about
encountering roving soldiers, random battles, or the men war cuts loose from
society, but with the help of God, Ian’s skill at seeing things coming and
avoiding them, and—no doubt—sheer blind luck, they had crossed sevenhundred miles without meeting serious trouble. But today they would reach
Canajoharie—and, just possibly, meet Works With Her Hands. 
“She was
lovely. I met her by the water—a pool in the river, where the water spreads
out and there’s not even a ripple on the surface, but ye feel the spirit of the
river moving through it just the same.”
The musket balls dropped one by one into her entrails as she remembered
Ian’s words. 
“She was lovely …”
And
 she had three children, one of whom might be Ian’s.
She closed her eyes and said a brief, fierce prayer of apology, with a
request for quietness of mind and peace of spirit. She rested her hand on
Oggy’s wriggling body, saying it, and the peace of spirit came at once. 
He
was Ian’s son, without doubt, nor could she doubt Ian’s love for him—or for
her.
“Ifrinn!”
 Ian exclaimed. She felt a sudden hot wetness bloom against the
palm of her hand, and a dreadful stink filled the air. “We’ll never be away at
this rate, laddie!”
As he hastily wiped and reclouted Oggy and Rachel mopped up the
overflow, Ian turned suddenly, kissed her forehead, and smiled at her, his
eyes tender above his tattoos.
Thank you,
 she thought toward God, and smiled back at her husband.
“I told thee that Friends have no doctrines, did I not, Ian?”
“Aye, ye did.” He cocked his head, waiting, and she raised a brow at him
and handed him one of the wire fasteners Brianna called safety pins, with
which to secure the clout.
“That does not mean that we therefore approve of all manner of behavior,
merely because it’s the normal practice of others.”
“Mmphm. And, um, which normal behavior is it ye had in mind that ye
willna stand for?”
“I had in mind polygamy.”
He laughed, and her spirit bloomed afresh.
THEY REACHED CANAJOHARIE in the afternoon, and Ian found them
two rooms in a small, relatively clean inn and then sent a message, written in
Mohawk, to Joseph Brant, one of the most powerful military leaders of the
Mohawk—and a relative of Emily’s—introducing himself and askingaudience. Before nightfall, an answer had come back, in English: 
Come in the
afternoon and we will drink tea. I will be pleased to make your acquaintance.
“He’s well spoken,” Jenny observed, taking in not only the message but
the paper it was written upon, which was handsome—and secured with a wax
seal.
“Thayendanegea’s been to London, Mam,” Ian replied. “He probably
speaks English better than you do.”
“Aye, well, we’ll see about 
that,
” she said, but Patience and Prudence
giggled and began to sing, “Pussy cat, pussy cat, where have you been? I’ve
been to London to visit the Queen!”
“
Has
 he been to London to visit the Queen?” Patience asked, breaking off.
“Your mam can ask him for ye,” Ian replied, making Silvia go pink to the
ears.
Oggy would have to accompany them, as Rachel would burst if obliged to
do without him for too long, but Silvia assured Rachel that Prudence and
Patience could easily tend Chastity—and should anything untoward occur,
such as the inn suddenly taking fire or an intrusion by bears, they were fleet
of foot and could be trusted to take their sister along while making their
escape.
Both Silvia and Jenny had offered to stay behind—and so had Rachel—but
Ian was firm: they must all go with him.
“It wouldna be seemly for me to show myself alone, as though I have nay
family. Thayendanegea would think me a pauper.”
“Oh,” said Jenny, raising a brow in interest. “So that’s it, is it? If ye can
support a gaggle o’ women and children, that proves ye must have a wee bit
o’ coin put away in your mattress?”
“That’s it,” he agreed. “A bit of ground, at least. Wear your silver watch,
Mam, aye? And if ye wouldna mind wearing Rachel’s other cloak, Friend
Silvia?”
None of the women had bright clothes, Jenny being still in her widow’s
black, Silvia possessing only one dress without holes, and Rachel’s modest
traveling wardrobe sporting nothing more ornate than a fur lining in her best
cloak, Ian having insisted on it as a matter of survival rather than vanity. But
they were all clean and decent, the fabrics good wool—and Jenny’s bodice
was a heavy black silk, at least.
“And we havena got soil or animal leavings under our fingernails,” Jenny
pointed out. “And we’ve good caps, though a bit of lace wouldna comeamiss.”
Ian shook his head good-naturedly and put on three bracelets over the
sleeves of his jacket, two of silver and one of polished copper. He bent to
peer into the tiny shaving mirror the landlady had provided, in order to fix in
his hair the spectacular blue and red feathers John Quincy Myers had brought
him—from a “macaw,” Myers had said, though he was unable to describe
what such a bird might look like, having never seen aught of it himself save a
handful of feathers.
“Tell me again how to pronounce the gentleman’s name, will thee, Ian?”
Rachel said, nerves getting the better of her.
“T’ay’ENDan’egg-e-a,” Ian replied, squinting into the mirror, hands busy
behind his head. “But it doesna matter; his English name is Joseph Brant.”
“Brant,” Rachel repeated, and swallowed.
“And my—the woman we’ve come to see about—is
Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa,” he added, with apparent casualness. He grinned at
Rachel in the mirror. “Just so ye’ll ken when we’re talkin’ about her.”
Jenny sniffed and drew Rachel away to the outer room, to leave Ian space
for his toilette, the bedroom being small and cramped.
“I shouldna imagine we’ll be talkin’ 
to
 her,” she said to Rachel under her
breath as they emerged into the tiny parlor. “Or I’d be askin’ him how to say,
‘Clear off, ye brazen-faced trollop,’ in Mohawk. Though that’s maybe no just
polite …”
“Possibly not,” Rachel said, feeling her spirit lighten a little. “If you find
out, though, do tell me. Just in case.”
Jenny shot her a sideways look.
“And you a Friend,” she said in mock disapproval. “Though I suppose
having the light o’ Christ inside her doesna necessarily keep a woman from
bein’ a brazen-faced trollop …” She squeezed Rachel’s wrist with her free
hand. “Dinna fash, lassie. The lad loves ye. Surely ye ken that?”
“I haven’t any doubt,” she assured Jenny. And she didn’t—truly, she
didn’t. It was the children who troubled her. Emily’s children.
But this was Ian’s choice to make; it had to be. He came out of the
bedroom then, resplendent. He was outwardly grave, but she could almost
hear excitement humming in his blood. She had picked up her cloak but stood
holding it, looking at him.
“Perhaps I should stay with the children. Surely thee should go alone,
first?” she asked. “To—to—”“No,” he said, in a tone indicating that he didn’t mean to argue about it,
and swung Oggy up into his arms. “We’re invited to tea.”
TO HER EVERLASTING surprise, it 
was
 tea. A formal tea, in an elegant
parlor, in a house that could have been built by a moderately successful
Boston merchant. Joseph Brant was dressed rather like a merchant, too, in a
good blue suit—though he wore a wide silver bracelet that clasped the blue
broadcloth just above his elbow and had his hair plaited in a queue and tied
with a lace from which dangled two small—but bright—red feathers.
Rachel thought that no one would have mistaken him for anything but
what he was, no matter what his dress. He wasn’t a tall man, but had a broad-
shouldered presence and a wide, square-jawed face with a firm, fleshy mouth
and heavy black brows.
“I thank thee for thy kindness in receiving us,” she said, looking him in the
eye as she smiled. Friends neither bowed nor curtsied, but she gave him her
hand and he bowed low over it and rose with a look of interest on his face.
“You’re a Friend?” he said.
“I am,” she replied, and nodding toward Silvia, “as is my friend, Silvia
Hardman.”
“Be welcome,” he replied, bowing low to each lady in turn, and lower still
to Jenny. “Madam, I am honored.”
“Well, I’m no a Friend myself, sir,” she said. She eyed his feathers and
jewelry. “But I’m friendly.” 
For the moment,
 her face said plainly.
Brant smiled at that—a genuine smile that reached his eyes.
“I am relieved to hear that, madam. I think I shouldn’t care to have you for
an enemy.”
“No, you wouldna,” Ian assured him, straight-faced. “But by good fortune,
we all come in peace. My uncle sends ye a token of his friendship.”
Jamie and Ian between them had decided on the gift for Brant, and Ian had
had it made in Philadelphia: a handsome inkwell whose heavy crystal was
banded with silver, this stamped with the four triangles that symbolized air,
earth, fire, and water, and had upon the cap the two triangles lying atop each
other, pointing in different directions, that stood for “all that is.” With it was
a quill, also banded with silver, made from the forefeather of a great horned
owl, supplied by Jamie.Brant looked at the feather with interest, then at Ian. It was the first feather
of the wing, the barbs shorter at one side, so that the feather had a long
indented curve at the leading edge, while the barbs on the trailing edge were
serrated, like a comb. It was this that let an owl fly silently, with no hint of its
presence until it dropped suddenly out of the night to seize its prey. As a
present, such a feather might be taken as compliment—or warning. Owls
were a symbol of wisdom—but also might be harbingers of something dire or
dangerous.
A woman had appeared in the wide doorway behind Brant, smiling. She
was dark-haired and pretty, wearing a European dress in sprigged red calico,
with a white fichu secured with a gold brooch in the shape of a butterfly.
“My dear,” Brant said, bowing to her with an elegant assumption of
London manners, “may I present Okwaho, iahtahtehkonah, and his wife and
mother? And their companion,” he added, with another bow toward Silvia.
“My wife, Catherine,” he ended, with what seemed a rather casual flourish
toward the woman in red, who gave him a sharp look but resumed her smile
as she curtsied to the travelers.
She looked astonished when none of the women returned her salute, and
she glanced at her husband, as if to ask whether he took note of this rudeness.
“They’re Quakers,” he said, with a small shrug, and her shoulders relaxed.
And Jenny Murray wouldn’t curtsy to the King of England, let alone a man
she thinks is a Royalist assassin,
 Rachel thought, but kept her face pleasantly
blank.
Catherine looked dubiously at Jenny, who could look inscrutable when she
cared to, but wasn’t doing it at the moment. Mrs. Brant decided the younger
women might be more approachable and turned to them, beckoning them to
the table where tea was laid and bidding them to sit down.
“Are either of you by chance a peace-talker?” she asked, smiling as she
took her own seat.
“I doubt it,” Rachel said cautiously, and looked at Silvia, who shook her
head.
“I’m not,” she said, “but I have heard of them.” She turned to Rachel in
explanation. “Since Friends are known to be impartial and dedicated to peace,
some have been invited to conduct negotiations between … people in
conflict?” she ended, with a dubious look at Catherine Brant.
“Yes, that’s right.” Mrs. Brant poured the tea through a silver strainer with
flower-work around its rim, and a fragrant, half-familiar steam rose like aghost.
“Tea!” Rachel said, involuntarily, then blushed. Thayendanegea grinned at
her through the steam.
“It is,” he said, and raised one eyebrow. “Do I take it that you have not
encountered tea in some time?”
That was a delicately pointed question. Ian was ready for it, though; he’d
told Rachel that he meant to make no bones regarding politics, as there was
no knowing how much Thayendanegea knew about them already.
“We have not,” Ian said easily, taking a bun from the flowered china plate
offered him by a servant. “It makes my uncle sneeze.”
Brant’s eyes creased with humor.
“I have heard of your uncle,” he said. “‘Nine-Fingers,’ he’s called among
some of the Iroquois?”
Rachel hadn’t heard that one, but either Ian had or he hid his surprise.
“Aye. The 
Tsalagi
 call him ‘Bear-Killer.’”
“A man of many names,” Brant said, amused. “And General Washington
calls him friend, I believe.”
“He is a friend to liberty,” Ian said, with a shrug.
“It’s fine tea, to be sure,” Jenny said to Mrs. Brant, though she set her cup
down undrunk. “And a handsome house. Have ye lived here for some time?”
Rachel didn’t know whether the word “liberty” was a signal agreed upon
between mother and son, or merely the natural rhythm of a conversation that
must necessarily hover between politics and politesse, but Catherine Brant
answered Jenny’s question, and the women passed easily into talk about the
house, the furnishings, and then—by way of the china patterns—food, at
which point the conversation became truly cordial.
Despite a genuine interest in corn soup and frybread, Rachel kept an ear on
the men’s conversation, which ranged easily between English and Mohawk.
She caught a name now and then—she recognized Looks at the Moon’s
Mohawk name, and “Ounewaterika,” the name the Indians gave General Lee.
And then her ear caught the name she had been waiting for.
Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa.
She tried not to listen and forced herself not to look at Ian. She felt, rather
than saw, Jenny’s sharp glance at him.
It didn’t last long, whatever was being said about the woman, for after a
little, Brant turned to her to ask after her brother, Denzell, whom he had metbriefly in Albany, and the eddies of the table’s conversation converged into a
smooth current.
Smooth enough, now that Works With Her Hands had been momentarily
dealt with, that Rachel could draw breath and consider the peculiarities of this
table and the man who owned it, who was chatting in the most amiable
fashion now with Silvia Hardman, about turkeys.
How could they be sitting here, engaged in the most ordinary sorts of
conversation, opposite a man of whom it was said that he had killed, and
ordered to be killed, numbers of people?
You not only sit down to dinner with Jamie Fraser, you love and respect
him,
 her inner light pointed out. 
Has he not done the same things?
Not to innocent people,
 she thought stubbornly. Though in fairness, she
knew well enough that anything might be said of a man, without its
necessarily being true.
And both of them have done what they’ve done because it’s war, I suppose
…
 Her inner light was skeptical, but retreated at a sudden shift in the talk.
Brant had said something to Ian in Mohawk, in a casual tone, but with a
sidelong glance at Rachel that made the hairs of her scalp prickle. Ian
deliberately turned to one side, so she couldn’t see his face, and said
something in the same language that made Brant laugh.
She became aware that Jenny, beside her, was giving Brant a very narrow
look. And that Catherine Brant was watching them over the rim of her teacup,
one brow raised. Seeing that Rachel had noticed, she set down the cup and
leaned forward a little.
“He said that if Wolf’s Brother should find that he couldn’t keep two
wives, he should know that Works With Her Hands has eighty-five acres of
good bottomland in her own name—she 
is
 very good at farming. But Wolf’s
Brother should not fear for your future”—she smiled at Rachel—“because a
good peace-talker would be welcome at any hearth and Thayendanegea
would himself offer to keep you.”
Despite her best intentions, Rachel’s mouth fell open.
“Oh—not that way,” Catherine assured her. “He means he would maintain
you as a valued member of his household, not his bed.”
“Oh,” said Rachel, faintly.
Before she could think of a courteous rejection of either proposal, there
was a cold draft from the hall as the front door opened, and soft footsteps in
the hallway.Everyone turned to look, and Rachel saw an older Mohawk man, still
slender and upright, but with gray hair—this finely dressed with silver
buttons and a pair of passenger pigeon wings dangling from a strand of
braided blue thread—and a deeply weathered countenance, whose lines and
dark eyes showed a man of self-assurance and deep humor. He bowed to the
ladies, eyes creased with interest.
“Ah, there you are,” Joseph Brant said, sounding amused. “I should have
known you couldn’t keep away from such visitors.” He rose and bowed
likewise to the ladies. “Madame Murray, Madame Another Murray, and
Madame … Hardman? Really, how strange … May I present to you the
Sachem, my uncle.”
“Charmed, mesdames,” said the Sachem, whose accent hovered
somewhere between educated English and French. “And you will be
Okwaho, iahtahtehkonah, of course,” he added, with a cordial nod to Ian.
“Yes, thank you,” he added to the servant who was bringing in another chair
and another who bore serving plates, silver, and linen napkins. He sat down
between Rachel and Jenny, smiling from one to the other.
Rachel wondered whether the Sachem’s appearance had been calculated, to
entertain the women while Ian talked politics with Brant, but his conversation
would have graced any drawing room, and within moments, his end of the
table was enlivened by observations, compliments, and stories of all kinds.
Rachel was accustomed to watch people and listen to them, and was
impressed by the Sachem: he asked intelligent questions and paid attention to
the answers, but when pressed for his own particulars was sufficiently witty
and entertaining as to—almost—keep her from dwelling on the implications
of Brant’s remarks regarding multiple wives.
“D’ye have a name, sir?” Jenny asked. “Or were ye just born a sachem,
and that’s it?” Rachel gave her mother-in-law a quizzical look. She knew
very well that Jenny knew what a sachem was; Ian had spent the miles
between Philadelphia and Canajoharie in explanations and descriptions of the
Mohawk and their ways. She’d watched his face, alight with memory and
expectation, and had spent those same miles torn between pleasure in his
excitement and an unworthy wish that he wouldn’t look 
quite
 so delighted at
the notion of returning to these people—who were, she reminded herself
sternly, 
his
 people, after all …
“Oh, surely a person is entitled to more than one name,” the Sachem
replied, his eyes creasing in amusement. “You have more names thanMurray, I am certain—for after all, that one must have belonged to your
husband.”
Jenny looked taken aback, but then realized, as Rachel had, that the
Sachem was well enough acquainted with European custom as to have
recognized her by her dress as a widow. 
Either that,
 Rachel thought, amused,
or he’s a good guesser.
Her amusement vanished in the next instant when the Sachem took Jenny’s
hand in his and said, quite casually, “He 
is
 still with you—your husband. He
says to tell you that he walks upon two legs.”
Jenny’s mouth fell open and so did Rachel’s.
“Yes, I was born with it,” the Sachem said, smiling as he released Jenny’s
hand. “But the name of my manhood—should you prefer to use it—is
Okàrakarakh’kwa. It means ‘sun shining on snow,’” he added, his eyes
creasing again.
“Blessed Michael, defend us,” Jenny said under her breath in Gaelic.
“Aye,” she said in a louder voice, and drawing herself up straight, managed
the ghost of a gracious smile. “Sachem will do fine for now. My name’s Janet
Flora Arabella Fraser Murray. Ye can call me Mrs. Janet, if ye like.”84
Fried Sardines and Strong Mustard
IF THE SACHEM KNEW anything else of an unsettling nature, he kept it to
himself, instead telling them—in answer to their questions—that he had gone
with his nephew to London, as companion and adviser, hence his familiarity
with English and his fondness for tea and fried sardines with strong mustard.
It was a long and elaborate meal, and by the time they had reached the 
corn
pudding with dried strawberries, Rachel’s breasts were beginning to tingle,
pushing at her stays with increasing urgency. Now that Oggy could eat a little
solid food, he nursed less often, and this sense of being about to burst hadn’t
happened in some time.
She pushed the thought aside; think of Oggy for one minute more, and her
milk would let down. She’d folded pads of cloth inside her stays as a
precaution, but they wouldn’t withstand the gush for long. She caught
Catherine’s eye and made a brief, questioning look with a nod of the head
toward the door.
Catherine stood at once and, touching her husband’s shoulder with brief
affection, beckoned Rachel with a nod to follow her.
“Oggy—my babe,” Rachel said, in the hallway. “Where is he just now?”
She had been induced to let a young Mohawk girl mind Oggy while they had
tea, but had no idea where the girl might have taken him.
“Oh,” said Catherine, with a little frown. “I saw Bridget take him outside a
little while ago. Don’t worry,” she added kindly, seeing Rachel’s face. “He’s
well wrapped up, and I’m sure they’ll come back soon.”
“Soon”
 wasn’t going to be soon enough; Rachel’s breasts were beginning
to leak at just the thought of Oggy.
“In that case,” she said, trying to preserve her dignity, “may I trouble you
to show me to the necessary?”The necessary was outside, a well-tended brick structure, and Catherine
left Rachel there with a smile. Rachel thanked her and hastily moved behind
the privy. Privacy was necessary, but she didn’t mean to express her milk into
a cesspit.
She managed the stays barely in time. One thought of her son, heavy and
boneless in his absorption, the sudden hard pull of his suckling, and milk
jetted from both breasts, spattering among the tattered red creepers that grew
up the wall of the privy. She closed her eyes, sighing in relief, then opened
them almost at once, hearing the creak of the privy door on the other side of
the building, then footsteps on the path.
She had barely time to clutch her cloths to her exposed breasts before a
man came round the corner of the necessary, stopping dead when he saw her.
“Wehhh!”
 he said, goggling at her. He was a white man, though very
much tanned by the sun, like Ian. He had no tattoos, but wore clothes that
were a combination of Indian and European dress, like Joseph Brant, though
his garments were of a much lesser quality. He limped badly, she saw, and
walked with a stick.
“If thee doesn’t mind, Friend, I would be grateful for a moment’s privacy,”
she said, with what dignity was possible.
“What?” He jerked his eyes from her breasts and looked her in the face.
“Oh. Oh, certainly. My pardon. Er … madam.” He backed slowly away,
though he seemed unable to remove his eyes from her chest.
He turned hastily at the corner of the necessary and almost immediately
collided with someone coming rapidly the other way. Rachel heard the
impact, a feminine outcry, another Mohawk execration from the man, and
then …
“Gabriel!” Silvia Hardman’s voice said in astonishment.
“Silvia!”
Rachel stood frozen, warm milk dribbling over her fingers.
Both voices together said, in tones of accusation, “What is 
thee
 doing
here?”
“Lord, have mercy,” Rachel said, under her breath, and took two steps to
the corner of the necessary, peering cautiously round it.
“I—I—” GABRIEL’S FACE was pale with shock, but Rachel could see that
he bore the signs of work, long months of exposure to the sun, and the marksof starvation, not that long in the past. “I— Silvia? It is thee? Really thee?”
Silvia’s shoulders were shaking under her gray cloak. She lifted a
trembling hand to her face, as though wondering whether it really 
was
 her.
“It … is,” she said, sounding doubtful, but the hand dropped, and she took
a few steps toward her husband and stopped, staring at him. Her head tilted as
she looked down, and Rachel saw that in addition to the stick he had dropped,
he had a crutch tucked under one arm, and the leg and foot on that side were
oddly twisted.
“What happened to thee?” Silvia whispered, and her hand went out toward
him. He made a small, convulsive movement as though to take her hand, but
then drew back.
“I—was taken. By Shawnee. They brought me north; one night I escaped.
That made them angry, and they—chopped my foot in half.” He swallowed.
“With an ax.”
“Oh, Christ Jesus, have mercy!”
“He did,” Gabriel said, mustering a very small smile from somewhere.
“They didn’t kill me. I still had value as a slave. What—”
“Thee is a slave here?” Silvia was beginning to get a grip on her emotions;
her voice held indignation as well as shock.
Gabriel shook his head, though.
“No. The Lord did protect me; the Shawnee sold me to a band of Mohawk
who had with them a Jesuit priest—they were escorting him to a mission in
Canada. He spoke only French, and I had little enough of that, but he bound
and poulticed my wound and I showed him that I could write and figure, and
he persuaded my captors that I would be worth more to a man of property
than working someone’s fields.”
“Mr. Brant?” Silvia sounded utterly horrified, and Rachel was, too.
“Eventually.” Gabriel sounded suddenly tired, and the lines in his face
showed stark. “I am—not a slave here, though. I am … free.”
Free.
The word hung in the cold morning air, glistening and sharp as an icicle.
No one spoke for a moment, but the unspoken words were as clear to Rachel
as if they’d been shouted.
Then why did thee not come home? Or at least send word that thee was not
dead?
“Have—has thee been well, Silvia?” Gabriel stood still, leaning on his
crutch. He wore no wig and the cold wind lifted his fine, thinning hair so itshimmered for a moment, like a fleeting halo.
Silvia laughed at that, a high, half-hysterical titter.
“No,” she said, stopping abruptly. “No, I have not. I had no money and
little help. But I have kept my girls fed, as best I could.”
“The girls. Pru and Patience, they’re with you? Here?” The excitement in
his voice was unfeigned, and Rachel’s shoulders relaxed a bit. Perhaps he had
been constrained from leaving, even though no longer a slave.
“Prudence, Patience, and little Chastity,” Silvia said, with a note in her
voice that dared him to ask. “Yes, they are with me.”
He froze for a moment, looking closely at her face. Even from the back,
Rachel could easily envision what Silvia’s expression must be: shame,
defiance, hope … and fear.
“Chastity,” he repeated, slowly. “When was she born?”
“February the fourth, in ’78,” Silvia replied clearly, defiance uppermost,
and Gabriel’s face hardened.
“I take it thee married again,” he said. “Is thy … husband … with thee?”
“I did not marry,” she said through her teeth.
He looked shocked. “But—but—”
“As I told thee. I kept my children fed.”
Rachel felt that she really must not be witness to such painful intimacies
between the Hardmans. But a dried honeysuckle vine had attached itself to
her clothing and her feet were sunk in the remains of dead tomato plants; the
wind had died suddenly and there was no way she could move in the midst of
this ghastly silence without detection.
“I see,” Gabriel said at last. His voice was colorless, and he stood for
several moments, hands knotted before him, clearly making up his mind
about something. His face changed as he thought, and the emotions of anger,
pity, shame, and confusion smoothed into a hard surface of decision.
“I did marry,” he said quietly. “A Mohawk woman, the niece of the
Sachem. He is—”
“I know who he is.” Silvia’s voice sounded faint and far away.
Another long moment of silence, and Rachel heard the tiny clicking noise
as Gabriel licked his lips.
“The … Mohawk have a different notion of marriage,” he said.
“I would assume they do.” Silvia still sounded as though she were a
hundred miles away, taking part in this conversation by means of smoke
signals.“I could—I 
could
 … have two wives.” He didn’t look as though the
prospect of dual matrimony was a pleasant one.
“No, thee can’t,” Silvia said coldly. “Not if thee thinks I would be one of
them.”
“I shouldn’t think thee would judge me,” Gabriel said stiffly. “I have
uttered no word of reproach for—”
“The look on thy deceitful face is reproach enough!” The shock had worn
off, and Silvia’s voice cracked with fury. “How dare thee, Gabriel! How long
has thee been here, with every facility for writing and communication, and
thee sent no word? Had I been a respectable widow, and had thee not
separated us 
from Yearly Meeting and other Friends in Philadelphia—I
would
 have married again, deeply though I mourned thee.” Her voice broke
and she breathed audibly, trying to regain her control.
“But no one knew whether thee was dead, detained, or … or what! I
couldn’t marry. I was left with nothing … 
nothing …
 save that house. A roof
over our heads. The army took my goats and trampled my garden, and I sold
everything other than a bed and a table. And after that …”
“Chastity,” Gabriel said, in a nasty tone.
Silvia was upright as an oak sapling, fists clenched at her sides and
trembling with rage. When she spoke, though, her voice was calm and
ringing.
“I divorce thee,” she said. “I married thee in good faith, I loved and
comforted thee, I gave thee children. And thee has abandoned me, thee has
treated me in bad faith and intend to continue doing so. There is no marriage
between us. I divorce and disown thee.”
Gabriel looked completely flabbergasted. Rachel understood that divorce
was 
possible
 between Friends but had never known anyone who had done it.
Had such a thing really just happened in front of her?
“You. Divorce 
me
?” For the first time, anger flushed his face. “If anyone
was to declare the union between us void—”
“
I
 did not deceive my spouse. 
I
 did not commit bigamy. But 
I
 will say that
our marriage is ended, and thee has no means by which to prevent me.”
Rachel had edged out of sight in reflex, a palm clutched over her mouth, as
though she might exclaim in protest at the scene before her. She was
preparing to steal away when Gabriel spoke again.
“Of course, I will keep Patience and Prudence,” he assured Silvia, and
Rachel froze. She felt obliged to peek cautiously round the building again, ifonly to be sure that Silvia’s silence did not mean she’d dropped dead from
shock or fury.
She hadn’t, though she had turned slightly, and it was plain from her
congested face that only inability to choose among the words flooding her
throat was keeping her from speaking.
“I missed them cruelly,” Gabriel said, and from the look on his face, he
probably meant it.
“Thee naturally didn’t miss Chastity,” Silvia said, her voice trembling—
with rage, Rachel was sure, though from the expression on Gabriel’s face, a
mingled look of pity and exasperation, she didn’t think 
he’d
 diagnosed his
wife’s mood correctly.
“I—do not condemn thee,” he said. “Whether it was … rape, or … or
choice, thee—”
“Oh, most assuredly choice,” Silvia hissed. “The choice between spreading
my legs or seeing my children starve! The choice 
thee
 left me with!”
Gabriel stiffened. “What—Whatever the cause of her birth, the child
cannot be condemned or held guilty,” he said. “She holds the light of Christ
within her, just as all men do, but—”
“But thee is unwilling to acknowledge Christ in her—or me, I suppose!”
Gabriel’s jaw clenched hard and he struggled for a moment, clearly
seeking to control his exigent emotions.
“Thee interrupted me just now,” he said evenly. “I said I will keep Patience
and Prudence with me. They will be happy, safe, and well cared for. But I
will give thee a sum of money with which to maintain yourself and the—
child.”
“Her name is Chastity,” Silvia said, just as evenly. “And thee knows why,
though 
she
 never will, God willing.” She took an audible breath and breathed
out a slow, dragon-like plume of white. “I shall most certainly keep her—and
her sisters as well. I will not speak ill of thee to them; they deserve to think
that their father loved them.” There was just the slightest emphasis on
“think.”
“Thee has no right to take them from me,” Gabriel said. He didn’t sound
angry now; only matter-of-fact. “Children belong to their father; it’s the law.”
“The law,” Silvia repeated, with contempt. “Whose law? Thine? The
King’s? The Congress’s?” For the first time, she looked about her, over the
spreading dark fields and the leafless trees, the houses in the distance, hazed
with smoke. “Did thee not tell me that the Mohawk have a different view ofmarriage? Well, then.” She set her gaze on him again, eyes hard as stone. “I
shall speak with thy master, and we will see.”
WITH THAT ULTIMATUM, Silvia turned and walked determinedly toward
the house. Gabriel Hardman pursued her, his crutch thumping in his anxiety
to catch her up, but if she heard his importunities at all, they had no effect.
Finding herself alone, Rachel shook herself violently, trying to dislodge
her memory of the last few minutes, so as to let her feelings settle in some
way. She went into the privy, and despite its dankly malodorous nature, she
dropped the latch and felt a welcome sense of privacy and quiet surround her.
The gentle workings of her own body eased her, too, with their quiet
reassurance. Her brother, Denny, had told her once that Jews—a race much
given to prayer—had special brief prayers to be recited on private occasions
such as this, thanking the Creator for the untroubled working of bladder and
bowels. That had made her laugh at first, but she thought now that there was
good sense in it.
The tingling of her slowly re-engorging breasts made her aware of other
workings, and she gave quick thanks for her child as she came out into the
biting air.
“And for wee Chastity and her sisters, too,” she added aloud, realizing
suddenly that the terrible scene she had just witnessed between the Hardmans
was certain to draw three innocent children into its vortex. “Lord, they don’t
even know about their father yet!”
She looked anxiously toward the house, but neither Silvia nor Silvia’s
erstwhile husband was in sight. The door opened, though, and her own
husband came out, his face lighting when he saw her.
“There ye are!” He lengthened his stride to reach her sooner and clasped
her in his arms. “I thought maybe ye’d met a snake in the privy, ye took so
long. Are ye all right?” he asked, looking at her face with sudden concern.
“Did ye eat something that disagreed wi’ ye?”
“Not the food,” she said. She wanted to cling to him, but her breasts were
so sensitive at the moment that she detached herself. “Ian—”
“The wee man’s roarin’ for ye,” he said, cocking his head toward the
house. 
He was; Rachel could hear Oggy bawling from where they stood, and
her breasts at once began to leak. She ran for the door, Ian on her heels.“See,” Ian said to Oggy as she snatched him up, “I told ye 
Mammaidh
wouldna let ye starve.” They were in the guest chamber Catherine had given
them when Brant had delivered Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa’s message, and Rachel
sank down on the bed, fumbling her stays loose with one hand. Oggy lunged
for her, seized the available nipple like a starving alligator, and the shrieks
abruptly stopped.
“The Sachem’s taken a fancy to my mother,” Ian said, in the sudden
silence. “He’s challenged her to a contest—pistols at ten paces.”
“A contest, or a duel?” Rachel inquired, closing her eyes in the bliss of
relief as her milk let down. The free breast was dripping, but she didn’t care.
“Either way, I’ve got five to one on Mam,” Ian said, laughing. “Her father
taught her to shoot, and Uncle Jamie and my da took her on the moors to hunt
rabbits and grouse when they were lads. She can hit a sixpence at ten paces,
so long as the pistol is true.”
“With whom is thy bet? Joseph Brant, or the Sachem?”
“Oh, Thayendanegea, to be sure. What’s amiss, lass?”
She opened her eyes to see his face a few inches from hers; she could feel
the heat of his body in the chilly room and nestled closer.
“I take it thee doesn’t know that Friend Silvia’s husband is here?”
Ian blinked.
“What—the man that’s supposed to be dead?”
“Unfortunately, he isn’t. But he 
is
 here. They met, just now, outside the
necessary.”
“Unfortunately,” he repeated slowly, and raised one eyebrow. “Why would
it be better for him to be dead?”
Rachel heaved a sigh that made Oggy grunt and latch on more ferociously.
“Ouch! I have no objection to the poor man going on living, it’s the ‘here’
that’s the problem.” She told him briefly what had happened.
“And what about Patience and Prudence?” she demanded, re-settling Oggy
on her lap. “From what you told me of thy first meeting with them, they’re
well aware of the straits in which their mother found herself and how she
dealt with their circumstances. They clearly love her and are loyal to her,
regardless. But now their father has come back, and they love him, too!”
“But they dinna ken yet—that he’s not dead and he 
is
 here?”
“They don’t.” Rachel closed her eyes and kissed Oggy’s small round head,
soft with its scurf of silky dark hair. “I have been thinking how we mightassist them and Friend Silvia, but I see no good way forward. Does thee have
any notions?”
“I don’t,” he said. He went and looked out of the window. “I dinna see
either of them. Not that I ken what the man looks like, but—”
“He limps badly and walks with crutches. The Shawnee who captured him
cut half his foot off with an ax.”
“Jesus. No wonder he didna go home, then.”
“Silvia said she would speak with his—her husband’s master—I suppose
she meant Joseph Brant. Perhaps they’re with him?”
Ian shook his head.
“Nay, they’re not. That’s what I came out to tell ye—Thayendanegea’s
gone. I’d told him right off why I’d come, and when we’d finished wi’ eating,
he said he’d go himself to Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa and arrange for me to see
her.” He lifted his chin toward the window, where the pale afternoon light
was coming in. “It’s eight miles, he said, but he’d be back for supper, if he
left straightaway.”
“Oh.” The news was a shock, only because she’d quite forgot the small
matter of Ian’s former wife. “That’s … very good of him.”
Ian lifted one shoulder.
“Aye, well, it’s manners to send word, if it’s a formal visit—and this is,”
he added, glancing at her. “But ye’re right, it’s good of him to go himself. I
dinna ken whether it’s respect for Uncle Jamie, or for Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa
—”
“He thinks highly of her, then.” Rachel tried to make that a statement and
not a question, but Ian was sensitive to tones of voice.
“She’s one of his people, his family,” he said simply. “She was with him in
Unadilla, the last time I saw her. Long before you and I were wed.” He
turned to the window again, shading his eyes against the light.
“Where d’ye think Silvia’s gone?”
No more than a moment’s thought supplied the answer.
“She’s gone to get her daughters,” Rachel said, with certainty. Ian stared at
her.
“Is she in any condition to ride?”
“Absolutely not.” Agitation made Rachel stiffen, and Oggy dug his fingers
into her breast in order to hold on. “Ow!”
“I’d best go find her then. Give Mrs. Brant my apologies about her
dinner.”85
A 
Moonlicht Flicht
IAN PAUSED TO PUT on his bearskin jacket—there was only a haze in the
sky, but it was the lavender color that foretold snow, and the air was chilling
fast—but didn’t bother to arm himself beyond the knife in his belt. Even if
Gabriel Hardman was a lapsed Quaker, he didn’t think a maimed man on
crutches would be a difficulty. He was glad that he hadn’t roached his hair for
this visit; if he had to ride to Canajoharie and back in the cold and snow, his
own pelt would serve him well enough.
He strode out of the house, heading for the barn where they’d left their
horses. Silvia wasn’t a good rider, and even if she’d managed to saddle and
bridle her horse alone, she wouldn’t have got far.
He’d heard the random bangs of pistol fire, but hadn’t paid attention. His
mother hailed him, though, and he saw that she and the Sachem had had 
their
contest: a grubby handkerchief was pinned to a huge, bare oak, perforated
with singed and blackened holes.
Jenny was flushed from the cold, and her cap had come off when she threw
back the hood of her cloak. She was groping behind her head in search of it,
and laughing at something the Sachem had said to her, and despite her silver-
gray hair, Ian, rather startled, thought she looked like a girl.
“Okwaho, iahtahtehkonah,” the Sachem said, seeing Ian. He smiled
broadly, looking at Jenny. “Your mother is deadly.”
“If ye mean with a pistol, I expect so,” Ian replied, slightly squint-eyed.
“She’s no bad wi’ a hatpin, either—should anyone give her cause.”
The Sachem laughed, and while Jenny didn’t, she sniffed in a way that
indicated amusement. She arched a brow at Ian, turned—and then turned
back, having seen something in his face.
“What’s happened?” she said, her own face changing in an instant.He told them, briefly. It occurred to him that the old Sachem was not only
Thayendanegea’s uncle but plainly had influence with him.
The Sachem didn’t interrupt or ask questions, and preserved an attitude of
respectful attention, but Ian thought he found the account entertaining. As he
brought the story to an end, though, it occurred to him also that the Sachem
very likely knew Gabriel Hardman well and might feel loyalty toward him.
His mother had been thoughtfully cleaning her pistol while he spoke,
ramming a cloth down the barrel with its tiny ramrod. Now she put the pistol
back in her belt, folded the stained cloth, and tucked it into the cartridge box.
“We had a wager, did we not?” she asked the Sachem. He rocked back a
little on his heels, a smile still lurking in the corners of his mouth.
“We did.”
“And ye admit that I won, I suppose. You bein’ an honest man?”
The smile grew plain.
“I cannot say otherwise. What forfeit do you demand?”
Jenny nodded in the direction of the house. “That you go with my friend
Silvia, to talk with Mr. Brant. And that you see justice done,” she added, in
the manner of an afterthought.
“You didn’t win by 
that
 much,” the Sachem said, with mild reproach. “But
since she’s your friend, clearly you will go with her wherever she goes. And
as you are also my friend—are you?” he interrupted himself, lifting one white
brow.
“If it’ll make ye go with her, aye,” Jenny said impatiently.
“I will go with 
you,
” the Sachem said, bowing. “Wherever you wish to
go.”
THIS EXCHANGE DISTURBED Ian, but he hadn’t time to do more than
give the Sachem a brief “trouble my mother and I’ll gut ye like a fish” look
on his way to the barn. His mother caught the look and appeared to think it
funny, though the Sachem kept a decently straight face.
Silvia was indeed in the barn, with the skewbald gelding named Henry that
she’d ridden from Philadelphia, leaning against his warm bulk, face buried 
in
her arms, as he calmly plucked mouthfuls of hay from a hanging net and
chewed with a comforting, slobbery sound. The horse’s saddle and bridle lay
on the ground at her feet.Silvia looked up at the sound of Ian’s footsteps. Her face was blotched
with weeping, her cap askew, and her limp brown hair uncoiled on one side
and hanging down beside her ear, but she bent at once to seize the bridle from
the ground at her feet.
“I was—was waiting—he was eating, I couldn’t bridle him while—” She
gestured helplessly at Henry’s tack and the slowly champing jaws.
“And where d’ye intend going?” Ian asked politely, though that was clear
enough. The question focused Silvia’s mind, though, and she drew herself
upright, eyes bleared but fierce.
“To get my girls and take them away. Will thee help me?”
“And go where, lass?” Ian reached for the bridle, but she clung to it,
desperate.
“Away!” she said. “It doesn’t matter, I’ll find a place!”
“Rachel said ye thought of taking the matter to Thayendanegea.”
“I did, yes. I was trying to decide,” she said, placing a hand on the horse’s
neck. “Whether to wait for his return and ask for his judgment between me
and Gabriel—or ride to the inn, fetch the girls, and run.” She was breathing
like a runaway horse herself, and now stopped to mop her face and swallow.
“If I waited—Gabriel might get help to pursue us, and should he catch us … I
—I doubt I could prevent his taking the girls from me. And … what if Brant
should take Gabriel’s side?” A belated thought struck her.
“Do the Mohawk believe that children are the property of the father?”
“No,” Ian said calmly. “If a woman puts her husband out of her house, or
he leaves, her bairns stay with her.”
“Oh.” She sat down suddenly on the saddle and raised a trembling hand to
tuck back the dangling hair. “Oh. Then perhaps …?”
“Perhaps it’s no Thayendanegea’s business,” Ian said matter-of-factly.
“What goes on between a man and his wife is … what goes on between a
man and his wife, unless it’s causin’ a stramash that bothers other folk. I
mean, if ye shot your husband, that might cause a bit of a nuisance, but I
dinna suppose ye mean to do that, bein’ a Friend and all.”
“Oh,” she said again. She sat for a bit, staring at the hay-strewn ground
between her feet, and he let her sit.
“I should 
like
 to shoot Gabriel,” she said, and stared some more, her lips
pressed tight together. Then she shook her head and got unsteadily to her feet.
“But thee is right. I won’t.”
She drew a deep breath and reached for the bridle in his hand.“But I must have my girls with me now. Will thee help me to go and get
them?”
The light was fading fast and a wind with the cold breath of night came
into the barn and stirred the scattered bits of straw along the packed-dirt floor.
Ian merely nodded and bent to heave the saddle up.
“Go and fetch your cloak, lass. Ye’ll freeze, else.”
IT WAS LESS than an hour’s ride to the inn, but the sun had gone down,
swallowed in a sudden bank of cloud that rose up from the trees like black
bread rising. It began to snow.
Ian had put Silvia up before him, saying that she might become tangled in
the rope leading their second horse. So much was true. It was more true that
while she was no longer starved, she was still thin as an icicle and just as
brittle, and he felt an urgent need to shelter her.
The wind had dropped, thank God, but the snow fell thick and silent,
muting all sound and burdening the branches of the pines and fir trees. It was
a good road, but he still pushed Henry a little, lest it disappear under the
horse’s hooves. This wasn’t his country, and he didn’t want to go astray and
end up spending the night in the woods with Silvia.
“I met Gabriel in Philadelphia,” she said, unexpectedly. “My parents were
still alive then, and we belonged to the same meeting. They’d chosen
someone else for me—a blacksmith who owned his own forge. Older than I
by ten years, well established. A kind man,” she added after a pause. “With a
house and property. Gabriel was a clerk, my own age, and earned barely
enough to keep himself, let alone a wife.”
“Well, I was nay more than an Indian scout when I met Rachel,” Ian said,
watching Henry’s misty breath flow back over the horse’s neck as they rode.
“And a man of blood, forbye. I did own some land, though,” he added fairly.
“And thee had a family,” she said softly. “My parents both died within the
year—smallpox—and there was no one left but me; I had no brothers or
sisters. Gabriel had broken with his people when he became a Friend—he
wasn’t born to it, as I was.”
“So ye only had each other, then.”
“We did,” she said, and fell silent for a bit.
“And then we had the girls,” she said, so softly that he barely heard her.
“And we were happy.”THE SNOW HAD stopped by the time they reached the inn, though
everything in sight was lightly frosted, shining gold where lamplight fell
through windows, silver in the fitful streaks of moonlight breaking through
the clouds. Silvia let him lift her down from the horse, but when he made to
come in with her, she put a hand on his chest to stop him.
“I thank thee, Ian,” she said quietly. “I need to talk with my daughters
alone. Thee should go back to Rachel and thy son.”
He could see her thin, worn face in the changing light, one moment
smoothed with shadow, the next strained with anxiety.
“I’ll wait,” he said firmly.
She laughed, to his surprise. It was a small and weary laugh, but a real one.
“I promise I shall not seize the girls and ride off into a blizzard alone,” she
said. “I had peace to think while we rode, and to pray—and I thank thee for
that,
 too. But it became clear to me that I must let Patience and Prudence see
their father. I need to talk with them first, though, and explain what has
happened to him.” Her voice wavered a little on “happened,” and she cleared
her throat with a little 
hem.
“I’ll stay in the taproom, then.”
“No,” she said, just as firmly as he had. “I can smell the landlady’s supper
cooking; the girls and I will eat together and talk and sleep—and in the
morning, I will comb their hair and dress them in clean clothes and ask the
innkeeper to arrange for us to be taken back in a wagon. Thee need not worry
for me, Ian,” she added gently. “I shall not be alone.”
He studied her for a moment, but she meant it. He sighed and dug out his
purse.
“Ye’ll need money for the wagon.”86
Unwelcome Prophecy
IT WAS COLD, BUT the air of dawn was clear as broken glass and just as
sharp in the lungs. Ian was hunting with Thayendanegea this morning, and
they were following a glutton. Following, not hunting. Fresh snow had fallen
in the night—was still falling, though lightly for the moment—and the animal
was visible, a tiny black blot on gray snow at this distance, but moving in the
stolid, rolling fashion that spoke of long patience, rather than the graceful
diving lope of pursuit. The glutton, too, was following something.
“Ska’niònhsa,”
 Thayendanegea said, nodding at a patch of muddied snow,
in which the curve of a hoofprint showed.
“Wounded, then,” Ian replied, nodding in agreement. A glutton wouldn’t
take on a healthy moose—few things would—but it would follow a wounded
one for days, patiently waiting for weakness to bring the 
ska’niònhsa
 to its
knees. “He’d best hope the wolves don’t find it first.”
“Everything is chance,” Thayendanegea said philosophically, and brought
his rifle down from its sling. The rifle notwithstanding, Ian thought the
remark was not entirely philosophical. Ian tilted his head to and fro in
equivocation.
“My uncle is a gambler,” he said, though the Mohawk word he used didn’t
carry quite the same meaning as the English one. It meant something more
like “one who seizes boldly” or “one who is careless with his life,” depending
on the context. “He says one must take risks, but only a fool takes risks
without knowing what they are.”
Thayendanegea glanced at him, slightly amused. 
And that wee bit wary,
too,
 Ian thought.
“And how is one to know, then?”
“One asks and one listens.”
“And have you come to listen to me?”“I came to see Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa,” Ian said courteously, “but it would
be wasteful indeed to leave again without listening to a man of your
experience and wisdom, since you are good enough to talk with me.”
The chuckle that came in response to that was Joseph Brant, not
Thayendanegea, and so was the knowing look that came with it.
“And your uncle, of course, might be interested in what I have to say?”
“Maybe,” said Ian, equably. He was carrying his old musket; good enough
for anything they were likely to find. They were passing through a growth of
enormous spruce, and the snow was sparse beneath the prickly branches, the
thick layer of needles slippery underfoot. “He told me to judge whether I
should say to you what he knows.”
“I suppose you’ve decided to do so, then,” Brant said, the look of
amusement deepening. “What he 
knows
? He said this? Not what he thinks?”
Ian shrugged, eyes on the distant glutton.
“He knows.” He and Uncle Jamie had discussed it, and Uncle Jamie had
finally left it up to him to decide how to tell it. Whether to pass it off as
knowledge gained from Jamie’s time as an Indian agent and his connections
with both the British government and the Continental army—or tell the truth.
Brant was the only military commander to whom this particular truth 
could
be told—but that didn’t mean he’d believe it. He was still a Mohawk, though,
half-Irish wife and college education notwithstanding.
“My uncle’s wife,” Ian said, watching the words leave him in small puffs
of white mist. “She is an 
arennowa’nen,
 but she is more. She has walked with
a ghost of the Kahnyen’kehaka, and she has walked through time.”
Thayendanegea turned his head sharply as a hunting owl. Ian had nothing
to hide and was unmoved. After a moment, Thayendanegea nodded, though
the muscles of his shoulders did not relax.
“The war,” Ian said bluntly. “You have so far cast your lot with the British,
and for good reason. But we tell you now that the Americans will prevail.
You will, of course, decide what is best for your people in light of that
knowledge.”
The dark eyes blinked, and a cynical smile touched the corner of his
mouth. Ian didn’t press things, but walked on tranquilly. The snow squeaked
beneath their boots; it was getting colder.
Ian lifted this head to sniff the air; despite the clearness of the air, he felt a
sense of further snow, the faint vibration of a distant storm. But what he
caught on the breeze was the scent of blood.“There!” he said under his breath, gripping Thayendanegea’s sleeve.
The glutton had momentarily disappeared, but as they watched, they saw it
leap from rock to rock, like water flowing uphill, and come to rest on a high
point, from which it looked down, intent.
The men said nothing but broke into a swift jog, their breath streaming
white.
The moose had fallen to its knees in the shelter of a cluster of dark pines;
the strong scent of its blood mingled with the trees’ turpentine, eddying
around them. The wolves would be here soon.
Thayendanegea made a brief gesture to Ian, to go ahead. This wasn’t a
matter of bravery or skill, only speed. The animal had broken a hind leg—it
stuck out at a disturbing angle, the splintered white bone showing through the
hair, and the snow around it was splattered and speckled with blood.
Weakened as it was, it raised its chest free of the icy snow and menaced
them—a young male, in its first winter. Good. The meat would be fairly
tender.
Even young and weakened, it was still a full-grown moose, and very
dangerous. Ian dismissed any notion of cutting its throat and dispatched it
quickly with a musket shot between the eyes. The moose let out a strange,
hollow cry and swayed empty-eyed to one side before collapsing with a thud.
Thayendanegea nodded once, then turned and shouted into the emptiness
behind them. A few men had come out with them, ranging out to hunt and
leaving them alone to talk, but they would still likely be in earshot. They
needed to butcher the carcass before the wolves showed up.
“Go find them,” Thayendanegea said briefly to Ian, drawing his knife. “I’ll
cut the throat and keep the glutton off.” He lifted his chin, indicating the high
rock where the wolverine kept a beady-eyed watch.
As Ian turned to go, he heard Thayendanegea say, almost offhandedly,
“You’ll tell this to the Sachem.”
So he was taking it seriously, at least. Ian was grimly pleased at that, but
not hopeful.
Before he had run a hundred yards, he heard the crunch of a riding
animal’s hooves, and rounding a bend in the trail found himself face-to-face
with what had to be Gabriel Hardman, riding a big, rawboned mule with a
mutinous eye. Ian took a step backward, out of biting range.
“I killed a moose,” Ian said briefly, and jerked his thumb behind. “Go help
him.” Hardman nodded, hesitated for a moment as though wanting to saysomething, but swallowed it and snapped the reins against the mule’s neck.
THE MEN WENT back together, laden with meat and exhilarated with cold
and blood. It was midmorning when they returned to the house, and Rachel
was looking out for them, peering out of the front window. She waved and
disappeared.
Ian saw Hardman come out of the barn, where the man had helped finish
the butchering.
“May I ask,” Hardman said, giving Ian a direct look, “how it came to be
that you were traveling with my—with Silvia and the … girls? I take it that
you were not aware I was here, as plainly Silvia wasn’t.”
“No. I came to visit the woman who was once my wife,” Ian replied. No
point in being secretive; the whole of Canajoharie would know about it by
this afternoon, if they didn’t already. “I had word that she and her children
were in Osequa when the attack there happened, and that her husband had
been killed—but none of my friends kent anything of her condition. So I
thought I would come and see.”
“Indeed.” Gabriel Hardman glanced at him, one eyebrow raised.
“I have a new wife,” Ian said equably, in reply to the eyebrow. “She’s with
me, and so is our son.”
“So I understand,” Hardman said. “I hear that she is a Friend?”
“She is, and she’s told me that Friends dinna hold wi’ polygamy,” Ian said.
“I didna have that in mind, but if I had, I wouldna have brought her with me.”
Hardman gave him a sharp look and a short laugh.
“Silvia told you, then. Why is she with you? Why did you bring her here?”
Ian stopped and gave Hardman a look of his own.
“She did a great service for my uncle, who sent me to see after her welfare.
If ye want to hear the state in which I found her and her daughters, I’ll tell ye,
man, and it would serve ye right if I did.”
Hardman reared back as though he’d been punched in the chest.
“I—I couldn’t—I 
couldn’t
 go back to Philadelphia,” he said, furious. “I
was a prisoner—a slave!”
Ian didn’t reply to that, but looked deliberately around him—at the house,
the woods, and the open road.
“I’ll leave ye here. Go with God,” he said, and walked away.87
In Which Rachel Paints Her Face
BRANT HAD SEEN WORKS With Her Hands the evening before, and told
Ian that she would welcome his visit today, in the afternoon.
“Ye’re goin’ with me,” Ian had said firmly to Rachel. “You and the wee
man both. I’ve come to see to her welfare, not to court her; it’s right for my
family to be with me. Besides,” he added, breaking into a sudden smile, “I
dinna want ye back here by yourself, takin’ potshots wi’ the Sachem and
imagining it’s me tied to the tree.”
“And why should I do that?” she asked, hiding her own smile. “What is
there about thee visiting thy former wife by thyself that should give me a
moment’s uneasiness?”
“Nothin’,” he said, and kissed her lightly. “That’s my point.”
She was happy that he wanted her to go, and in fact she felt no uneasiness
whatever about meeting this woman who had shared her husband’s bed and
body—and a good bit of his soul, too, from the little he’d told her of his dead
children.
Ha,
 she thought. 
So I am to walk up to this woman, carrying Ian’s large,
healthy, beautiful son. Plainly he wants her to see that—and I am ashamed to
admit that I want that, too, but I do. It is
 not 
right that she should see my
inner 
feelings, though. I am not come to triumph over her—nor cause her to
doubt her wisdom in dismissing Ian.
Consideration of what she should wear for this occasion wasn’t vanity, she
assured herself. It was a desire to look … appropriate.
She had only two dresses; it would have to be the indigo. Beyond that …
Catherine had taken her to the Sachem, who had listened carefully to her
request and looked at her with the sort of keen interest she’d seen on Claire
Fraser’s face—and Denny’s, for that matter—when presented with some
medical phenomenon like a teratoma, a hollow tumor filled with teeth or hair.But the Sachem had nodded, and with great care had shown her how to make
the paint from white clay and a handful of dark dried berries, soaked in what
was likely deer urine from the smell, then ground into a blue paste and mixed
with some of the white clay.
Catherine had watched the process, and when the pigments were prepared
and approved by the Sachem, she had taken Rachel to her boudoir so that she
might use the looking glass there to apply them neatly with a rabbit’s-foot
brush.
Rachel had combed and tied her hair carefully back, then painted only the
upper part of her face, from her hairline to just below the eyes, a solid white,
and below that—after some thought—a narrow band of blue that crossed the
bridge of her nose. Ian had told her some months ago—and Catherine Brant,
though somewhat amused at her intent, had confirmed it—that to paint your
face white in that manner meant that you came in peace, and that blue was for
wisdom and confidence.
Rachel had wanted to ask Catherine whether she thought this course a wise
one, but didn’t. She knew quite well it wasn’t, but the blue band was meant
as an exhortation to those who saw it, as well as she who wore it.
“It 
is
 done?” Rachel asked; she’d asked before, and asked now only to hear
reassurance. “Women do paint their faces, as well as men?”
“Oh, yes,” Catherine assured her. “Not war paint, of course, but to
celebrate an occasion—a marriage, the visit of a chief, the Strawberry
Festival …”
“An occasion,” Rachel said, with certainty. “Yes, it is.”
“Remarkable,” Catherine said happily, gazing over Rachel’s shoulder at
her completed reflection in the mirror. “With those dark brows and lashes,
your eyes are … startling. In a good way, to be sure,” she added hastily,
patting Rachel’s shoulder.
WAKYO’TEYEHSNONHSA HAD A modest but good farmhouse on her
land—and, like Thayendanegea, had a longhouse behind it, standing at the
edge of the forest, so the wood and the hides and the leather thongs that
bound it together seemed to melt into the trees.
Like a large animal lying in wait,
 Rachel thought.
She had met them in the yard before the farmhouse, invited them in, and
offered them milk and whisky, with little sweet biscuits. Admired Oggy withwhat seemed great sincerity, and though she had blinked at sight of Rachel’s
paint, treated her with a delicate respect, though never quite meeting her eyes.
She 
was
 lovely. Dressed in the Mohawk fashion of shirt and trousers of
soft deerskin, decorated with a dozen small silver rings, small and still lithe,
despite having birthed three living children and Yeksa’a, Ian’s stillborn
daughter. Rachel thought they were much of an age, though Works With Her
Hands bore the marks of weather and of sorrow in her face. Her eyes were
still warm, though, and lively, and she met Ian’s glance often and fully.
The children had come in briefly, brought by an older woman who smiled
at Ian. The two youngest, girls of maybe four and two, were lovely, with their
mother’s soft dark eyes and solid, handsome faces that perhaps resembled
their late father’s. Rachel refrained from looking too closely at the eldest boy
—perhaps seven or eight—and successfully fought the temptation to look
from the boy’s face to Ian’s.
He resembled his siblings, but didn’t look as much like them as they
looked like each other, she thought. His face was lively, but charming rather
than beautiful, and his eyes didn’t look like his mother’s. Dark, but with a
glint of hazel that the others didn’t have. He was tall for his age, but thin.
“This is my eldest son,” Emily said, introducing the children with a smile
of pride. “We call him Tòtis.” Tòtis looked curiously at the visitors, but
seemed mostly interested in Oggy and asked his name, in English.
“He hasn’t yet got a real name,” Ian said, smiling down at the boy. “We
called him for the governor of Georgia, a man named Oglethorpe, until his
proper name should come.”
The children were taken away, and they made conversation over the food.
After they had eaten, Works With Her Hands said she must go to the
longhouse for a few moments—and invited Ian to come, saying that perhaps
it had been a long time since he had been in such a place. She said nothing
about Rachel, leaving it to her whether to come, too, but Rachel nodded
politely and said she would feed Oggy and then perhaps follow them.
“I confess to curiosity,” she said, smiling directly at Works With Her
Hands. “I should like to see the sort of place that my husband called home for
so long a time.”
She had a very good idea as to Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa’s motive in inviting
Ian to attend her in the longhouse. This was the setting in which Ian had first
become attracted to her, the sort of place they had lived in together. The
thought made her heart beat faster.For the first time, she wondered whether Ian had desired her to come with
him as a form of protection.
“God knows,” she said to Oggy, undoing her laces. “But we’ll do our best,
won’t we?”
IAN COULD SMELL it long before she pulled back the bearskin that hung
over the door of the longhouse. Smoke and sweat, a trace of piss and shit. But
mostly the smell of fire and food, meat and roasted corn and squash, the tang
of beer—and the smell of furs. He had done his best to forget the touch of
cold winter on his skin and the smell of her smooth musky warmth in the
furs. He shoved the memory aside now, with the ease of long habit, 
and
stepped inside. But the heavy air touched him and followed him into the dark
like a hand laid lightly on his back.
It was a small house, only two fires. Two women sat by one of them,
tending a couple of pots, while three small children played in the shadows
and a baby’s squeal was cut short by its mother putting it to her breast.
The squeal raised the hairs on his neck in reflex. Another memory, and one
he 
had
 forgotten: Emily’s silent tears in the darkness, after the loss of each of
their bairns, when she heard the mewling of new babes in the longhouse at
night. But Oggy was older and louder. Much louder. Strong, and the thought
comforted him.
She led him to her sleeping compartment and sat down on the shelf,
gesturing him to sit beside her, against the dark soft mass of the rolled-up
furs.
They were far enough from the women outside as not to be overheard
unless they shouted, and he didn’t think it would come to that. The glow from
the fires was enough, though, to see her face. It was beautiful; still young, but
serious, and shadowed with something that he couldn’t name. It made him
uneasy, though.
She looked at him for a long moment, unspeaking.
“Do you not know this person anymore?” he said quietly in Mohawk. “Is
this person a stranger to you?”
“Yes,” she said, but with the trace of a smile. “But a stranger I think I
know. Do you think you know 
this
 person?” Her hand touched her breast,
pale and graceful as a moth in the semi-dark.“Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa,” he whispered, taking the hand between his own.
“I would always know the work of your hands.” It was rude to ask someone
directly what they were thinking, save when it was men planning war or
hunting, and he laid her hand back on her knee and waited, patient, while she
gathered either her thoughts or her courage.
“What it is, Okwaho, iahtahtehkonah,” she said at last, using his formal
name and giving him a direct look, “is that this person will marry John
Whitewater. In the spring.” Well, so. Clearly she had taken Whitewater to her
bed already; a man’s stink was noticeable in the furs behind him. It gave him
an absurd pang of jealousy—followed by guilt at the thought of Rachel—and
he wondered for an instant why it should be worse that now he kent the
man’s name?
“This person wishes you happiness and good health,” he said. It was a
formal statement, but he meant it and let that show. She drew breath, relaxed
a little, and suddenly smiled back at him—a real smile, which held
acknowledgment of what had been true between them and regret for what
could be true no longer.
She put out her hand, impulsively, and he took it, kissed it—and gave it
back.
“What it is,” she repeated, her smile lapsing into seriousness, “is that John
Whitewater is a good man, but he dreams of my son.”
“Of Tòtis? What does he dream?” It was plain that the dreams were not
good ones.
“He has dreamed that when the moon begins to wax, he sees a boy
standing there”—she lifted her chin to point to the entrance of her sleeping
compartment—“against the moonlight that comes from the smoke hole, and
the boy’s face is not seen, but clearly it is Tòtis. Waiting. He dreams that the
child comes, night by night, the light growing stronger behind him and the
child growing bigger. And John Whitewater knows that when the moon is
full, a man who is my son will come in to kill him.”
“Well, that’s not a good dream, no,” Ian said, in English. “Ye havena had
this dream yourself?”
Emily grimaced and shook her head, and the live thing quivering in Ian’s
backbone settled. He didn’t ask whether she believed that Whitewater had in
fact dreamed this; that was clear. But if she had been dreaming the same
thing, that would be very serious. Not that it wasn’t anyway.“I have not shared his dream,” she said, so low that he barely heard her.
“But when he told me … The next night I, too, had a dream. I dreamed that
he killed Tòtis. He broke my son’s neck, like a rabbit.”
The live thing leapt straight up into Ian’s throat, and a good thing, too, as it
stopped him speaking.
“This dream has come twice, and this person has prayed,” she said softly,
going back to the Kahnyen’kehaka.
“This person prayed,” she repeated, looking up into his face, “and you are
here.”
He was mildly surprised that he wasn’t shocked. Swiftest of Lizards had
told him that old Tewaktenyonh had told 
him
 that he was the son of Ian’s
spirit. Clearly she would have told Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa the same thing—or
Emily had told the old woman.
“I thought perhaps I would have to send my son to my sister, in Albany,”
she said. “But she has no husband now, and three children to feed. And I
worry,” she said simply. “Things are very dangerous. Thayendanegea says
that the war will soon be over, but his wife’s eyes say he does not believe it.”
“His wife is right.” Both of them were whispering now, though he could
hear the murmur of the women talking at the end of the house. “My uncle’s
wife is a …” There were words for magic, and foretelling, as he had used
with Thayendanegea, but none of them seemed quite right now. “She sees
what will happen. That’s why I came; I met Looks at the Moon and Hunting
like a Glutton in the place where I live, and they told me of the massacre at
Osequa, and your husband’s death. They didn’t know whether you were still
with Thayendanegea’s people, nor how you and your children fared. And so I
came to see,” he ended simply.
He didn’t realize that she’d been holding her breath, until she let it out in a
long, deep sigh that touched his face.
“Thank you,” she said. “Now that you know—you will take Tòtis?”
“I will.” He said it without hesitation, even as he wondered how on earth
he’d tell Rachel about this.
Emily’s relief touched him, and so did she, clasping his hand hard against
her breast.
“If your wife will not have him at her fire,” she said, a note of anxiety
creeping into her voice once more, “I am sure you will find a woman who
will care for him?” That was done sometimes; if a man’s wife died and he
married someone 
who didn’t get along with his children, he’d go to and froand look until he found a woman who would either be his second wife or, if
she was married, would care for his children in return for his providing her
with meat and skins.
“Perhaps your mother?” Emily said, hope mingling with doubt in her
voice.
“Neither my wife nor my mother would see any bairn starve,” he assured
her, though his imagination was unequal to envisioning what either one was
going to say. He squeezed her hand gently and let go. He already knew that
he couldn’t explain Emily to Rachel; now he realized that he could never
explain Rachel to Emily, either, and smiled wryly to himself.
“My wife is a Friend, ken? And she paints her face with wisdom.”
“I am a little bit afraid of her,” Emily said honestly. “Will you go and tell
her—ask her—now?”
“Come with me,” he said, and stood up. It wasn’t until they had come out
into the pale light of snow and fog that something occurred to him, and he
turned to her.
“Ye said ye prayed, Emily,” he said, and she blinked at the sound of his
name for her. “Who were ye praying to?” He asked it out of curiosity; some
Mohawk were Christians, and might pray to Jesus or His mother, but she had
never been a Christian, when he knew her.
“Everybody,” she said simply. “I hoped someone would hear.”
IAN SAW RACHEL walking toward the longhouse with Oggy when they
pushed back the hide over the door, and Emily went out to her at once,
inviting her in.
Rachel stopped for a moment, blinking into the darkness; then her eyes
found Ian and she saw what she wanted in his face, for she smiled. The smile
lessened, but still lingered, when she turned to Emily. It vanished when Ian
told her about Tòtis, but only for an instant. He saw her swallow and
imagined her reaching for her inner light.
“Yes, of course,” she said to Emily, and turned to the boy, warmth in her
eyes. “He will always be your son, but I’m honored that he will be mine, too.
I’ll certainly feed him at my hearth—all he wants, ever.” Ian hadn’t realized
that his wame was clenched tight, until it relaxed and he drew a very deep
breath. Tòtis had been eyeing Rachel with curiosity, but no fear. He glancedat his mother, who nodded, and he went to Rachel and, taking her hand,
kissed her palm.
“Oh,” Rachel said softly, and caressed his head.
“Tòtis,” Emily said, and the boy turned and went to her. She hugged him
close and kissed his head, and Ian saw the shine of the tears she wouldn’t
shed until her son was truly gone. “Give it to him now,” she whispered in
Mohawk, and lifted her chin toward Ian.
He’d been much too intent on their conversation to notice much about the
furnishings, beyond the sleeping furs and their memories, but when Tòtis
nodded and ran toward a large, lidded basket that stood in the corner of the
compartment, half hidden under the ledge, he had a sudden notion what it
held.
“Wake up!” Tòtis said, pushing the lid off and leaning into the basket. A
soft thumping came from the depths, and the long creaking noise of a yawn.
And then Tòtis stood up with a large, gray, furry puppy in his arms and a grin
on his face, missing two teeth.
“One of the many grandsons of your wolf, Okwaho, iahtahtehkonah,”
Emily said, with a smile to match her son’s. “We thought you should have
someone to follow you again. Go ahead,” she encouraged Tòtis. “Give it to
him.”
Tòtis looked up at Ian, still grinning. But as he came near, he turned, and
holding the puppy up to Oggy said, “He is yours, my brother.” He’d spoken
in Mohawk, but Oggy understood the gesture, if not the words, and squealed
with joy, bending half out of Rachel’s arms in his urge to touch the dog. Ian
grabbed him and sat down on the floor with him, and Tòtis let the wriggling
puppy go. It leapt on Oggy and began kneading him with its paws, licking his
face and wagging its tail, all at the same time. Oggy didn’t cry, but giggled
and kicked his legs and squealed in the light of the fire. Tòtis couldn’t resist
and joined in the scuffle, laughing and pushing.
Emily looked blank for a moment, but when Ian said, “Thank ye, lass,” she
smiled again.
“So,” she said, “you named my son for me; let me do the same for yours.”
She spoke gravely, in English, and looked from Ian’s face to Rachel’s and
back again.
Ian felt Rachel stiffen and feared that this might be one too much for the
inner light. The blue paint had begun to melt with her sweat in the heat of the
longhouse and was spreading little blue tendrils and drops down her cheekslike budding vines. Her mouth opened, but she didn’t seem able to form
words. He saw her shoulders straighten, though, and she nodded at Emily,
who nodded seriously back, before turning her attention to Oggy.
“His name is Hunter,” she said.
“Oh,” Rachel said, and her smile blossomed slowly through the vines.88
In Which Things Do Not Add Up
IAN DECLINED AN INVITATION to stay the night in the longhouse, to
Rachel’s very apparent relief. He squeezed her hand, and when no one was
looking raised it to his lips.
“Tapadh leat, mo bhean, mo ghaol,”
 he whispered. She knew that much
Gaelic, and her face, a little strained under the blue and white streaks, relaxed
into its normal loveliness.
She squeezed back and whispered, “Hunter James, and whatever the
Mohawk is for ‘Little Wolf.’”
“Ohstòn’ha Ohkwàho,” he said. “Done.” He turned to make their
farewells.
Tòtis would stay with his mother until the Murrays’ departure for the
Ridge, and so it was only the three of them that returned to Joseph Brant’s
house, riding in the wagon through the quiet, cold dark. The early storm had
passed, and the light snow melted; the moon cast light enough to make the
muddy road visible before them.
He thanked her again for agreeing to take Tòtis, but she shook her head.
“I grew up as an orphan in the home of people who sheltered me out of
duty, not love. And while I had Denzell for some of those years, I wanted
more than anything to have a big family, a family of my own. I still want that.
Besides,” she added casually, “how could I not love him? He looks like thee.
Has thee a clean handkerchief? I fear my paint is running down my neck.”
The house looked welcoming, all its windows lighted and sparks flying
from the chimney.
“Does thee suppose Silvia and her daughters have come yet?” Rachel
asked. “I had forgotten them altogether.”
Ian felt his heart jerk. He’d forgotten them, too.“Aye, they have,” he said. “But the house is still standing. I expect that’s a
good sign.”
EVERYONE SEEMED TO be at the back of the house; there was talk and
laughter in the distance and the smell of supper hung appetizingly in the air,
but only the servant-girl who let them in was in evidence.
Rachel begged him to make her excuses; she wanted only to feed Oggy,
who, having slept in her arms like a small, heavy log all the way home, was
now showing signs of life, and to go to bed.
“I’ll ask the cook to send ye a wee snack, shall I? I smell roast salmon and
mushrooms.”
“Mushrooms have no smell unless they’re right under thy nose,” she said,
yawning. “But yes, please.”
She vanished upstairs, and Ian turned to go and announce their arrival. As
he did so, though, he heard footsteps on the landing above and turned to see
Silvia, with Prudence and Patience, the girls gleaming with cleanliness, their
hair tightly braided under their caps.
“Well met, Friends,” he said, smiling at the girls. They wished him a good
evening, but were plainly in some agitation of mind, and so was their mother.
“Can I help?” he said quietly, as she stepped down beside him. She shook
her head, and he saw that she was wound tight as the string of a top.
“We are well,” she said, but a nervous swallow ran down her throat, and
she had a fold of her skirt still clutched tight. “We—are going to meet
Gabriel. In the parlor.”
Patience and Prudence were clearly trying hard to preserve some sense of
decorum, but it was just as clear that they were fizzing with a mixture of
excitement and apprehension.
“Aye?” Ian said. He looked at Silvia and said, low-voiced, “Ye’ve talked
to them, of course?”
She nodded and touched her cap to make sure it was straight. “I told them
what has happened to their father and how he comes to be here,” she said.
Her long upper lip pressed down tight for a moment. “I said that he will tell
them … everything else.”
Or maybe not,
 Ian thought, but he bowed to them, ushering them toward
the parlor. A small giggle escaped Prudence, and she clapped a hand over her
mouth.To Ian’s surprise, Silvia opened the parlor door and motioned the girls in,
but promptly shut it after them. She leaned against the wall beside it, dead
white in the face, eyes closed. He thought he’d best not leave her and leaned
against the opposite wall, arms crossed, waiting.
“Papa?” one of the girls said inside the parlor, almost in a whisper. Her
sister said, louder, “Papa,” and then both of them shrieked 
“Papa, Papa,
Papa!”
 and there was the sound of feet thundering across a wooden floor and
the screech of a chair’s legs as bodies struck it.
“Prudie!” Gabriel’s voice was choked, filled with joy. “Pattie! Oh, my
darlings, oh, my darling girls!”
“Papa, Papa!” they kept saying, their exclamations interrupting each
other’s half-asked questions and observations, and Gabriel said their names
over and over, like an incantation against their disappearance. Everyone was
crying.
“I missed you so,” he said hoarsely. “Oh, my babies. My sweet, dear
babies.”
Silvia was crying, too, but silently, a crumpled white handkerchief pressed
to her mouth. She motioned to Ian, and he took her arm, helping her down the
corridor, for she walked as though drunk, bumping into the walls and into
him. She wanted to go outside, and he grabbed a cloak from the hook by the
door and wrapped it hastily round her, guiding her down the wooden steps.
He took her to the tree his mother and the Sachem had used for their
shooting practice, observing absently that they—or someone—had been at it
again, for the torn corner of a pink calico handkerchief flapped from a nail,
the lower edges ragged and singed brown. There was a bench, though, and he
sat Silvia down and sat beside her, his shoulder touching hers while she wept,
shaking with it.
She stopped after a few minutes, and sat still, twisting the wet
handkerchief between her hands.
“I keep trying to think of a way,” she said thickly. “But I can’t.”
“A way to—?” he began cautiously. “To let the girls stay wi’ their father?”
She nodded, slowly. Her eyes were fixed on the ground, where the thin
snow was trampled and footmarks had scuffed through it, leaving a moil of
dirt, snow, and slicks of half-frozen meltwater.
“But I can’t,” she said again, and blew her nose. Ian disliked the painful
look of the wet handkerchief applied to her raw, red nose, and handed her adry though paint-stained one from his sleeve. “Two of my daughters are his
—but I have three. Even if—”
Ian made a small noise in his throat, and she looked at him sharply.
“What?”
“I’m sure he’d ha’ told ye himself, were ye on speaking terms,” Ian said.
“But Thayendanegea told me this morning, that he has two wee bairns wi’ the
woman he … ehm …” 
She’d have found out anyway,
 he argued silently, and
she would, but he still felt like a guilty toad, a feeling not improved by the
look of naked betrayal on her face.
“Does it help, to curse aloud?” she said at last.
“Well … aye. It does, a bit. Ye dinna ken any curses, though, do ye?”
She frowned, considering.
“I do know some words,” she said. “The men who … came to my house
would often say wild things, especially if they’d brought liquor or … or if
there was more than one, and they … quarreled.”
“Mac na galladh,”
 he muttered.
“Is that a Scottish curse?” she asked, and sat up straighter, the
handkerchief still twisted in her hands. “Perhaps I should find it easier to say
bad words in another language.”
“Nay, 
Gàidhlig
 cursing’s a different thing. It’s … well, ye make a curse for
the occasion, ye might say. We really dinna have bad 
words,
 but ye might say
something like, 
‘May worms breed in your belly and choke ye on their way
out.’
 That’s no a very good one,” he said apologetically. “Just on the spur o’
the moment, ken? Uncle Jamie can turn a curse would curl your hair, without
even thinkin’ about it, but I’m no that good.”
She made a small 
hough
 sound that wasn’t close to a laugh, but wasn’t
crying, either.
“What was that thee said, then?” she asked, after a moment’s silence. “In
Gaelic.”
“Oh, 
mac na galladh
? That’s just ‘son of a bitch.’ Something ye might say
by way o’ description, maybe. Or if ye can’t think of anything better to say,
and ye have to say something or burst.”
“
Mac na galladh,
 then,” she said, and fell silent.
“Thee need not stay with me,” she added, after a few moments.
“Dinna be daft,” he said amiably, and they sat together for some time.
Until the back door opened, and the black form of a man on crutches showedfor a moment against the light. The door closed, and Ian stood up. “God bless
thee, Silvia,” he said softly, and squeezed her shoulder briefly in farewell.
He didn’t, of course, go far. Only into the shadows under a nearby larch.
“Silvia?” Gabriel called, peering into the dark. “Is thee here? Mrs. Brant
said thee had gone out.”
“I am here,” she said. Her tone was perfectly neutral, and Ian thought it
had cost her quite a bit to make it so.
Her husband stumped through the hay-strewn mud to the target tree and
bent to peer at her in the shadow.
“May I sit down?” he asked.
“No,” she said. “Say what thee must.”
He snorted briefly, but laid his crutches on the ground and straightened up.
“Well, then. I wish the girls to remain here. They wish this, too,” he added,
after a pause.
“Of course they do,” she said, her voice colorless. “They loved thee. They
have constant hearts; they still love thee. Did thee tell them that thee has
married again, that thee has another family?”
There was silence, and after a moment of it, she laughed. Bitterly.
“And did thee tell them that thee would have nothing to do with their
sister? Or has thee changed thy mind regarding Chastity?”
“Has thee changed thy mind regarding 
our
 marriage? I can have two
wives, as I said. Perhaps thee could find a place nearby, where thee could live
with the … the child, and Prudence and Patience would be able to visit. And
I, of course,” he added.
“I have not changed my mind,” she said, her voice cold as the night. “I will
not be thy concubine, nor will I let Patience and Prudence remain here.”
“I am far from rich, but I can—I 
will
—manage the expense,” he began, but
she cut him off, leaping to her feet, visible now in the faint light from the
house.
“Damn the 
‘expense,’
” she said, furious. “After what thee said, thee
expects that I will—”
“What did I say?” he demanded. “If I spoke out of shock—”
“Thee said I was a whore.”
“I did not use that word!”
“Thee didn’t have to! Thy meaning was clear enough.”
“I didn’t mean …” Gabriel began, and she rounded on him, eyes blazing.“Oh, but thee 
did
 mean it. And whatever thee says now, thee would still
mean it. If I were to go to thy bed, thee would wilt from thinking of the men
who had come before thee, and be consumed with yet more anger against me
for causing thy disgrace.”
She snorted, steam rising sudden from her nostrils.
“And thee would wonder whether those men were preferable to thee.
Worry did I think of any of them when I touched thy body, did I think thee
weak and disgusting. I 
know
 thee, Gabriel Hardman, and by this time, I know
a good deal about other men, too. And thee dares … thee 
dares
! …” She was
shouting now and could be heard from the barn, surely. “Thee dares to tell
me it’s godly and acceptable that thee should take more than one woman to
thy bed, only because thee lives with folk who do such things!”
Gabriel was pale with anger, but had himself under control. He wanted his
daughters.
“I apologize for what I said,” he said, between clenched teeth. “I spoke out
of shock. How can thee blame me for speaking wildly?”
“Thee was not speaking wildly when thee said thee would take Prudence
and Patience from me,” she replied.
“I am their father, and I 
will
 keep them!”
“No, thee will not,” she said evenly, and turned toward Ian’s tree. “Will
he?”
Ian stepped out from behind the tree.
“No,” he said mildly. “He won’t.”
Gabriel licked his lips and huffed out a great white sigh.
“What are we to do, then, Silvia?” he said, plainly struggling for calm.
“Thee knows the girls want to be with me as much as I wish to be with them.
Whatever thee thinks of me at present—how can thee be so heartless as to
take them from me?”
“As for thee, I expect thy 
other
 children will comfort thee,” Silvia said, in
as nasty a tone as Ian had ever heard from her. She rubbed a hand over her
face, hard, also striving for calm. “No. Thee is right in that, at least. I do
know how much they love thee and I will never say anything to them that
would blacken thee in their eyes. I think thee should tell them, though, about
thy children here. They will understand that, but they will 
not
 understand
why thee would keep the truth from them—and they are bound to find out
sooner or later, though not from me.”Gabriel had moved into the light as well, shuffling his lame foot. He had
assumed an odd, mottled appearance, like an old birch tree whose bark is
peeling off.
“I will not go and leave them here,” Silvia said, having regained some
control of her emotions. “But I will write to thee when we have found a
home, and thee may come to visit them. I will help them to write to thee, and
perhaps they may come here to see thee again, if it seems safe.” She
straightened her back and smoothed her pinafore.
“I forgive thee, Gabriel,” she said quietly. “But I will never be wife to thee
again.”89
The Filature
Savannah
September 30, 1779
ALFRED BRUMBY DIDN’T 
LOOK
 like a smuggler, or at least not like
Brianna’s notion of one. On the other hand, she was forced to admit that the
only people she knew who were or had been professional smugglers were her
father and Fergus. Mr. Brumby was a comfortably solid and beautifully
dressed gentleman of medium height who, upon meeting her, had tilted his
head back, shading his eyes as he looked up at her, and then laughed and
bowed to her.
“I see that Lord John knows the value of a good artist,” he said, smiling.
“Do you scale your commission by the inch, madam? Because if so, I may be
obliged to sell my carriage in order to afford you.”
“I do indeed charge by the inch, sir,” she’d told him politely, and nodded at
his diminutive wife. “But the basis would be the size of the painting, rather
than the artist.”
He’d laughed heartily, and so had his very young wife—
My God,
 Brianna
thought, 
she’s barely eighteen, if that!
—and then had turned to Roger,
shaking 
hands and engaging him in lively conversation, while his wife,
Angelina, knelt on the floor, careless of her fine dress, and talked to Mandy
and Jem, then scrambled to her feet and invited them to come along and see
their mother’s studio.
The arrangement offered by the hospitable Mr. Brumby was that the
MacKenzies would live in his household during the length of Brianna’s
commission and be treated as members of the family. By suppertime,
everyone had been seamlessly absorbed into the Brumby household, which
was a large and cheerful one, with many servants, an excellent cook, andHenrike, a large and very capable German maidservant who had been
Angelina’s nurse and had insisted upon coming with her upon her marriage to
Mr. Brumby.
“And how do you propose to pass your time, Mr. MacKenzie, while your
wife is employed in painting?” Mr. Brumby asked over a delicious pork roast
with brandied applesauce.
“I have various commissions to fulfill, sir,” Roger said. “On behalf of the
Presbytery of Charles Town, who have entrusted me with various letters to
deliver—and also a few small errands to perform on behalf of my father-in-
law, Colonel Fraser.”
“Oh, indeed.” Mr. Brumby’s eyes grew bright through his spectacles. “I’ve
heard of Colonel Fraser—as who has not? I was unaware that he makes
whisky of such quality, though.” He nodded at the bottle Roger had presented
to him before dinner; he’d brought it along to the table and continued to take
small sips from a silver cup that the butler replenished—frequently—in the
course of the meal. “Should he be interested in selling it to a wider market
…”
Roger smiled and assured Mr. Brumby that Jamie made whisky only for
his own personal use, causing Mr. Brumby to laugh loudly and give Roger an
exaggerated wink and a finger alongside his nose.
“Very sensible,” he said, “very sensible indeed. Customs and excise taxes
being what they are, it would hardly pay to offer it commercially, save at an
extortionate price—and that, of course, has its own difficulties.”
Brianna enjoyed the dinner and was delighted by the house, which had
been built by a fine architect. The effort of nodding appreciatively at each of
the Brumbys in turn—for both of them talked incessantly, and frequently at
the same time—was wearing her down, though, and she took the entrance of
cigars and brandy for the gentlemen as her cue to rise and excuse herself to
go and see that the children were still where she’d put them.
They had been tucked into trundle beds that had been set up in the
commodious dressing room attached to the well-appointed guest room that
had been assigned to the MacKenzies, and when looked in upon, they were
both clean and sound asleep, having been fed earlier by the cook, Mrs. Upton.
“I could get used to this,” Roger said, yawning as he came in later,
stripping off his coat. “You wouldn’t think there was an armed siege going
on outside, would you?” The Brumbys’ house stood in Reynolds Square,
opposite the filature—a facility for raising silkworms—and the plentitude oftrees, including the large grove of white mulberry trees required for the diet
of said silkworms, gave it a sense of enclosure and pastoral peace.
“You’re keeping track of the calendar, aren’t you?” Bree pulled her
sleeping 
shift over her head, noting from the smell that she should talk to the
Brumbys’ laundress tomorrow. “
How
 many days until all hell breaks loose?”
“Less than three weeks,” he said, more soberly. “Your father didn’t give
much detail on the battle, but we know the Americans will lose. The siege
will be lifted on October the eleventh.”
“And you’ll be here and safely inside, right?” She raised her eyebrows at
him, and he smiled and took her hand.
“I will,” he said, and kissed it.90
The Swamp Fox
Savannah
October 8, 1779
ROGER HAD DRESSED FOR his occasions. Luckily, the same black
broadcloth suit, long-coated and pewter-buttoned, would do for both, since it
was the only one he possessed. Brianna had plaited and clubbed his hair
severely, and he was so clean-shaven that his jaw felt raw. A high white stock
wrapped round his neck completed the picture—he hoped—of a respectable
clergyman. The British sentries at the barricade on White Bluff Road had
given him no more than a disinterested glance before nodding him through.
He could only hope the American sentries outside the city felt the same lack
of curiosity about ministers.
He rode out a good distance from the city before turning east and
beginning to circle back toward the Americans’ siege lines, and it was just
past noon when he came within sight of them.
The American camp was rough but orderly, an acre or so of canvas tents
fluttering in the wind like trapped gulls, and the amazingly big French
warships visible in the river beyond, from which every so often a volley of
cannon fire would erupt with gouts of flame, setting loose vast clouds of
white smoke to drift across the marshes with the scattered clouds of gulls and
oystercatchers alarmed by the noise.
There were pickets posted among the yaupon bushes, one of whom popped
up like a jack-in-the-box and pointed a musket at Roger in a business-like
way.
“Halt!”
Roger pulled in his reins and raised his stick, white handkerchief tied to its
end, feeling foolish. It worked, though. The picket whistled through his teethfor a companion, who popped up alongside, and at the first man’s nod, came
forward to take his horse’s bridle.
“What’s your name and what d’you want?” the man demanded, squinting
up at Roger. He wore a backwoodsman’s ordinary breeches and hunting shirt,
but had army boots and an odd uniform cap, shaped like a squashed bishop’s
mitre. A copper badge on his collar read 
Sgt. Bradford.
“My name is Roger MacKenzie. I’m a Presbyterian minister, and I’ve
brought a letter to General Lincoln from General James Fraser, late of
General Washington’s Monmouth command.”
Sergeant Bradford’s brows rose out of sight beneath his hat.
“General Fraser,” he said. “Monmouth? That the fellow that abandoned his
troops to tend his wife?”
This was said with a derisive tone, and Roger felt the words like a blow to
the stomach. Was this how Jamie’s admittedly dramatic resignation of his
commission was commonly perceived in the Continental army? If so, his own
present mission might be a little more delicate than he’d expected.
“General Fraser is my father-in-law, sir,” Roger said, in a neutral voice.
“An honorable man—and a very brave soldier.”
The look of scorn didn’t quite leave the man’s face, but it moderated into a
short nod, and the man turned away, jerking his chin in an indication that
Roger might follow, if he felt so inclined.
General Lincoln’s tent was a large but well-worn green canvas, with a
flagstaff outside from which the red and white stripes of the Grand Union
flag fluttered in the wind off the water. Sergeant Bradford muttered
something to the guard at the entrance and left Roger with a curt nod.
“The Reverend MacKenzie, is it?” the guard said, looking him up and
down with an air of skepticism. “And a letter from General James Fraser,
have I got that right?”
Christ.
 Did Jamie know of the talk about him? Roger remembered the
moment’s hesitation when Jamie had handed him the letter. Perhaps he did,
then.
“I am, it is, and you do,” Roger said firmly. “Is General Lincoln able to
receive me?” He’d been meaning to leave the letter and come back for the
reply—if there was one—after he’d spoken to Francis Marion, but now he
thought he’d better find out whether Benjamin Lincoln shared this apparent
negative view of Jamie’s actions.“Wait here.” The soldier—he was a Continental regular, a uniformed
corporal—ducked under the tent flap, kept closed against the chilly breeze.
Through the momentary gap, Roger caught sight of a large man in uniform,
curled up on a cot, his broad blue back turned to the door. A faint buzzing
snore reached Roger’s ears, but apparently the corporal had no intention of
trying to wake General Lincoln, and after a minute’s delay—for the sake of
plausibility, Roger assumed—the corporal reappeared.
“I’m afraid the general’s engaged at present, Mr ….?”
“Reverend,” Roger repeated firmly. “The Reverend Roger MacKenzie. As
General Lincoln isn’t available, could I speak with”—
shit, what’s Marion’s
rank now?
—“with Captain Francis Marion, perhaps?”
“Lieutenant Colonel Marion, I expect you mean.” The corporal corrected
him matter-of-factly. “You’ll maybe find him out by the Jewish cemetery; I
saw him go that way with some 
chasseurs
 a while ago. You know where it
is?” He gestured toward the west.
“I’ll find it. Thank you.” The guard seemed relieved to be rid of him, and
Roger made his way in the direction indicated, holding his broad-brimmed
hat against the tug of the wind.
The busy atmosphere of the camp was much at odds with the brief vision
of its sleeping commander. Men were moving to and fro with purpose; in the
distance, he saw a great many horses—cavalry, he realized with interest.
What were they doing?
Forming up.
 He felt as though Jamie had spoken in his ear, matter-of-fact
as always, and his stomach contracted. 
Getting ready.
This was October 8. According to Frank Randall’s book, the siege of
Savannah began on September 16 and would be lifted on October 11.
For all the good that’s likely to do you, blockhead.
 For the thousandth
time, he castigated himself for not knowing more, not having read everything
there was to read about the American Revolution—but knowing, even as he
reproached himself, that the chances of any book knowledge ever resembling
the reality of his experience were vanishingly small.
A small squadron of pelicans dropped low in unison over the distant water
and sailed serenely just above the waves, ignoring ships, cannon, horses,
shouting men, and the rapidly clouding sky.
Must be nice,
 he thought, watching them. 
Nothing to think about but where
your next fish is coming—A musket went off somewhere behind him, a cloud of feathers burst from
one of the pelicans, and it dropped like a stone, wings loose, into the water.
Cheers and whistles came from behind him, these cut off abruptly by a
furious officer’s voice, castigating the marksman for wasting ammunition.
Okay, point taken.
As though backing up the rifleman, there was a distant boom, followed by
another. 
Siege cannon,
 he thought, and an uncontrollable shiver of excitement
ran down his spine at the thought. 
Getting the range.
He lost his way briefly, but a passing corporal put him on the right path
and came with him to the cemetery, marked by a large stone gateway.
“That’ll be Colonel Marion, Reverend,” his escort said, and pointed.
“When you’ve done your business with him, one of his men’ll bring you back
to General Lincoln’s tent.” The man turned to go, but then turned back to add
a caution. “Don’t you be a-wandering about by yourself, Reverend. ’Tisn’t
safe. And don’t try to leave the camp, either. Pickets got orders to shoot any
man as tries to leave without a pass from General Lincoln.”
“No,” Roger said. “I won’t.” But the corporal hadn’t waited for an answer;
he was hurrying back into the main body of the camp, boots crunching on
white oyster shell.
It was close—a lot closer than he’d thought. He could feel the whole camp
humming, a sense of nervous energy, men making ready. But surely it was
too early for …
Then he walked through the high stone gate of the cemetery, its lintel
decorated with the Star of David, and saw at once what must be Lieutenant
Colonel Francis Marion, hat in hand and a blue-and-buff uniform coat thrown
loose over his shoulders, deep in conversation with three or four other
officers.
The unfortunate word that popped into Roger’s mind was “marionette.”
Francis Marion was what Jamie would call a wee man, standing no more than
five foot four, by Roger’s estimation, scrawny and spindle-shanked, with a
very prominent French nose. Not quite what the romantic moniker “Swamp
Fox” conjured up.
His appearance was made more arresting by a novel tonsorial arrangement,
featuring thin strands of hair combed into a careful puff atop a balding pate
and two rather larger puffs on either side of his head, like earmuffs. Roger
was consumed by curiosity as to what the man’s ears must look like, torequire this sort of disguise, but he dismissed this with an effort of will and
waited patiently for the lieutenant-colonel to finish his business.
Chasseurs,
 the corporal had said. French troops, then, and they looked it,
very tidy in blue coats with green facings and white smallclothes, with jaunty
yellow feather cockades sticking up from the fronts of their cocked hats like
Fourth of July sparklers. They were also undeniably speaking French, lots of
them at once.
On the other hand … they were black, which he hadn’t expected at all.
Marion raised a hand and most of them stopped speaking, though there was
a good deal of shifting from foot to foot and a general air of impatience. He
leaned forward, speaking up into the face of an officer who topped him by a
good six inches, and the others stopped fidgeting and craned to listen.
Roger couldn’t hear what was being said, but he was strongly aware of the
electric current running through the group—it was the same current he’d
sensed running through the camp, but stronger.
Jesus Christ Almighty, they’re getting ready to fight. Now.
He’d never been on a live battlefield but had walked a few historical ones
with his father. The Reverend Wakefield had been a keen war historian, and a
good storyteller; he’d been able to evoke the sense of a muddled, panicked
fight from the open ground at Sheriffmuir, and the sense of doom and
slaughter from the haunted earth of Culloden.
Roger was getting much the same feeling, rising up from the quiet earth of
the cemetery through his body, and he curled his fists, urgently wanting the
feel of a weapon in his hand.
The air was cool but humid, with a faint rumble of thunder over the sea,
and sweat was condensing on his body. He saw Marion wipe his own face
with a large, grubby handkerchief, then tuck it away with an impatient
gesture and step closer to the 
chasseur
 officer, raising his voice and jerking
his head toward the river behind them.
Whatever he’d said—he was speaking French, and the distance was too far
for Roger to make out more than a phrase here and there—seemed to settle
the 
chasseurs,
 who grunted and nodded amongst themselves, then gathered
behind their officer and set off at a jog-trot toward the ships. Marion watched
them go, then sighed visibly and sat down on one of the tombstones.
It seemed ludicrous to approach Marion with his questions under these
circumstances, but the man had spotted him and lifted his chin inquiringly.
Not much choice but to say hello, at least.“Good afternoon, sir,” he said, bowing slightly. “I apologize for
interrupting 
you. I can see that—” Lacking any sufficient words, he waved a
hand toward the distant camp.
Marion laughed, a low sound of honest amusement.
“Well, yes,” he said, in an accent that seemed faintly tinged with the
French he’d just been speaking. “It’s clear, isn’t it? I take it you didn’t know,
though, or—?” One eyebrow quirked up.
“Or I wouldn’t be here,” Roger finished. Marion shrugged.
“You might have come to volunteer. The Continental army isn’t choosy,
though I have to say that the occasional minister we get usually doesn’t wear
his best clothes to fight in.” The look of amusement deepened as he looked
Roger up and down. “So—why 
are
 you here, sir?”
“My name is Roger MacKenzie, and I am the son-in-law of General James
Fraser, late of—”
“Really.” Both eyebrows were raised as high as they could go. “Fraser’s
sent you as an envoy to General Lincoln, and they sent you to me because
Benjamin’s asleep?”
“Not exactly.” He’d best just put it baldly. Whatever Jamie’s reputation
with the Continental army was, his business with Marion was straightforward
enough.
“I take it you know that General Fraser resigned his commission following
the Battle of—”
“Monmouth, yes.” Marion shifted his scrawny buttocks on the stone.
“Everyone knows by now, I should think. Is it true that he wrote his letter of
resignation on the back of an ensign and sent him to Lee with a muddy
shirt?”
“It was written in his wife’s blood,” Roger said, “but yes.”
That took the look of amusement out of Marion’s eyes. He nodded a little,
the meager pouf of graying hair on top of his head stirring in the rising
breeze, as though disturbed by the thoughts beneath it.
“I don’t know Monsieur Fraser as a man,” he said, “but I’ve talked with
those who do.” He eyed Roger, head on one side. “What does he want with
me?”
“He’s assembling a militia,” Roger replied, just as bluntly. “A partisan
band. He doesn’t want to have anything further to do with the Continental
army—and I imagine the feeling is mutual—but he does intend to fight.”“I suppose he’ll have to.” It was a statement of fact, made with no emotion
at all, but spoken 
here,
 with the air around them live and dangerous as a
lightning storm, it struck Roger like a blow in the chest.
“Yes.”
“And he wants a—a 
liaison
 with the army, perhaps? A connection, but not
a formal connection. Just so.” Marion’s lips were thin and bloodless; pressed
tight together, they disappeared, making him look like a marionette with a
hinged, carved jaw.
“He knows of you, too,” Roger said carefully. “That you have experience
in forming militia units and … employing them effectively in a … a formal
military context?”
“It’s much more effective to employ them outside that context,” Marion
said, glancing toward the cemetery wall. There was a rising noise of horses
and men, audible now that the guns had fallen silent. His large dark eyes
turned back, focusing on Roger’s face. “Tell him that. He should keep his
distance from the army. They will use his militia, certainly, they need every
man they can get. But the risk to him—him, personally—is very great. If it
had not been for Lee’s trial and La Fayette’s good word, Fraser would have
been court-martialed himself after Monmouth; perhaps even hanged.”
Marion spoke casually, but Roger felt the scar on his throat tighten and
burn beneath the concealment of his high white stock, and he had the sudden
uncontrollable urge to fling his arms out, burst the memory of rope and
helplessness.
He gulped air and tried to speak, but no words came. Instead, he turned
violently on his heel, seized a stone from the ground, and flung it at the stone
wall. It struck with a crack like a bullet, and a gull that had been sitting on the
wall rose with a shriek and flapped away, dropping a large wet splatter of
feces on the ground between the two men.
Marion looked at him with concern.
Roger cleared his throat and spat on the ground. He didn’t apologize; there
wasn’t anything he could say.
“I’ll tell him,” he said, hoarse and formal. “Thank you for your advice,
sir.”
He was trembling. The sense of something coming hadn’t gone away; it
was growing. The ground seemed to be vibrating, but it must be only him.
A young lieutenant came through the gate beneath the Star of David, face
lit with fear and excitement.“They’re waiting for you, Colonel.”
Marion nodded to the boy and stood up.
“You can’t leave, I’m afraid,” he said apologetically to Roger. “It will
begin soon. Do you want to fight? I can give you a good rifle.”
“I—no.” Roger touched the stock at his throat. Marion’s attention was
focused on the sounds behind the cemetery wall. No, it wasn’t his
imagination; the ground 
was
 vibrating. 
Horses. The horses …
 “But I—I’d
like to help. If I can.”
“Bon,”
 said Marion softly, almost absently. He slid his arms into the
sleeves of his coat and hitched it up on his shoulders, fingers twitching the
lower buttons into place without looking. But his attention came back to
Roger, just for a moment.
“Go back into camp, then,” he said. “And wait. If things go wrong, you can
help bury us. Or if they go right, I expect.”
Marion looked toward the gate and shook his head slightly.
“I don’t have a good feeling about this, no,” he said, as though to himself,
and went off, the young lieutenant falling into step behind him.
Roger hesitated for a split second, then followed, stretching his legs to
catch up.
“I’m no good with a rifle,” he said. “But if you can give me a sword, I’ll
go with you.” Marion cast him the briefest of glances, nodded, and made a
small gesture to the lieutenant.
“Bon,”
 he said. “Come on, then.”91
Besieged
BRIANNA WAS CUTTING UP a bit of fried chicken in the kitchen for
Mandy when she heard a tapping at the window. She looked up in surprise to
see Lord John outside, in uniform. He grimaced and nodded, indicating that
he would like to come in out of the rain.
“What are you doing out here?” she asked, opening the door into the back
garden. She’d had tea with him twice since their arrival, but hadn’t expected
an informal visit.
“I wanted to see you for a moment,” he replied, stepping in and taking the
towel she offered him, “but I can’t spare the time for civilities with Mr. or
Mrs. Brumby. Thank you, my dear.” He took off his hat, wiped his face, and
brushed at the shoulders of his blue cloak, then handed back the towel.
“I came to tell you that the siege will shortly be at an end,” he said
carefully, glancing at Jem, Mandy, and Mrs. Upton, the cook.
“Really? That’s—” she stopped abruptly, seeing his face. “What … makes
you think so?” she asked carefully, and he gave her a brief smile.
“The Americans have begun to move their guns,” he said.
“Oh, have they? Time enough!” Mrs. Upton said, eyes on the eggs she was
whisking. “The master said as he thought the Frenchies and their ships would
be off soon, they not wanting to be blown to bits by hurricanes.”
“Hurricanes?” said Jem, perking up. “Do they have hurricanes here?”
“Indeed we do, Master Jem,” Mrs. Upton said, nodding portentously at the
rain-spattered window. “See that rain? You can tell how hard the wind’s
blowing—see the drops run slant-wise down the glass? This time of year the
wind comes up—and sometimes it doesn’t go back down. For days.”
“I know you haven’t much time,” Bree said, eyeing John, “but come along
to my studio, will you? I’d like your opinion on something.”“It would be my pleasure. 
Bonsoir,
 monsieur, mademoiselle.” He nodded
to Jemmy, then solemnly picked up Mandy’s chubby hand—fork, chicken,
and all—bowed over it, and planted a discreet kiss upon it that made her
shriek and giggle.
“Mrs. Upton is correct, to a point,” he said to Bree, once they were safely
down the hall. “D’Estaing does 
not
 want to lose half his fleet to a hurricane.
But neither does he want to sail away without trying to get what he came
for.”
“Meaning …?”
“Meaning that the Americans are indeed moving their smaller guns—but
not back onto the ships. A large number of troops appear to be moving to the
south of the town, circling round through the marshes, which is not
something I personally would do, but styles of command vary.”
She’d clenched her hands without noticing; now she noticed and
unclenched them with a small effort.
“You mean they’re going to try to—to take the city? Now?”
“They’ll certainly 
try,
” he assured her. “I don’t think they’ll manage it, but
they have quite a few more men than we do, which no doubt gives them a
sense of optimism. Just in case—” He pushed back his cloak in order to reach
into the haversack he had slung over his shoulder and pulled out a small
bundle of cloth, folded into a packet and tied with string.
“It’s an American flag,” he said, handing it to her. “Hal took it off a
prisoner. If—and I do mean ‘in the extremely unlikely event’—the
Americans do get in, hang this out a window, or tack it to the front door.”
Roger.
 She swallowed. He’d been going to visit an elderly, retired
Presbyterian minister who lived in the tiny settlement of Bryan Neck. With
luck, he was nowhere 
near
 Savannah at the moment. But he 
had
 mentioned
maybe going to see Francis Marion on Jamie’s behalf, if the Swamp Fox
should be in the American camp … but … it wasn’t supposed to be 
now.
 …
Her heart was beginning to thump erratically, and she put a hand on her chest
to still it.
“They have more men, you said.” He was resettling his cloak, ready to go,
but looked up at this. “How many?”
“Oh, somewhere between three and four thousand,” he said. “At a guess.”
“And how many do you have?”
“Not that many,” he said. “But we 
are
 His Majesty’s army. We know how
to do this sort of thing.” He smiled, and rising slightly on his toes kissed hercheek. “Don’t worry, my dear. If anything drastic happens, I’ll come for you
if I can.”
He had almost got to the back door before she shook off her sense of shock
enough to run after him.
“Lord John!”
He turned at once, eyebrows raised, and she thought for an instant how
young he looked. Excited at the nearness of battle. 
Roger. Oh, Lord, Roger …
“My husband,” she managed, breathless. “He’s on his way home, from—
from an errand. He thought he’d make it for supper …?”
Lord John shook his head.
“If he’s not here now, he won’t be.” He saw the look on her face and
added, “I mean, he can’t get into the city. The road is closed and the city is
surrounded by abatis. But I’ll send word to the captain of the city guard.
Remind me: What’s your husband’s name and what does he look like?”
“Roger,” she said, through the lump in her throat. “Roger MacKenzie. He’s
tall and dark and he looks … like a Presbyterian preacher.” 
Thank God you
wore your good clothes today,
 she thought passionately toward her absent
husband.
Lord John had been fully concentrated on her words, but that made him
smile.
“In that case, I’m sure no one will shoot him,” he said, and lifting her hand,
kissed it briefly. “
Au revoir,
 my dear.”
“Good …” she began by reflex, but then froze. He politely pretended not 
to
notice, touched her cheek gently, then turned and went out, pulling down his
hat against the rain.
THE SOFT LIGHT woke her, next morning. She lay for a moment, confused.
What was wrong?
“Mummy, Mummy!”
A small curly black head with bright brown eyes popped up at eye level,
and she blinked, trying to focus.
“Mummy! Mrs. Upton says there’s flapjacks ’n’ hash for breakfast! Hurry
up!” Mandy vanished, and Bree heard both children thundering down the
stairs, both evidently already dressed and shod. It was true: enticing smells of
food and coffee were drifting up from the dining room below.She sat up and swung her feet out of bed, and then it struck her. It was
quiet. The guns had stopped. After five days of being jerked awake in the
black predawn by the distant French ships practicing bombardment, today the
house was rising peacefully, early sun seeping through the fog, calm as
honey.
“Thank God,” she muttered, and crossed herself, with a quick prayer for
Roger, and another for her father, her first father. She’d believed what he’d
said in the book; the siege of Savannah would fail. But it was hard to have
complete faith in history when it was exploding around you.
“Thanks, Daddy,” she said, and reached for her stays.92
Like Water Spilled on the Ground, Which
Cannot Be Gathered up Again
In the Marshes Outside Savannah
An hour past midnight
October 9, 1779
THE QUILL WAS LITTLE more than a blunt stub, the greasy feather
mangled by dogged hands determined to send one last word. Roger had
written more than one such word tonight, for the men who could not write or
had no notion what to say. Now the camp lay sleeping—lightly—all around
him, and he faced the same problem.
Dearest Bree,
 he wrote, and paused for a breath before going on. There
was only the one thing 
to
 say, and he wrote, 
I’m sorry.
 But she deserved
more, and slowly, he found his way.
I didn’t mean to be here, but I have the strongest feeling that here
is where I should be. It wasn’t quite “Whom shall I send? Who shall
go for us?”—but something close, and so was my answer.
God willing, I’ll see you soon. For now and for always, I am your
husband and I love you.
Roger
The last few words were ghosts on the scrap of rough, rain-spotted paper;
the last of the ink. His name was no more than scratches, but he supposed that
was all right; she’d know who’d written it.
He let the ink dry and folded the scrap carefully. Then realized that he had
no way to send it—nor any ink left with which to write Bree’s direction on it.
The other letters had been given to Marion’s company clerk, now snoringunder a blanket near one of the many watchfires, anonymous among the
huddled, sleeping sheep.
With slow hands, he tucked it into the breast pocket of his coat. If he died
in the morning, someone might find it on him. Francis Marion would survive
this battle; Roger could trust him to send it on—to Jamie, at least.
He lay down on the squelchy ground, commended his soul to God, and was
asleep.
Two hours before dawn
October 9, 1779
THERE WAS A shimmer of light in the eastern sky, but fog lay so thickly on
the marshes that the city wasn’t visible. It was easy to believe that it wasn’t
there at all, that they’d lost their bearings in the dark and were now facing
inland, away from Savannah. That when the order was given, they’d charge,
yelling like banshees, straight out into peaceful farmland, startling sleeping
cows and slaves at their work.
But the wet, sluggish air stirred, and suddenly Roger caught the scent of
baking bread from the public ovens in Savannah; faint, but so heady that his
empty stomach growled.
Brianna.
 She was there, somewhere in the fog with the fresh-baked bread.
Someone murmured something in French, too low to catch the words but
evidently witty, for there was a ripple of laughter and the tension relaxed for
a moment.
They were bunched into columns now, four columns, each column eight
hundred strong. There was no need to keep quiet; the British certainly knew
they were here. He could hear shouts from one of the redoubts at the edge of
the city now, echoing oddly in the fog. Spring Hill, they called it. There was
another redoubt, somewhere to the left, but he didn’t remember what that one
was called.
It was cold, so early, but sweat trickled down the side of his face and he
wiped it away, morning stubble rasping under his palm. The officers had all
shaved before dawn, putting on their best uniforms like bullfighters preparing
for the ring, but the men had risen from their blankets and bed sacks frowsty
as scarecrows. Wide awake, though. And ready.
It’s the wrong day. Surely it’s the wrong day …He shook his head violently. He was a historian, too—or had been. He of
all people should know how imprecise history really was. But here they were,
swallowed up in swirling fog, facing an invisible armed city at dawn. On the
wrong day.
He drew a deep, trembling breath.
We’re going to lose this one.
Frank Randall said so.
His stomach clenched, hunger forgotten.
Lord, help me do what You want me to do—but in the name of Christ Your
son, let me live through it.
“Because if You don’t, You’ll have my wife to answer to,” he murmured,
and touched the hilt of his borrowed sword.
General Marion was bending down from his saddle, speaking French to
two of the officers from Saint-Domingue—murky as it was, he was close
enough to see the bright yellow of the officer’s lapels and cockades. 
Yellow-
breasted sapsuckers,
 he thought.
They might as well be, too, for as much of their speech as he understood.
Theoretically, Roger spoke French, but he didn’t speak this kind of French,
full of hissing and glottal stops.
No one was trying to be quiet. Everyone knew what was about to happen,
including the British garrison. The Americans and their allies had given up
their position before the city, and—dragging their unwieldy cannon through
the marshes, in the dark—had circled Savannah, the army gathering again
before the two points where they might break through the city’s defenses,
south of the Louisville Road.
Lord, help them. Help me help them. Please, deliver us.
And he knew it was a vain prayer and still he prayed with all his heart.
“Les abatis sont en feu!”
 He heard the shout above the rumble and
murmur and clanking of the army, and felt the jolt of hope like a stroke of
lightning in his heart.
Someone had managed to set the abatis on fire! The news was rocketing
around the marshes, and Marion stood up in his stirrups to peer through the
fog.
Roger licked his lips, tasting salt. The British knew how to defend against
a siege; the whole city was encircled on the landward side by trenches
liberally spiked with abatis, sharpened logs jammed into the earth, points
outward.He could smell smoke, different in character from the smell of the ovens or
of chimney smoke from the town—a wilder, rougher kind of smoke.
But then the wind changed and the smoke died. There were groans and
curses in multiple languages; evidently the fire had gone out, been
extinguished by the English, failed to catch hold in the damp, who knew?
But the abatis remained, and so did the cannon, aiming from the ground
between the redoubts. He stared in fascination as they faded slowly into sight.
The fog was beginning to shred and orders were being shouted. The 
faint
skirl of a bagpipe floated on the air; there were Highlanders in the redoubt.
The black snouts of the guns poked through the thinning fog, and now there
was another kind of smoke that he knew must be slow-match, to touch off the
cannon.
It was time, and his heartbeat echoed in his ears.
“You go back if you want, Reverend.” It was Marion, bending down from
his horse, his breath visible in the chilly air. “You aren’t sworn nor paid to be
here.”
“I’ll stay.” He couldn’t tell whether he’d said that or only thought it, but
Marion straightened up and drew his sword from its scabbard, resting the
blade on his thigh. He had a blue tricorne on his head, but there were
dewdrops in the puffs of hair that covered his ears.
Roger took hold of his borrowed sword, though God knew what he’d do
with it. 
God knew.
 That was, in fact, a comforting thought, and for a moment
he was able to draw a deep breath.
“Save your life, maybe,” Lieutenant Monserrat had said, handing it over
yesterday. “Even if you don’t mean to fight.”
I don’t mean to fight. Why am I here?
Because they’re here.
 The men around him, sweating in the chill, smelling
death with the scent of fresh-baked bread.
There was a roar from the first column that spread over the field, and he
was seized by panic.
I don’t know what to do.
Mortars nearby fired with a sudden 
bomph!
 and he found that his knees
and his hands were shaking and he urgently needed a piss.
You didn’t know what to do when the bear killed Amy Higgins,
 a voice that
might have been his said inside his head. 
But you did something anyway.
Things would have been worse if I hadn’t, I know that much. I have to go.The first column suddenly began to run, not in tidy lines but a mob,
surging toward the redoubt and the crack of musket fire, yelling their lungs
out, some firing, some just running and screaming, a knife in one hand,
clawing their way over the abatis, and they were falling as the bullets struck,
those farther out knocked down like bowling pins by bouncing cannonballs.
A panicked frog erupted suddenly from a patch of wiry yellow grass near
Roger’s foot and landed in a puddle, where it vanished.
“I don’t like this, me,” Marion said, in a brief moment between explosions.
He shook his head. “No, I don’t.” He raised his sword. “God be with you,
Reverend.”
IT WASN’T GOD he found with him, but the next best thing. Major Gareth
Barnard, one of his father’s friends, an ex–military chaplain. Barnard was a
tall, long-faced man who wore his graying hair parted down the middle in a
way that made him look like an old hound dog, but he’d had a black sense of
humor and he’d treated Roger, thirteen years old, as a man.
“Did you ever kill anyone?” he’d asked the major when they were sat
around the table after dinner one night, the old men telling stories of the War.
“Yes,” the major replied without hesitation. “I’d be no use to my men,
dead.”
“What did you do for them?” Roger had asked, curious. “I mean—what
does a chaplain do, in a battle?”
Major Barnard and the Reverend had exchanged a brief look, but the
Reverend nodded and Barnard leaned forward, arms folded on the table in
front of him. Roger saw the tattoo on his wrist, a bird of some kind, wings
spread over a scroll with something written on it in Latin.
“Be with them,” the major said quietly, but his eyes held Roger’s, deeply
serious. “Reassure them. Tell them God is with them. That I’m with them.
That they aren’t alone.”
“Help them when you can,” his father had said, softly, eyes on the worn
gray oilcloth that covered the table. “Hold their hands and pray, when you
can’t.”
He saw—actually saw—the blast of a cannon. A brilliant-red flowering
spark the size of his head that blinked in the fog with a firework’s 
BOOM!
and then vanished. The fog blew back from the blast and he saw everything
clearly for a second, no more—the black hulk of the gun, round mouthgaping, smoke thicker than the fog rolling over it, fog falling to the ground
like water, steam rising from the hot metal to join the roiling fog, the
artillerymen swarming over the gun, frenzied blue and brown ants,
swallowed up the next instant in swirling white.
And then the world around him went mad. The shouts of the officers had
come with the cannon’s blast; he only knew it because he’d been standing
close enough to Marion to see his mouth open. But now a general roar went
up from the charging men in his column, running hell-bent for the dim shape
of the redoubt before him.
The sword was in his hand, and he was running, yelling wordless things.
Torches glowed faintly in the fog—soldiers trying to re-fire the abatis, he
thought dimly.
Marion was gone. There was a high-pitched yodeling of some sort that
might be the general, but might not.
The cannon—how many? He couldn’t tell, but more than two; the firing
kept up at a tremendous rate, the crash of it shaking his bones every half
minute or so.
He made himself stop, bend over, hands on his knees, gasping. He thought
he heard musket fire, muffled, rhythmic crashes between the cannon blasts.
The British army’s disciplined volleys.
“Load!”
“Fire!”
“Fall back!”
 An officer’s shouts rang out sudden in the heartbeat of
silence between one crash and the next.
You’re not a soldier. If you get killed … nobody will be here to help them.
Fall back, idiot.
He’d been at the back of the rank, with Marion. But now he was
surrounded by men, surging together, pushing, running in all directions.
Orders were being barked, and he 
thought
 some of the men were struggling
to obey; he heard random shouts, saw a black boy who couldn’t be more than
twelve 
struggling grimly to load a musket taller than he was. He wore a dark-
blue uniform, and a bright-yellow kerchief showed when the fog parted for an
instant.
Roger tripped over someone lying on the ground and landed on his knees,
brackish water seeping through his breeches. He’d landed with his hands on
the fallen man, and the sudden warmth on his cold fingers was a shock that
brought him back to himself.The man moaned and Roger jerked his hands away, then recovered himself
and groped for the man’s hand. It was gone, and his own hand was filled with
a gush of hot blood that reeked like a slaughterhouse.
“Jesus,” he said, and, wiping his hand on his breeches, he grappled with
the other in his bag, he had cloths … he yanked out something white and
tried to tie it round … he felt frantically for a wrist, but that was gone, too.
He got a fragment of sleeve and felt his way up it as fast as he could, but he
reached the still-solid upper arm a moment after the man died—he could feel
the sudden limpness of the body under his hand.
He was still kneeling there with the unused cloth in his hand when
someone tripped over 
him
 and fell headlong with a tremendous splash. Roger
got up onto his feet and duck-walked to the fallen man.
“Are you all right?” he shouted, bending forward. Something whistled over
his head, and he threw himself flat on top of the man.
“Jesus Christ!” the man exclaimed, punching wildly at Roger. “Get the
devil off me, you bugger!”
They wrestled in the mud and water for a moment, each trying to use the
other for leverage to rise, and the cannon kept on firing. Roger pushed the
man away and managed to roll up onto his knees in the mud. Cries for help
were coming from behind him, and he turned in that direction.
The fog was almost gone, driven off by explosions, but the gun smoke
drifted white and low across the uneven ground, showing him brief flashes of
color and movement as it shredded.
“Help, help me!”
He saw the man then, on hands and knees, dragging one leg, and he
splashed through the puddles to reach him. Not much blood, but the leg was
clearly wounded; he got a shoulder under the man’s arm and got him on his
feet, hustled him as fast as possible away from the redoubt, out of range …
The air shattered again and the earth seemed to tilt under him; he was lying
on the ground with the man he’d been helping on top of him, the man’s jaw
knocked away and hot blood and chunks of teeth soaking into his chest.
Panicked, he struggled out from under the twitching body—Oh, God, oh,
God, he was still alive—and then he was kneeling by the man, slipping in the
mud, catching himself with a hand on the chest where he could feel the heart
beating in time with the blood spurting, 
Oh, Jesus, help me!
He groped for words, frantic. It was all gone. All the comforting words
he’d gleaned, all his stock-in-trade …“You’re not alone,” he panted, pressing hard on the heaving chest, as
though he could anchor the man to the earth he was dissolving into. “I’m
here. I won’t leave you. It’s gonna be all right. You’re gonna be all right.” He
kept repeating that, kept his hands pressing hard, and then, in the midst of the
spouting carnage, felt the life leave the body.
Just … gone.
He sat on his heels, gasping, frozen in place, one hand on the still body as
though it were glued there, and then the drums.
A faint throb through the rhythmic sounds of gunfire. His bones had
absorbed that without his noticing; he could feel the ebb when the first rank
of muskets fell back and the surge when the second rank reached the edge of
the redoubt and fired. Something in the back of his head was counting … 
one
… two …
“What the hell,” he said thickly, and stood up, shaking his head. There
were three men near him, two still on the ground, the third struggling to rise.
He got up and staggered over to them, gave the live man his hand, and pulled
him up, wordless. One of the others was plainly dead, the other almost so. He
let go of the man he was holding and collapsed on his knees by the dying one,
taking the man’s cold face between his hands, the dark eyes bleared with fear
and ebbing blood.
“I’m here,” he said, though the cannon fired then and his words made no
sound.
The drums. He heard them clearly now, and a sort of yell, a lot of men
shouting together. And then a rumbling, squashing, splashing, and suddenly
there were horses everywhere, running … Running at the fucking redoubts
full of guns.
A crash of guns and the cavalry split, half the horses wheeling, back and
away, the rest scattering, dancing through the fallen men, trying not to step
on the bodies, big heads jerking as they fought the reins.
He didn’t run; he couldn’t. He walked forward, slowly, sword flopping at
his side, stopping where he found a man down. Some he could help, with a
drink or a hand to press upon a wound while a friend tied a cloth around it. A
word, a blessing where he could. Some were gone, and he laid a hand on
them in farewell and commended their souls to God with a hasty prayer.
He found a wounded boy and picked him up, carrying him back through
the smoke and puddles, away from the cannon.Another roar. The fourth column came running through the broken ground,
to throw themselves into the fighting at the redoubt. He saw an officer with a
flag of some kind run up shouting, then fall, shot through the head. A little
boy, a little black boy in blue and yellow, grabbed the flag and then bodies
hid him from view.
“Jesus Christ,” Roger said, because there wasn’t anything else he could
possibly say. He could feel the boy’s heart beating under his hand through the
soaked cloth of his coat. And then it stopped.
The cavalry charge had broken altogether. Horses were being ridden or led
away, a few of them fallen, huge and dead in the marshy ground, or
struggling to rise, neighing in panic.
An officer in a gaudy uniform was crawling away from a dead horse.
Roger set the boy’s body down and ran heavily to the officer. Blood was
gushing down the man’s thigh and his face, and Roger fumbled in his pocket,
but 
there was nothing there. The man doubled up, hands pressing his groin,
and saying something in a language Roger didn’t recognize.
“It’s all right,” he said to the man, taking him by the arm. “You’re going to
be all right. I won’t leave you.”
“Bóg i Marija pomóżcie mi,”
 the man gasped.
“Aye, right. God be with you.” He turned the man on his side, pulled out
his shirttail and ripped it off, then stuffed it into the man’s trousers, pressing
into the hot wetness. He leaned on the wound with both hands, and the man
screamed.
Then there were several cavalrymen there, all talking at once in multiple
languages, and they pushed Roger out of the way and picked the wounded
officer up bodily, carrying him away.
Most of the firing had stopped now. The cannon was silent, but his ears felt
as though fire-bells were ringing in his head; it hurt.
He sat down, slowly, in the mud and became aware of rain running down
his face. He closed his eyes. And after some time, became aware that a few
words had come back to him.
“Out of the depths I cry unto you, O, Lord. O, Lord, hear my voice.”
The trembling didn’t stop, but some little time later, he got up and
staggered away toward the distant marshes, to help bury the dead.93
Portrait of a Dead Man
THE AIR STILL SMELLED of burning, and the onshore wind in the evening
had added a faint stink of death to the usual smell of the marshes. But the
battle was over, the Americans defeated. Lord John had turned up in the
afternoon, stained with powder smoke but cheerful, to assure her that it 
was
over, and all was well.
She didn’t 
think
 she’d screamed at him, but whatever she’d said had made
his face set beneath the mottling of black powder, and he’d squeezed her
hand hard and said, “I’ll find him.” And left.
The next day, she’d received a note from Lord John saying simply, 
I have
walked the entire field, with my aides. We have not found him, neither dead
nor injured. A hundred or so prisoners were taken, and he is not among them.
Hal has sent an official inquiry to General Lincoln.
“We have not found him, neither dead nor injured.”
 She whispered that
under her breath, over and over, throughout the day, as a means of keeping
herself from going out to comb that bloody field herself, turning over every
grain of sand and blade of saw grass. And in the evening, Lord John had
come again, worn and weary, but with a clean face and a smile.
“You said that your husband meant to speak with a Captain Marion, so I
went into the American camp with a flag of truce, looking for one. He’s now
a lieutenant colonel, it seems, but he did speak with Roger—and he told me
that Roger came off the field with him, unhurt, and went to help with the
burial of the fallen Americans.”
“Oh, God.” Her knees had given way and she’d sat down, her feelings in
chaos. 
He isn’t dead, he wasn’t hurt.
 And the feeling of relief at that was
enormous—but instantly shot through with doubt, questions, and an abiding
fear. 
If he’s alive, why isn’t he
 here
?
“Where?” she managed, after a moment. “Where … did they bury them?”“I don’t know,” Lord John said, his brow creased a little. “I’ll find out, if
you like. But I think the burials must surely have been completed by now—
there was considerable carnage on the field, but Lieutenant Colonel Maitland
thinks there were not above two hundred killed. He was commanding the
redoubt,” he added, seeing her blank look. He cleared his throat.
“I think that perhaps,” he said diffidently, “he might have then gone with
the army surgeons, to help with the wounded?”
“Oh.” She managed to take a breath that completely filled her lungs; the
first one in the last three days. “Yes. That—sounds very reasonable.” 
But why
the
 hell 
didn’t he send me a note?
She gathered enough strength to get up and offer Lord John thanks and her
hand. He took the hand, drew her in, and embraced her, his arms the first
warmth she remembered feeling since Roger had left.
“It will be all right, my dear,” he said softly, patted her, and stepped back.
“I’m sure it will be all right.”
BRIANNA VACILLATED BETWEEN being sure, too, and not being sure at
all—but the balance of evidence seemed to indicate that Roger probably was
(a) alive and (b) reasonably intact, and that semi-conviction was at least
enough to let her return to work, seeking to drown her doubt in turpentine.
She couldn’t decide whether painting Angelina Brumby was more like
trying to catch a butterfly without a net or lying in wait all night by a
waterhole, waiting for some shy wild beast to appear for a few seconds,
during which you might—if lucky—snap its photo.
“And what I wouldn’t give for my Nikon right now …” she muttered under
her breath. Today was the first hair day. Angelina had spent nearly two hours
under the hands of Savannah’s most popular hairdresser, emerging at last
under a cloud of painstakingly engineered curls and ringlets, these powdered
to a fare-thee-well and further decorated by a dozen or so brilliants stabbed in
at random. The whole construction was so vast that it gave the impression
that Angelina was carrying about her own personal thunderstorm, complete
with lightning flashes.
The notion made Brianna smile, and Angelina, who had been looking
rather apprehensive, perked up in response.
“Do you like it?” she asked hopefully, poking gingerly at her head.“I do,” Bree said. “Here, let me …” For Angelina, unable or unwilling to
bend her bedizened head enough to look down, was about to collide with 
the
little platform on which the sitter’s chair was perched.
Once settled, Angelina became her usual self, chatty and distractible—and
always in movement, with waving hands, turning head, widening eyes,
constant questions and speculations. But if she was difficult to capture on
canvas, she was also charming to watch, and Bree was constantly torn
between exasperation and fascination, trying to catch something of the blithe
butterfly without having to drive a hatpin through her thorax to make her 
be
still
 for five minutes.
She had had nearly two weeks of dealing with Angelina, though, and now
set a vase of wax flowers on the table, with firm instructions that Angelina
should fix her eyes upon this and count the petals. She then turned over a
two-minute sandglass and urged her subject not to speak or move until the
glass ran out.
This procedure—repeated at intervals—let her circle Angelina, sketchpad
in hand, making rough sketches of the head and neck, with quick visual notes
of a ringlet coming down the curve of the neck, a deep wave over one of
Angelina’s shell-pink ears … the morning sun was coming through the
window, glowing sweetly through the ear. She wanted to try to catch that
pink …
There was time, perhaps, to work on the arms and hands …. She had as
much as she needed of the hair for now, and Angelina was wearing a soft
gray-silk wrapper that left her arms bare to the elbow.
“Ooh! Are you painting me now?” Angelina sat up straighter, wrinkling
her nose at the smell of fresh turpentine.
“I will be, soon,” Bree assured her, setting out the palette and brushes. “If
you want to stretch for a few minutes, though, this would be a good time.”
Angelina made her way down to the floor, one hand minding her swaying
hair and the other fanned for balance, and vanished without urging. Brianna
could hear her clattering out into the sunshine at the back of the house,
calling to Jem and Mandy, who were playing ball in the yard with the little
Henderson boy from next door.
Bree drew a deep breath, savoring the momentary solitude. There was a
strong touch of fall in the air, though the sun was bright through the window,
and a single late bumblebee hummed slowly in, circled the disappointing wax
flowers, and bumbled out again.It would be winter soon in the mountains. She felt a pang of longing for the
high rocks and the clean scent of balsam fir, snow, and mud, the close warm
smell of sheltered animals. Much more for her parents, for the sense of her
family all about her. Moved by impulse, she turned the page of her
sketchbook and tried to capture a glimpse of her father’s face—just a line or
two in profile, the straight long nose and the strong brow. And the small
curved line that suggested his smile, hidden in the corner of his mouth.
That was enough for now. With the comforting sense of his presence near
her, she opened the box where she kept the small lead-foil tubes she had
made, the ends folded over to close them, and the little pots of hand-ground
pigment, and made up her simple palette. Lead white, a touch of lampblack,
and a dab of madder lake. A moment’s hesitation, and she added a thin line of
lead-tin yellow, and a spot of smalt, the nearest thing she could get—
so far,
she thought with determination—to cobalt.
With the color of shadows in her mind, she went across to the small
collection of canvases leaning against the wall and, uncovering the unfinished
portrait of Jane, set it on the table, where it would catch the morning light.
“That’s the trouble,” she murmured. “Maybe …” The light. She’d done it
with an imagined light source, falling from the right, so as to throw the
delicate jawline into relief. But what she hadn’t thought to imagine was what
kind
 of light it was. The shadows cast by a morning light sometimes had a
faint green tinge, while those of midday were dusky, a slight browning of the
natural skin tones, and evening shadows were blue and gray and sometimes a
deep lavender. But what time of day suited the mysterious Jane?
She frowned at the portrait, trying to feel the girl, know something of her
through Fanny’s words, her emotions.
She was a prostitute.
 Fanny had said her original drawing had been made
by one of the … customers … at the brothel. Surely, then, it had been made at
night? 
Firelight, then … or candlelight?
Her ruminations were interrupted by the sound of Angelina’s laughter and
footsteps in the hallway. A man’s voice, amused—Mr. Brumby. 
And what’s
he thinking just now? Is he pleased about the battle, or dismayed?
“Mr. Salomon is in my office, Henrike,” he was saying over his shoulder
as he came in. “Take him something to eat, would you? Ah, Mrs. MacKenzie.
A very good morning to you, ma’am.” Alfred Brumby paused in the
doorway, smiling in at her. Angelina clung to his arm, beaming up at him andshedding white powder on the sleeve of his bottle-green coat, but he didn’t
appear to notice. “And how is the work proceeding, might I ask?”
He was courteous enough to make it sound as though he really 
was
 asking
permission to inquire, rather than demanding a progress report.
“Very well, sir,” Bree said, and stepped back, gesturing, so he could come
in and see the head sketches that she’d done so far, arranged in fans on the
table: Angelina’s complete head and neck from multiple angles, close view of
hairline, side and front, assorted small details of ringlets, waves, and
brilliants.
“Beautiful, beautiful!” he exclaimed. He bent over them, taking a quizzing
glass from his pocket and using it to examine the drawings. “She’s captured
you exactly, my dear—a thing I shouldn’t have thought possible without the
use of leg-irons, I confess.”
“Mr. Brumby!” Angelina swatted at him, but laughed, flushing like a June
rose.
Lord, that color!
 But there was no chance of it lasting long enough to study
—she’d just have to fix it in mind and try later. She cast a longing glance at
the tempting dab of madder on her fresh palette.
Mr. Brumby had a due regard for his own time, though, and thus for hers
as well, and after a few more flattering remarks he kissed his wife’s hand and
left to meet Mr. Salomon, leaving Angelina still an enchanting shade of pink.
“Sit down,” Bree said, hastily offering a hand. “Let’s see how much we
can get done before our elevenses.”
The awe of actual oil paints—perhaps aided by the fumes of turpentine and
linseed oil—seemed to calm Angelina, and while she sat with unusual
rigidity, it didn’t really matter at the moment, and the studio was temporarily
filled with a peaceful silence made up of small noises: children outside, dogs
scratching and snuffling, muffled pot-banging and talk from the cookhouse, a
thump of feet and murmur of voices overhead as the maids swept out the
hearths, emptied the chamber pots, and aired the linens, the jingle and clop of
wagons passing in the street.
A single distant 
boom
 came in on the breeze from the window and she
stiffened for a moment, but as nothing further happened, she relaxed back
into the work, though now with the thought of Roger hovering over her left
shoulder, watching her paint. She imagined for a moment his arm about her
waist and the hairs on the back of her neck prickled, in anticipation of warm
breath.The mantelpiece clock in the drawing room down the hall struck eleven in
an imperious chime, and Bree felt her stomach gurgle in anticipation.
Breakfast had been at six, and she could do with a slice of cake and a cup of
tea.
“R oo wrkg n m mth?” Mrs. Brumby said, moving her lips as little as
possible, just in case.
“No, you can talk,” Brianna assured her, suppressing a smile. “Don’t move
your hands, though.”
“Oh, of course!” The hand that had risen unconsciously to fiddle with her
densely sculpted curls dropped like a stone into her lap, but then she giggled.
“Must I have Henrike feed me my elevenses? I hear her coming.”
Henrike weighed about fourteen stone and could be heard coming for some
considerable time before she appeared, the wooden heels of her shoes striking
the bare floorboards of the hall with a measured tread like the thump of a bass
drum.
“I have 
got
 to paint that floorcloth you asked for,” Bree said, not realizing
that she’d spoken aloud until Angelina laughed.
“Oh, do,” she said. “I meant to tell you, Mr. Brumby says he prefers the
design with the pineapples, and could you possibly have it ready by
Wednesday-week? He wants to have a great dinner for General Prévost and
his officers. In gratitude, you know, for his gallant defense of the city.” She
hesitated, her little pink tongue darting out to touch her lips. “Do you think
… er … I don’t wish to—to be—that is—”
Brianna made a long, slow brushstroke, a streak of pale pink mingled with
cream catching the shine of light on the roundness of Angelina’s delicate
forearm.
“It’s all right,” she said, barely attending. “Don’t move your fingers.”
“No, no!” Angelina said, twitching her fingers guiltily, then trying to
remember how they’d been.
“That’s fine, don’t move!”
Angelina froze, and Bree managed a gray suggestion of shadow between
the fingers while Henrike clumped in. To her surprise, though, there was no
sound of rattling coffee things, nor any hint of the cake she’d smelled baking
this morning as she dressed.
“What is it, Henrike?” Angelina was still sitting rigidly erect, and while
she’d been given permission to talk, she kept her eyes fixed on the vase of
flowers. “Where is our morning coffee?”“Da ist ein Mann,”
 Henrike informed her mistress portentously, dropping
her voice as though to avoid being overheard.
“Someone at the door, you mean?” Angelina risked a curious glance at the
studio door before jerking her eyes back into line. “What sort of man?”
Henrike pursed her lips and nodded at Brianna.
“Ein Soldat. Er will sie sehen.”
“A soldier?” Angelina dropped her pose and looked at Brianna in
astonishment. “And he wants to see Mrs. MacKenzie? You’re sure of that,
Henrike? You don’t think he might want Mr. Brumby?”
Henrike was fond of her young mistress and refrained from rolling her
eyes, instead merely nodding again at Bree.
“Her,” she said in English. 
“Er sagte, ‘die
 Lay-dee Pain-ter
.’”
 She folded
her hands under her apron and waited with patience for further instructions.
“Oh.” Angelina was clearly at a loss—and just as clearly had lost all sense
of her pose.
“Shall I go and talk to him?” Bree inquired. She swished her squirrel-fur
brush in the turps and wrapped it in a bit of damp rag.
“Oh, no—bring him here, will you, Henrike?” Angelina plainly wanted to
know what this visitation was about. And, Bree thought with an internal
smile, seeing Angelina poke hastily at her hair, be seen in the thrilling
position of having her portrait painted.
The soldier in question proved to be a very young man—in the uniform of
the Continental army. Angelina gasped at sight of him and dropped the glove
she was holding in her left hand.
“Who are you, sir?” she demanded, sitting up as straight as she possibly
could. “And how come you are here, may I ask?”
“I came under flag of truce, to bring a message. Lieutenant Hanson, your
servant, ma’am,” the young man replied, bowing. “And yours, ma’am,”
turning to Brianna. He withdrew a sealed note from the bosom of his coat and
bowed to her. “If I may take the liberty of inquiring—are you Mrs. Roger
MacKenzie?”
She felt as though she’d been dropped abruptly down a glacial abyss,
freezing cold and ice-blind. Confused memories of yellow telegrams seen in
war movies, the memory of siege guns, and 
where is Roger?
“I … am,” she croaked. Angelina and Henrike both looked at her, grasped
the situation at once, and Angelina rushed to support her.“What has happened?” Angelina demanded fiercely, hugging Bree round
the middle and glaring at the soldier. “Tell us at once!”
Henrike’s hands tightened on Bree’s shoulders, and she could hear the
whisper of a German prayer behind her. 
“Mein Gott, erlöse uns vom Bösen
…”
“Er …” The young man—he couldn’t be more than sixteen, Bree thought
dimly—looked flabbergasted. “I—er—”
Bree got control of her throat muscles and swallowed.
“Has he been killed in battle?” she asked, with what calm she could
muster. 
Oh, God, I can’t tell the kids, I can’t do this … Oh, God …
“Well, yes, ma’am,” the soldier said, blinking. “But how did you know?”
The note was still in his hand, half extended. She broke free of the women
and snatched it from him, scrabbling frantically to break the seal.
For a moment, the words, written in an unfamiliar hand, swam before her
eyes, and her gaze dropped to the signature. 
A doctor, dear God …
 And then
her eyes rose to the salutation.
Friend MacKenzie
“What?” she said, looking up at the young soldier. “Who the hell wrote
this?”
“Why, Dr. Wallace, ma’am,” he said, shocked by her language. Then,
realizing, “Oh. He’s a Quaker, ma’am.” She wasn’t paying attention, though,
having returned to the text of the letter.
Thy husband bids me give thee his best and tell thee that he will be with
thee in Savannah in three days’ time, God willing.
 She closed her eyes and
took a breath so deep that it dizzied her. 
He would have written to say so in
his own hand but has suffered a minor dislocation of the thumb which
prevents his writing comfortably.
He has departed on a brief but urgent errand for Lieutenant-Colonel
Marion. In the meantime, he asks whether thee would come to the American
camp at Savannah (the soldier who brings this under a flag of truce will
escort thee), in order to perform an artistic service of generosity and
compassion.
One of the most esteemed of the American cavalry commanders was killed
in the battle, and General Lincoln is desirous of having some concrete
memento of General Pulaski. Friend Roger offered consolation to the
general’s friends, and upon hearing General Lincoln’s lamentation at havingno lasting memorial, suggested that, as thee were close at hand, thee might
be willing to come and make a drawing of the gentleman, prior to his burial.
At this point, astonishment began to overcome shock and she started to
breathe more slowly. She was still light-headed and her heart was fluttering
—she put a hand flat on her chest in reflex—but the words on the page had
steadied.
Pulaski. The name was vaguely familiar to her; she must have heard it in
school. One of the European volunteers who had come to join the American
cause. There was something in New York named after him, wasn’t there?
And now—
now,
 today, not two hundred years in the past—he had died.
She became aware of Angelina, Henrike, and the young soldier, all staring
at her with varying degrees of concern and anxiety.
“It’s all right,” she said. Her voice trembled, and she cleared her throat and
shook her head to dispel the dizziness. “It’s all right,” she said again, more
firmly. “My husband’s all right.”
“Oh …” Angelina’s face relaxed and she clasped her hands. “Oh, I’m 
so
glad, Mrs. MacKenzie!”
Behind Angelina’s back, Henrike crossed herself solemnly, the fear ebbing
from her eyes. The soldier coughed.
“Yes, ma’am,” he said apologetically. “I should have said, straight out.
Only I never thought …”
“It’s all right,” Bree said. Her hands were damp, and she picked up a
relatively clean rag to dry them, then folded the note carefully and tucked it
into her pocket. Her heart was slowing and her brain was starting to work
again.
“Mrs. Brumby … Angelina … I need to go with this gentleman. Just for a
few hours,” she added quickly, seeing anxiety bloom again in Angelina’s big
brown eyes. “It’s a request from my husband; something urgent that I have 
to
do for him. But I’ll come back as quickly as ever I can. Do you think perhaps
… the children?” She looked apologetically at Henrike, but the housekeeper
nodded vigorously.
“
Ja,
 I vill mind them. I—” The clank of the brass door knocker interrupted
her, and she turned sharply. 
“Ach! Mein Gott!”
 She moved off with
determination, muttering something under her breath that Brianna couldn’t
interpret but assumed to be along the lines of 
“If it isn’t one damned thing it’s
another …”“I’ll have Cook pack you some food. And will Mrs. MacKenzie need a
horse?” Angelina turned sharply to the young soldier, who blushed.
“I’ve brought a good riding mule for the lady, ma’am,” he said. “It’s—it’s
not a great distance to the—to the camp.”
“The camp?” Angelina said blankly, interrupted in her mental preparations.
“To the … 
American
 camp? Sure you don’t mean behind the siege lines?”
Well,
 this 
could get sticky …
“It’s a matter of friendship, Angelina,” Bree said firmly. “My husband is a
minister; he knows a lot of people on both sides of this war, and it’s a friend
of his, a surgeon named Dr. Wallace, who asked for me to come.”
“Dr. Wallace … oh! You don’t mean 
the
 Dr. Wallace, who operated on the
governor?” Angelina was round-eyed by this time, alarmed but excited by the
sense of emergency.
“I … possibly,” Brianna said, taken aback. “I haven’t met him yet. I’m
sure that—”
“I wish to speak with Mrs. MacKenzie,” a deep male voice said from
somewhere down the corridor. “My friend wishes to engage her for a portrait.
Lord John Grey recommended that we call upon her—a mutual acquaintance.
Please inform her that I have brought a letter of introduction, and—”
“Mein Gott,”
 Brianna said under her breath. John Grey? What on earth—
The gentleman—his voice was English, educated—was encountering
resistance from Henrike. Brianna was already picking up pencils, charcoal
sticks, shuffling together a box of things she might need to make the image of
a dead man. There wasn’t time …
“Angelina,” she said, over her shoulder. “Could you maybe tell this man
that I’ve been called away on an urgent errand? He can come back tomorrow
—or … or maybe the next day,” she added doubtfully. No telling how long it
might take.
“Of course!” Angelina headed purposefully for the hall, and Brianna
closed her eyes and tried to think. The kids, first. At least she could tell them
that Daddy was coming to see them soon. Then … what on earth to wear for
a commission of this sort? It would have to be her rough painting gown, for
riding a mule and whatever the conditions might be in a siege camp …
Would they have trenches? she wondered.
The voices in the hallway had risen and there were more of them. Angelina
and Henrike were arguing with what sounded like 
two
 men now, both of
whom seemed set upon seeing Mrs. MacKenzie, come hell or high water.There wasn’t time for this. Impatient, she stepped out into the hall,
intending to send the visitors on their way. The morning sun flooded in
through 
the open front door, silhouetting what seemed like a mob of shadow-
people, black bodies, faceless heads, limbs outlined in sparking light as they
moved. It was one of those sudden, beautiful sights that happen without
warning, and she paused for a single heartbeat to fix it in her mind. Then one
of the taller figures moved, turning, and she saw in outline the same long,
straight nose, the same high brow that her fingers had drawn so recently.
“Wait!” she said. She had no memory of striding down the hall but was
suddenly face-to-face with him and there was no more obscuring shadow, but
morning sun lighting a shockingly familiar pair of blue and slanted eyes fixed
on hers.
“Bloody hell,” he said, completely startled. “It’s you!”
“YOUR 
BROTHER
?” ANGELINA was excited beyond all bearing. “And
you didn’t know he was here, nor he you? How amazing!”
“Yes,” Bree said. “Yes … amazing.” In a daze, she extended a tentative
hand toward him. William blinked once, grasped the hand, and bowed over it,
kissing it lightly. The feel of his breath on her turpentine-chilled hand raised
the hairs on her forearm, and she tightened her fingers on his. He straightened
up but didn’t pull away; his fingers turned and covered hers.
“I didn’t mean to disturb you,” he said, and she could see—and feel—his
eyes searching her face, just the way she was searching his.
“Oh, not at all,” she said, meaning quite the opposite. He caught that,
smiled a little, and let go of her hand. “I—did you say that Lord John sent
you?”
“Yes, he did, the conniving old sod. Er … begging your pardon, ma’am.”
He took his gaze off her for a moment, turning toward the other gentleman.
This was a tall, very broad young man of mixed blood, with a remarkable cap
of close-cropped tight curls of a soft reddish brown.
“Allow me to present my friend, Mr. John Cinnamon,” William said.
Angelina and Henrike curtsied immediately in a bloom of skirts. Mr.
Cinnamon looked quite horrified, but after a quick glance at William, he
bowed deeply and murmured, “Your most obedient servant … ma’am. And
… er … ma’am.”“Er … ma’am? Mrs. MacKenzie?” Lieutenant Hanson, quite eclipsed by
William and Mr. Cinnamon, who were each a good foot taller than he was,
struggled manfully to regain Brianna’s attention. “We must be going, ma’am,
or we shan’t arrive in time for you to … er … do it.” He cleared his throat.
“And who are you, may I ask?” William was frowning at the lieutenant’s
blue-and-buff uniform. “What on earth are you doing here?”
Bree cleared her own throat, loudly.
“Lieutenant Hanson came to fetch me for an urgent commission,” she said.
“I—he’s right. We need to leave, as soon as I’ve packed my things and
changed clothes. Told the children. Will you … come with me, back to my
studio? We can talk while I put things together.”
BY UNSPOKEN CONSENSUS, William came alone, leaving his 
friend and
Lieutenant Hanson to the tender mercies of Angelina and Henrike, who were
already twittering about cakes, coffee, and perhaps slices of cold ham …
Brianna’s stomach gurgled at the thought of ham sandwiches, but she
suppressed it for the moment and turned to William. 
My brother.
“I wanted to tell you,” she said at once, closing the door and standing with
her back against it. “When we first met. Do you remember? On the quay in
Wilmington. Roger—my husband—was with me, and Jem and Mandy. That
was—I wanted you to meet them, see them, even if you didn’t know we were
… yours.”
He looked away and put a hand on the table, touching the wood only with
his fingertips. She felt the solid door against her shoulder blades and
understood the need of physical support.
“Mine?” he said softly, looking down at the scatter of papers and brushes
on the table.
“I should probably say something polite about ‘only if you want us,’” she
said. “But it’s—”
“A bit late for that,” he finished, and looked up at her, his eyes wary but
direct. “To lie about the truth, I mean.” His mouth turned up a little at one
side, but she wasn’t sure it was a smile. “Particularly when it’s as plain as the
nose on your face. And mine.”
She touched her own nose by reflex, and laughed, a little nervously. His
nose 
was
 hers, and the eyes, too. He was tanned, though, with dark-chestnuthair clubbed in a queue, and while his face was very like her—their—
father’s, his mouth had come from somewhere else.
“Well. I do apologize, though. For not telling you.”
He looked at her, expressionless, for the space of four heartbeats; she felt
each small thud distinctly.
“I accept your apology,” he said dryly. “Though in all honesty, I’m glad
you didn’t tell me.” He paused, then, apparently thinking this might sound
ungracious, added, “I wouldn’t have known how to respond to such a
revelation. At the time.”
“And you do now?”
“No, I bloody don’t,” he said frankly. “But as my uncle recently pointed
out, at least I haven’t blown my brains out. When I was seventeen, I might
have.”
A hot flush rose in her cheeks. He wasn’t joking.
“How flattering,” she said, and to avoid looking at him she turned and
resumed the ordering of her sketchbox. She heard him snort a little, under his
breath, and then his footsteps, close behind her.
“
I
 apologize,” he said quietly. “I didn’t mean that with any derogatory
reference to—to you, or your family …”
“
Your
 family, you mean,” she said, not turning round. The silverpoint
pencil? No, charcoal and graphite; silverpoint was too delicate for this.
He cleared his throat. “I meant it solely with regard to my own situation,”
he said formally. “Which has nothing whatever to do with—”
He stopped abruptly. She swung round to look at him and found him
staring at the portrait of Jane, propped against the wall, as though he had
quite 
literally seen a ghost. He’d gone pale under his tan and his hands were
half clenched.
“Where did you get that?” he said. His voice was hoarse, and he cleared
his throat violently. “That picture. That … girl.”
“I made it,” she said simply. “For Fanny.”
He closed his eyes for an instant, then opened them, still fixed on the
painting. He turned away, though, and she caught the bob of his Adam’s
apple as he swallowed, hard.
“Fanny,” he said. “Frances. You know her, then. Where is she? How is
she?”
“She’s fine,” Bree said firmly, and, crossing the few feet of floor between
them, laid a hand on his arm. “She’s with my parents, in North Carolina.”“You’ve seen her?”
“Yes, of course—though actually, I haven’t seen her since early
September. We stopped for a bit in Charleston—Charles Town,” she
corrected, “to visit my … well, I suppose he’s my stepbrother, and Marsali,
well, she’s sort of my stepsister, but they’re not exactly …”
The wariness had come back into William’s eyes. He didn’t pull away
from her, though, and she felt the warmth of his arm through the cloth of his
coat.
“Are these people also my relations?” he asked, as though fearing the
answer might be yes.
“I suppose so. Da adopted Fergus—he’s French, but … well, that doesn’t
matter. He was an orphan, in Paris. Then later Da married … well, that
doesn’t matter, either, but Marsali—she’s Fergus’s wife—and her sister,
Joan, they’re Da’s stepdaughters, so … um. And Fergus and Marsali’s
children—they have five now, so they’d be …”
William took a step back, detaching himself, and put up a hand.
“Enough,” he said firmly. He pointed a long forefinger at her. “You, I can
deal with. Nothing else. Not today.”
She laughed and picked up the ratty shawl she kept in the studio for work
during the chilly hours of the morning.
“Not today,” she agreed. “I have to go, William. Shall we—”
“Your commission,” he said, and shook his head as though to settle his
wits. “What is it?”
“Well, if you must know, I’m going to the American siege camp to draw
pictures of a dead cavalry commander.”
He blinked—and then she saw his eyes lift, his gaze going to the portrait of
Jane. The sun had moved, and the picture stood in shadow. She stopped,
shawl halfway around her shoulders, startled by the look on his face. It lasted
no more than a moment, though, and then he turned and picked up her
sketchbox, tucking it under his arm.
“Are portraits of the dead a specialty of yours?” he asked, with a slight
edge.
“Not yet,” she replied, with an equal edge. “Give me my sketchbox.”
“I’ll carry it,” he said, and reached to open the door for her. “I’m coming
with you.”94
Outriders
THE FOG OFF THE river had finally lifted, and the sun was warm.
To her relief, the mule Lieutenant Hanson had brought for her was tall and
rangy; rawboned and rabbit-eared, but of a friendly disposition. She’d had
visions of herself riding a wizened donkey, her feet dragging in the dust,
surrounded by large men on big horses, towering above her. As it was,
William and John Cinnamon both possessed sound but unremarkable
geldings, and the lieutenant himself rode another, smaller mule. The
lieutenant wasn’t happy.
“I am not allowing my sister to go unaccompanied into an army camp,”
William had said firmly, untethering his own horse outside the Brumbys’
house.
“Mais oui,”
 Mr. Cinnamon said, and bent to give Brianna a foot up into
her saddle.
“But—
I
 will be escorting her! General Lincoln is expecting me to bring
him Mrs. MacKenzie!”
“And Mrs. MacKenzie he will get,” she assured the lieutenant, settling her
skirts and taking up the reins. “Though apparently with outriders.”
Lieutenant Hanson had given William a look of deep suspicion, and no
wonder, she thought. William sat tall and easy in the saddle, and wore a
shabby, travel-stained suit that hadn’t been fashionable to start with, but
someone with much less experience than Lieutenant Hanson would have
recognized him at a glance as a soldier—and not only a soldier. An officer
accustomed to command. The fact that William’s accent and bearing were at
odds with his very commonplace dress was probably even more upsetting.
The lieutenant’s thoughts were clear to her—and, she thought, probably to
William, too, though his face was politely impassive. Was he a British soldier
in mufti? A spy? Was he a British soldier looking to turn his coat and take upa commission with the Continentals? She saw Mr. Hanson’s gaze dart to the
bulk of John Cinnamon, and away. And what about 
him
?
But there was no choice; Lieutenant Hanson had been sent to fetch an
artist, and couldn’t well come back without her. Shoulders hunched around
his ears, he turned his mule’s head toward White Bluff Road.
“Tell me about General Pulaski,” Brianna suggested, coming up beside
him. “It was only this morning that he was killed?”
“Oh. Er … no, ma’am. That is to say,” Hanson said, obviously striving for
exactness, “he did 
die
 this morning, on the ship. But he—”
“What ship?” she asked, startled.
“The 
Wasp,
 I think it’s called.” Hanson cast a quick look over his shoulder
and lowered his voice. “The general was shot up two days ago, runnin’ his
cavalry in betwixt two batteries, but—”
“He led a cavalry charge … into cannon?” Evidently Lieutenant Hanson
hadn’t lowered his voice quite enough, for the question came from William,
riding close behind. He sounded incredulous and slightly amused, and Bree
turned round and glared at him.
He ignored the glare, but urged his horse up toward Hanson’s mule. The
lieutenant was carrying his flag of truce, and at this, moved it instinctively,
pointing it at William in the manner of a jousting lance.
“I meant no insult to the general,” William said mildly, raising one hand in
negligent defense. “It sounds a most dashing and courageous maneuver.”
“It was,” Hanson replied shortly. He raised his flag a little and turned his
back on William, leaving brother and sister riding side by side, John
Cinnamon bringing up the rear. Bree gave William a narrow-eyed look that
strongly suggested he should keep his mouth shut. He eyed her for a moment,
then looked away with a patently bland countenance.
She wanted to laugh almost as much as she wanted to poke him with
something sharp, but lacking her own flag of truce, she settled for an audible
snort.
“À vos souhaits,”
 Mr. Cinnamon said politely behind her.
“Merci,”
 she said, with equal politeness. William snorted.
“À tes amours,”
 Mr. Cinnamon said, sounding amused. Nothing more was
said until they arrived a few minutes later at the edge of the city. A
detachment of Scottish Highlanders was guarding the end of the street, even
though the street itself was guarded by a couple of large redoubts dug by the
British, visible on the side toward the river. The sight of the kilted soldiers,and the sound of their voices speaking Gaelic to one another, gave her a
peculiar twisting sensation inside. A camp kettle was boiling over a tiny fire,
and the scent of coffee and toasted bread made her mouth water. It was a long
time since breakfast, and in the haste of leaving, they’d left behind Henrike’s
packet of food.
She must have been gazing hungrily at a few men eating by the fire, for
William nudged his horse nearer and murmured, “I’ll see you’re fed as soon
as we reach the camp.”
She glanced at him and nodded thanks. There was nothing amused or
offhand in his manner now. He sat relaxed in his saddle, reins loose in his
hand as Lieutenant Hanson talked to the Scottish officer in command, but his
eyes never left the soldiers.
They passed through the checkpoint in silence. She could feel the eyes of
the soldiers on her skin, and the hair prickled on her scalp. 
The enemy …
The American siege lines lay no more than a quarter mile away, the camp
perhaps a half mile beyond, but Lieutenant Hanson led them immediately
inland, in order to circle the American redoubts and the French artillery,
dragged overland from the ships. The guns were silent—
thank God
—but she
could see them plainly, dark shapes beginning to emerge from the morning’s
fog, still thick here near the river.
“You were telling me about General Pulaski,” she said, pushing up beside
the lieutenant. She didn’t want to look at the cannon and think of Jem and
Mandy in the city—or the holes and burnt roofs she’d seen in the houses of
Savannah nearest the river. “He was on a ship, you said?”
The lieutenant had relaxed a little, once out of Savannah, and was pleased
to tell her of the dreadful but gallant death of Casimir Pulaski.
“Yes, ma’am. ’Twas the 
Wasp,
 as I said. When the general went down, his
men got him back directly, of course, but ’twas plain he was bad hurt. Dr.
Lynah—he’s the camp surgeon, ma’am—took the grapeshot out of him, but
then General Pulaski said as how he wanted to go aboard ship. I don’t know
why—”
“Because the French aren’t going to hang about much longer,” William
interrupted. “It’s hurricane season; D’Estaing will be nervous. I imagine
Pulaski knew that, too, and didn’t want to risk being left behind, wounded, if
—when, I mean—the Americans abandon the siege.”
Hanson turned in his saddle, pale with rage.
“And what would 
you
 know of such matters, you—you dandy prat?”William looked at him as he might regard a humming mosquito, but
answered politely enough.
“I have eyes, sir,” he said. “And if I understand aright, General Pulaski is
—was—the Commander of Horse for the entire American army. Is that
right?”
“It is,” Hanson replied, between gritted teeth. “So what?”
Even Bree could tell that this was purely rhetorical, and William merely
lifted one shoulder in a shrug.
“I want to hear about the general’s cavalry charge,” John Cinnamon said,
interested. “I’m sure he must have had a good reason,” he added tactfully,
“but why did he do that?”
“Yes, I’d like to hear that, too,” Bree put in hastily.
Lieutenant Hanson glared at William and John Cinnamon, but after a
muttered remark in which she caught only the words “… fine pair of
backgammon players …” He stiffened his shoulders and fell back a little, so
that Brianna could ride up alongside him on the narrow road. The countryside
here was flat and open, but the earth was sandy and thickly grown with a sort
of coarse, rough-edged grass that caught at the horses’ feet.
She could see that the road, though, had been heavily used of late.
Hoofprints, footprints, horse droppings, wagon wheels … the road was
churned and muddy, the verges trodden down by marching troops, moving
fast. A sudden shiver went up her back as the wind changed and she caught
the scent of the army. A feral smell of sweat and flesh, metal and grease,
tinged with the stink of lye soap, manure, half-burnt food, and gunpowder.
Mr. Hanson had relaxed a little, seeing that he had his audience’s full
attention, and was explaining that the Americans and their French allies had
planned and executed an assault on the British forces at the Spring Hill
redoubt—“You can see that from here, ma’am,” pointing toward the sea. As
part of that assault, General Pulaski’s cavalry was to follow the initial
infantry attack, “so as to cause confusion, d’you see, amongst the enemy.”
The cavalry charge had evidently accomplished that modest goal, but the
overall attack had failed, and Pulaski himself had been cut down when caught
in the crossfire between two British batteries.
“A great pity,” William said, with no sense of sarcasm whatever.
Lieutenant Hanson glanced at him, but accepted the remark with a brief nod.
“It was. I heard that the 
Wasp
’s captain meant to bury the general at sea—
but one of his friends who’d gone aboard with him said, no, they mustn’t, andcame ashore with his body just after dawn this morning, in a longboat.”
“Why would his friend not want him to be buried at sea?” she asked,
careful not to imply any criticism with the question.
“His men,” William said, before Lieutenant Hanson could answer. He
spoke with a sober certainty. “He’s their commander. They’ll need to bid him
farewell. Properly.”
The lieutenant had risen slightly in his stirrups, ready to be indignant at the
interruption, but hearing this, subsided and gave Brianna a brief bow.
“Just so, ma’am,” he said.
PAST THE ARTILLERY, they wound their way through an acre of so of
mud-spattered tents and soldiers, the air around them a strange combination
of sea tang, the acrid ghost of gunpowder, and a breath of autumn rot from
the harvested fields beyond. Brianna took a deep, inquisitive breath and let it
out hastily. Latrine trenches.
They were headed toward a cluster of large tents—this must be General
Lincoln’s field headquarters—that billowed and moved gently in the morning
air, like a group of friends with their heads together, talking. This pleasant
illusion was shattered in the next instant, as a battery of cannon went off
behind them.
Brianna started and jerked at the reins. Her mule, evidently used to this
kind of thing, jerked impatiently back with a toss of his head. Lieutenant
Hanson’s mule and the horses were less phlegmatic about the noise and shied
violently, nostrils flaring.
“Getting rather a late start this morning, aren’t you?” William said to
Hanson, bringing his horse round in a circle to calm it. 
And who taught you to
ride, brother?
 she thought, seeing him. Lord John was a good horseman, but
Jamie Fraser had been a groom at the estate where William had grown up.
“The fog,” Hanson replied shortly. “Cannon fire disperses it.” He turned
his mule’s head toward one of the large tents. “Come. You’re to see Captain
Pinckney.”
She found herself next to William, as they resumed their plodding advance,
and leaned close to speak to him quietly.
“You said they’d left it late—the artillery firing, you meant?”
“Yes.” He glanced at her, one dark eyebrow raised. “You needn’t worry;
it’s only a gesture.”“I wasn’t—” she began, but stopped. She 
was
 worried, worried that
perhaps her father had been mistaken, that the siege would continue …
“Well, all right, I was,” she conceded. “What do you mean, a gesture?”
“They’ve lost,” William said, with a quick glance toward Lieutenant
Hanson. “But they haven’t lifted the siege officially. Likely General Lincoln
is arguing with D’Estaing about it.”
She stared at him.
“You seem to know a bloody lot about it, for a guy who just rode into
town.”
“A guy?” The brow flicked higher, but relaxed as he dismissed this. “I 
was
a soldier, you know. And I know what a military camp feels like, what it
should feel like. This one is …” He lifted a hand toward the ragged rows of
tents. “They aren’t admitting it—hence the bombardment—but … Tighten
your rein; it’s coming again.”
It did, another volley of defiant artillery, but the mules and horses merely
danced and snorted this time, not taken by surprise.
“But?” she said, neatly returning to her place at his side. He gave her a
sidelong smile.
“But they know the end is coming,” he finished. “But as for my knowledge
of the situation, I will admit it’s more than observation. My fath—” A brief,
fierce grimace crossed his face and disappeared. “Lord John told me about
the battle. He wasn’t in any doubt as to the outcome, nor am I.”
“So the siege 
is
 about to lift?” she persisted, wanting certainty.
“Yes.”
“Oh, good,” she said, and let her shoulders slump in relief. He gave her an
odd, interested look, but said no more and urged his horse into a faster walk.
CAPTAIN PINCKNEY WAS perhaps thirty and probably good-looking,
though sleeplessness and defeat had made him haggard. He blinked as Bree
alighted from her mule without assistance and turned to greet him; she topped
him by four or five inches. He closed his eyes for an instant, opened them
again, and bowed to her with impeccable courtesy.
“Your most obedient, Mrs. MacKenzie, and I am to give you the utmost
compliments of General Lincoln and the troops. I am also to convey his deep
sense of obligation and gratitude for your kind assistance.”He spoke like an Englishman, though she thought there was a southern
softness in his vowels. She didn’t try to curtsy, but bowed to him in return.
“I’m very glad to help,” she said. “I understand there may be some urgency
in the … er … situation. Perhaps you could show me where General Pulaski
is at the moment?”
Captain Pinckney glanced at William and John Cinnamon, who had
dismounted and handed their reins to the orderly accompanying the captain.
“William Ransom, sir, your servant.” William bowed and, straightening,
nodded at Cinnamon. “My friend and I have come to escort my sister. We
will remain, and see her back when her errand is finished.”
“Your sister? Oh, good.” Captain Pinckney looked substantially happier at
the revelation that he wouldn’t be solely responsible for her. “Your servant,
sir. Follow me.”
The guns went off again, a ragged volley. This time, she didn’t jump.
THE DEAD GENERAL lay in a small, worn green tent on the riverbank,
apart from the camp. This placement might have been a sign of respect, but
there was a practical aspect to it, too, as Brianna discovered when Captain
Pinckney removed a crumpled but clean handkerchief from his sleeve and
handed it to her before courteously raising the tent flap for her.
“Thank y— Oh, my God.” A few late flies rose sluggishly from the corpse,
wafted on a rising stink that shrouded him more thoroughly than the clean
sheet over his face and upper body.
“Gangrene,” William said behind her, under his breath. “Jesus.” John
Cinnamon coughed heavily, once, and fell silent.
“I do apologize, Mrs. MacKenzie,” Pinckney was saying. He’d taken hold
of her elbow, as though afraid she might either bolt or faint.
“I—It’s all right,” she managed, through the folds of the handkerchief. It
wasn’t, but she stiffened her spine, tensed her stomach muscles, and edged up
to the makeshift bier on which they’d laid Casimir Pulaski. William stepped
up beside her at once. He didn’t say anything or touch her, but she was glad
of his presence.
With a sidelong glance to be sure she wasn’t about to faint, Captain
Pinckney drew down the sheet.
The general was pale, eyes closed, his skin faintly mottled with purplish
undertones and a greenish tinge about the jawline. She’d have to adjust that;they might want a death portrait, but she was pretty sure they didn’t actually
want him to look really 
dead
—just … romantically dead. She swallowed and
tasted the thick, sweetly nasty air, even through the cloth. She coughed,
breathed out strongly through her nose, and moved closer.
“Romantic” is the word,
 she thought. He had a high brow (and a slightly
receding hairline …), a small dark mustache, neatly waxed to make the ends
turn up, and his features were an interesting mix of strength and delicacy. He
had no expression; he must have lapsed into unconsciousness before he died
(
and a good thing if he did, poor man …
).
“Did he—does he have a wife?” she asked, remembering her own feelings
when she’d thought for an instant that Roger—
“No,” Pinckney said. His eyes were fixed on Pulaski’s face. “He never
married. No money, of course. And no interest, really, in women.”
“His family in Poland?” Brianna ventured. “Perhaps I should make a
likeness for them, as well?”
Captain Pinckney lifted his gaze then, but only to exchange a brief glance
with Lieutenant Hanson.
“He didn’t speak of them, ma’am,” the lieutenant said, and bit his lip,
looking down at the dead man. “He—” He swallowed, audibly. “He was kind
enough to say that we—we were his family.”
“I see,” she said quietly, and did. “For all of you, then.”
She glanced down at the body, absently noting the details of the clean
dress uniform in which they’d clothed him and wondering morbidly exactly
where and how he’d been wounded. Could she ask?
There was a deep gash in Pulaski’s head, starting just above one temple,
the wound a reddish black, with tiny crumbs of blackened skin along its
edges. Looking closer, where the gash disappeared under the general’s hair,
she thought she perceived … without thinking, she put out a finger and felt
the cold skull give under her touch, light as it was. She heard Captain
Pinckney draw in a sharp breath and hastily removed the finger.
“Grapeshot?” William asked, sounding mildly interested.
“Yes, sir,” Captain Pinckney replied, with an air of somber rebuke that she
felt was aimed at her. “He was struck in several places—in the body and
head.”
“Poor man,” Brianna said softly. She felt a strong urge to touch him again
—to lay a hand gently on his chest, covered by the silver-banded red facing
of his uniform—the uniform had a high collar, made of some kind of whitefur … no, it was lambswool, lined with grubby pink velvet—but felt she
couldn’t, under the censorious gaze of the captain.
“The doctor—
our
 doctor—thought he might be saved.” Pinckney had
lowered his voice discreetly, talking directly to William. “He was conscious,
speaking … but he insisted upon being taken aboard the 
Wasp,
 and the navy
doctor …” He cleared his throat explosively and took a deep breath. “It was
the wound in his groin that went bad, or so I was told.”
“A great shame, sir,” William said, and clearly meant it. “A very gallant
gentleman.”
“Yes, sir,” the captain said, and she could tell that he had warmed toward
William.
“I understand that my sister is to make a likeness of the general,” William
said, and she looked up. He nodded to her, then tilted his head toward the
captain. “Would you tell Captain Pinckney what things you require for the
task, sister?”
Hearing the word 
“sister”
 in his voice again gave her an odd little bloom
of warmth in the middle of her chest.
“And while things are being prepared,” he added, before she could speak,
“perhaps she might be given something to eat—we came at once in answer to
General Lincoln’s request.”
“Oh. Of course. Certainly.” The captain looked over his shoulder.
“Lieutenant Hanson—will you see to finding something for the lady and her
escorts?”
“To be eaten somewhere else,” William said firmly.
LIGHT. THAT WAS the first thing. And somewhere to sit. A place to set her
implements. A cup of water.
“That’s really all I need,” she said, with a glance back toward the silent
tent. She hesitated for a moment. “I don’t know whether you were thinking
that you’d like—eventually, I mean—like a painting of the general, or—or
were you thinking just a drawing, or drawings? The message just said a
likeness, I mean, and I can do whatever you like, though all I can do today is
to make sketches and notes for a … more formal likeness.”
“Oh.” Captain Pinckney drew a deep breath, frowning, and she saw his
eyes slide sideways for an instant, then back to her. He straightened his
shoulders. “I don’t believe that has been decided as yet, Mrs. MacKenzie. ButI do assure you that—that you will be compensated adequately for whatever
… form the likeness may take. I will guarantee that personally.”
“Oh. I wasn’t worried about that.” She flushed slightly with
embarrassment. “I hadn’t expected to be paid—er … I mean … I intended
from the 
start to do this just as a gesture of … goodwill. In support of the—
the army, I mean.”
All four men stared at her, with varying degrees of astonishment. Her flush
grew hotter.
It hadn’t occurred to her that Lord John hadn’t told William she was a
rebel. Dr. Wallace undoubtedly knew her political allegiance, but perhaps had
thought it more discreet not to mention it. And she’d been staying in a
Loyalist household in a city under British occupation, employed by a very
prominent Loyalist.
Well, the cat was out of the bag now. She gave William a level look and
raised one brow. He raised one back at her and looked away.
It was midafternoon; the light was going already; it would be dark in a
couple of hours. There would be candles, Captain Pinckney assured her, as
many as she wanted. Or a lantern, perhaps?
“Perhaps,” she said. “I’ll make as many sketches as I can. Er … how long
…?” Given the stench of the dead man, she imagined they must be wanting to
get him underground as quickly as possible.
“We’ll bury him with the proper honors tomorrow morning,” Captain
Pinckney said, correctly interpreting her question. “The men will come this
evening, after supper, to pay their respects. Um … will that be all right?”
She was taken aback, but only for a moment, imagining this process of
visitation.
“Yes, perfectly all right,” she said firmly. “I’ll draw them, too.”95
Pozegnanie
SHE SAT, UNOBTRUSIVE IN the shadows. Head bent, the soft 
shush
 of
her charcoal lost in the clearing of throats, the rustle of clothing. But she
watched them, in ones and twos and threes, as they ducked under the open
tent flap and came to the general’s side. There each man paused to look on
his face, calm in the candlelight, and she caught what she could of the
drifting currents that crossed their own faces: shadows of grief and sorrow,
eyes sometimes dark with fear, or blank with shock and tiredness.
Often, they wept.
William and John Cinnamon flanked her, standing just behind on either
side, silent and respectful. General Lincoln’s orderly had offered them stools,
but they had courteously refused, and she found their buttressing presences
oddly comforting.
The soldiers came by companies, the uniforms (in some cases, only militia
badges) changing. John Cinnamon shifted his weight now and then, and
occasionally took a deep breath or cleared his throat. William didn’t.
What was he doing? she wondered. Counting the soldiers? Assessing the
condition of the American troops? They were shabby; dirty and unkempt, and
in spite of their respectful demeanor, few of the companies seemed to have
any notion of order.
For the first time, it occurred to her to wonder just what William’s motive
in coming had been. She’d been so happy at meeting him that she’d accepted
his statement that he wouldn’t let his sister go unaccompanied into a military
camp at face value. Was it true, though? From the little Lord John had said,
she knew that William had resigned his army commission—but that didn’t
mean he’d changed sides. Or that he had no interest in the state of the
American siege, 
or
 that he didn’t intend to pass on any information he gainedduring this visit. 
“I was a soldier,”
 he’d said. Clearly he still 
knew
 people in
the British army.
The skin on her shoulders prickled at the thought, and she wanted to turn
round and look up at him. A moment’s hesitation and she did just that. His
face was grave, but he was looking at her.
“All right?” he asked in a whisper.
“Yes,” she said, comforted by his voice. “I just wondered whether you’d
fallen asleep standing up.”
“Not yet.”
She smiled, and opened her mouth to say something, apologize for keeping
him and his friend out all night. He stopped her with a small twitch of fingers.
“It’s all right,” he said softly. “You do what you came to do. We’ll stay
with you and take you home in the morning. I meant it; I won’t leave you
alone.”
She swallowed.
“I know you did,” she said, just as softly. “Thank you.”
There was an audible stir outside. The procession of shuffling soldiers had
stopped. She sat up straight and felt the two men behind her shift. She caught
a low murmur from William.
“This will be General Lincoln, I expect.”
John Cinnamon made an inquisitive huffing noise but said nothing, and an
instant later the tent flap was pulled well back and a very fat, stocky man in
full Continental uniform, complete with cocked hat, limped in, followed by a
close-packed group of officers in a variety of uniforms. It had begun to rain,
and a welcome breath of cool, damp air came in with them.
She slipped her sketches into the writing desk and took out a few fresh
sheets, but didn’t return to her work right away; she didn’t want to draw
attention to herself. This … this was history, right in front of her.
Her heart had been quiet through the evening, but now it sped up and
began to thump heavily, in an unpleasant way that made her worry that it was
about to run amok. She pressed a hand hard against the placket of her stays,
and mentally uttered a fierce 
Stay!
 as though her heart were a large, unruly
dog.
The general stopped short beside the body, coughed—everyone did, the
smell was growing worse, despite the cool night—and slowly removed his
hat. He turned to murmur something to the man at his shoulder—a
Frenchman? She thought Lincoln was speaking French, though veryawkwardly—and she caught another whiff of rain and night, and saw the
droplets that he shook from his hat make spots in the shadowed dust.
Lincoln beckoned three of the men forward. 
French,
 said the objective
watcher in the back of her mind, and her pencil made rapid strokes, rough
indications of embroidery, epaulets, full-skirted blue coats, red waistcoats
and breeches …
The three men—naval officers?—stepped forward, one in front, his
lavishly gold-laced hat held solemnly to his bosom. She heard William make
a low humming noise in his throat; was this Admiral d’Estaing himself?
She leaned forward a little, not sketching now but memorizing, storing
away the play of firelight through the tent’s wall on the officer’s face, the
pitter of rain on the canvas above. The admiral—if that’s who he was—was
slender but round-faced, jowly, but with oddly childlike wide eyes and a
plump little mouth …. He murmured a few words in formal French, then
leaned forward and placed a hand on General Pulaski’s chest.
The general farted.
It was a long, loud, rumbling fart, and the night was filled with a stench so
terrible that Brianna huffed out all the air in her lungs in a vain effort to
escape it.
Someone laughed, out of sheer shock. It was a high-pitched giggle, and for
a moment she thought she’d done it herself and clapped a hand to her mouth.
The tent dissolved into embarrassed, half-stifled laughter punctuated by gasps
and choking as the entire rotting essence of General Pulaski’s insides filled
the atmosphere. Admiral d’Estaing turned hastily aside and threw up in the
corner.
She had to breathe … She grunted, as though the smell had punched her,
and her stomach puckered. It was like breathing rancid lard, a fatty foulness
that slicked the inside of her nose and throat.
“Come on.” William grabbed her by one arm, John Cinnamon by the other,
and they had her out of the tent in a ruthless instant, knocking General
Lincoln out of their way.
It was raining hard outside by now and she gulped air and water, breathing
as deep as she could.
“Oh, God, oh, God, oh, God …”
“Was that worse, do you think, than the dead bear in the wood above
Gareon?” John Cinnamon asked William, in a meditative voice.“Lots,” William assured him. “Oh, Jesus, I’m going to be sick. No, wait
…” He bent over, arms folded over his stomach, and gulped heavily for a
moment, then straightened up. “No, it’s all right, I’m not. Are you?” he asked
Brianna. She shook her head. Cold water was running down her face and her
sleeves were pasted to her arms, but she didn’t care. She would have jumped
through a hole in Arctic ice to cleanse herself of 
that.
 A slime of rotten
onions seemed to cling to her palate. She cleared her throat hard and spat on
the ground.
“My sketchbox,” she said, wiping her mouth and looking toward the tent.
There had been a general hasty exodus, and men were scattering in every
direction. Admiral d’Estaing and his officers were jostling down a footpath
toward a large, lighted green tent that glowed like an uncut emerald in the
distance. General Lincoln, his hat full of rain, was looking about helplessly as
his adjutants and orderlies tried in vain to keep a torch lighted. General
Pulaski’s resting place, by contrast, was deserted and pitch dark.
“He put the candles out,” said William, and sniggered very briefly. “Good
thing the tent didn’t explode.”
“That would have been quite fun,” Cinnamon said, with obvious regret.
“And fitting, too, for a hero. Still, your sister’s drawings … I’ll toss you to
see who goes in to get them.” He fumbled in his pocket and withdrew a
shilling.
“Tails,” said William at once. Cinnamon tossed, caught the coin on the
back of his hand with a slap, and peered at it.
“I can’t see.” If there was a moon, it was covered with rainclouds, and the
pouring night was dark as a wet black blanket.
“Here.” Brianna reached out and ran her fingertips over the wet, cold face
of the coin. And it was a face, though she couldn’t tell whose. “Heads,” she
said.
“Stercus,”
 William said briefly, and, unwinding his wet stock, rewound it
around his lower face and plunged down the path toward the dark tent.
“
Stercus
?” Bree repeated, turning to John Cinnamon.
“It means ‘shit’ in Latin,” the big Indian explained. “You aren’t a Catholic,
are you?”
“I am,” she said, surprised. “And I do know some Latin. But I’m pretty
sure 
‘stercus’
 isn’t in the Mass.”
“Not one I’ve ever heard,” he assured her. “I thought you wouldn’t be
Catholic, though. William isn’t.”“No.” She hesitated, wondering just how much this man knew about
William and the complications of their shared paternity. “You … er … have
you been traveling with William for some time?”
“A couple of months. He didn’t tell me about you, though.”
“I suppose he wouldn’t have.” She paused, not sure whether to ask what—
if anything—William 
had
 told him.
Before she could decide, William himself was back, gasping and gagging,
the sketchbox under his arm. He thrust it at her, yanked the stock down off
his face, turned aside, and threw up.
“Filius scorti,”
 he said, breathless, and spat. “That was the worst …”
“Mrs. MacKenzie?” A familiar voice came out of the darkness,
interrupting him. “Is that you, ma’am?” It was Lieutenant Hanson, drenched
to the skin, but holding a dark lantern. The rain plinked on its metal, and
water vapor drifted through the slit of light.
“Over here!” she called, and the lantern turned in their direction, the rain
suddenly visible needles of silver falling through the light.
“Come with me, ma’am,” Lieutenant Hanson said, reaching them. “I’ve
found some shelter for you and your … um …”
“Thank God,” William said. “And thank you, too, Lieutenant,” he added,
bowing.
“Of course. Sir,” Hanson said uncertainly. He lifted the lantern, showing
them the path, and Bree thanked him and started down it, followed by
William and Cinnamon. She heard a small noise from one of them, though,
and turned round. Lieutenant Hanson had stopped, looking toward the tent
where Casimir Pulaski lay in darkness.
Hanson lifted the lantern a little, in salute, and in a low, clear voice said,
“Pozegnanie.”
 Then he turned with decision and came toward his waiting
charges.
“It means ‘farewell’ in Polish,” he said to Brianna, matter-of-factly. “He
used to say that to us, when he left us for the night.”96
One Thing of Value
THE SMALL WOODEN STRUCTURE to which Lieutenant Hanson
escorted them might originally have been a chicken coop, Brianna thought,
ducking beneath the flimsy lintel. Someone had been living in it, though;
there were two rough pallets with blankets on the floor, a chipped and stained
pottery ewer and basin between them, and an enameled tin chamber pot in
much better condition.
“I do apologize, ma’am,” Lieutenant Hanson said, for the dozenth time.
“But half our tents have blown away and the men are holding down the rest.”
He held his lantern up, peering dubiously at the dark splotches seeping
through the boards of one wall. “It seems not to be leaking too badly. Yet.”
“It’s perfectly fine,” Brianna assured him, hunching out of the way so her
two large escorts could squeeze in behind her. With four people inside the
shed, there was literally no room to turn around, let alone lie down, and she
clutched her sketchbox under her cloak, not wanting it to be trampled.
“We are obliged to you, Lieutenant.” William was bent nearly double
under the low ceiling, but managed a nod in Hanson’s direction. “Food?”
“Directly, sir,” Hanson assured him. “I’m sorry there’s no fire, but at least
you’ll be out of the rain. Good night, Mrs. MacKenzie—and thank you
again.”
He squirmed past the bulk of John Cinnamon and disappeared into the
blustery night, clutching his hat to his head.
“Take that one,” William said to Brianna, jerking his chin at the bed sack
farthest from the leaking wall. “Cinnamon and I will take the other in shifts.”
She was too tired to argue with him. She laid down her sketchbox, shook
the blanket, and when no bedbugs, lice, or spiders fell out, sat down, feeling
like a puppet whose strings had just been cut.She closed her eyes, hearing William and John Cinnamon negotiate their
movements, but letting the low voices wash over her like the wind and rain
outside. Images crowded the backs of her eyes, the trampled grass of the
shoreline trail, the suspicious faces of the Highlanders at the edge of the city,
the ever-changing light on the dead man’s face, her brother jerking his chin in
exactly the way her—their—father did … dark streaks of water and white
streaks of chicken shit on silvered boards in the lanternlight … light … it
seemed a thousand years since she’d watched the morning sun glow pink
through Angelina Brumby’s small sweet ear … and Roger … at least Roger
was alive, wherever he was right now …
She opened her eyes on darkness, feeling a hand on her shoulder.
“Don’t fall asleep before you eat something,” William said, sounding
amused. “I promised to see you fed, and I shouldn’t like to break my word.”
“Food?” She shook her head, blinking. A sudden glow rose behind
William, and she saw the big Indian set down a clay firepot next to the stubby
candle he’d just lit. He tilted the candle over the bottom of the upturned
chamber pot, then stuck it into the melted wax, holding it until the wax
hardened.
“Sorry, I should have asked if you wanted to piss first,” Cinnamon said,
looking at her apologetically. “Only there’s no place else to put the candle.”
“No,” she said, and shook her head to clear it. “That’s all right. Is there
anything to drink?” She’d drunk almost nothing during the day and evening
and felt dry as a winter husk, in spite of the prevailing damp.
Lieutenant Hanson had managed to find several bottles of beer, some slices
of cold roast pork, rimmed with grease, a loaf of dry, dark bread, a pot of
strong mustard, and a large lump of crumbling cheese. She’d never eaten
anything better in her life.
They didn’t talk; the men ate with the same single-mindedness as she did,
and, the last crumb finished, she eased herself down flat on the blanket,
wrapped her cloak around her, and fell asleep without a word.
She dreamed, caught in the uneasy chill between sleep and waking. She
dreamed of men. Men as shadows, slow with grief. Men at work, their sweat
running down bare arms, scarred backs … Men walking in ranks, their
uniforms black with wet, splashed with mud, no telling who they were … a
tiny boy rooting at her breast with great determination, unaware that he was
helpless.She woke every now and then, briefly, but seldom broke the surface of the
dream and fell back slowly into sleep, with the scents of men and chickens
lending odd, stumpy wings to a man flying upward into the sun …
She woke slowly to the sensation of wings beating in her chest.
“Shit,” she said, but softly, and pressed her palm hard against her
breastbone. As usual, this accomplished nothing, and she lay still, breathing
as shallowly as possible, hoping it would stop. She was lying on her side, and
her brother’s face was a foot from hers, shadowed but visible as he lay asleep
on the other pallet.
The rain had stopped, the wind had dropped, and she could hear water
dripping from the eaves of the shed. Moonlight filtered through cracks in the
boards, flickering on and off as clouds raced past. And the flutter in her chest
eased and her heart bumped two or three times, then resumed its usual
rhythm.
She took a cautious breath and sat up slowly, not to wake William, but he
was dead asleep, long body sprawled limp with exhaustion.
“There’s water,” said a soft voice to her right. “Do you want some?”
“Please.” Her tongue clicked from dryness and she reached toward the vast
shadow that must be John Cinnamon. He was sitting on the upturned chamber
pot; he leaned forward and put a small canteen into her hand.
The water was fresh and cool, with a pleasant metallic taste from the tin,
and she drank thirstily, just managing to stop without draining the canteen
entirely. She handed it back, reluctantly, and wiped her mouth with the back
of her hand.
“Thank you.” He made a small grunt in response, and leaned back; the
boards of the shed wall creaked in protest. Now she really did need to piss,
she realized. Well, no way round it.
She got clumsily to her feet, and Cinnamon rose too, much more
gracefully, and seized her by the arm to stop her falling.
“I—just—I’m going outside for a moment.”
“Oh.” He let go her arm, hesitant, and half-turned toward the upside-down
chamber pot as though to right it.
“No, it’s all right. The rain’s stopped.” The door of the shed was stuck,
swollen with the wet; he reached past her and freed it with a jolt of his palm.
Fresh cold air rushed into the shed, and she heard a rustle as William stirred.
“I’ll go first.” Cinnamon whispered in her ear as he somehow slid past her.
“You wait ’til I call.”“But—” But he was gone, leaving the door slightly ajar. She cast a quick
glance at William, but he had sunk back into slumber; she could hear a faint
snore from the darkness and smiled at the sound.
As quietly as she could, she pushed the ramshackle door open and stuck
her head out. The night spread overhead in a silent rush, bright-edged clouds
racing past a bright half-moon.
She could hear the drip of water more clearly out here, falling from the
leaves of a big tree that stood by the chicken shed. She could hear a steadier
splash of water, too, and smiled again. John Cinnamon had taken the
opportunity for discreet relief of his own.
She turned in the other direction and retired under the shadow of the big
tree, in spite of the drips, where she accomplished her own business without
ceremony.
“I’m just here,” she said, emerging in time to forestall Cinnamon’s calling
her. He turned from the shed door sharply, then nodded, seeing her.
He made a slight inquisitive motion toward the shed, but she shook her
head.
“Not yet. I need a little air.” She tilted back her head and breathed, grateful
for the freshness of the night and for the stars appearing and vanishing
overhead, vivid in the patches of black night scoured by the passing clouds.
John Cinnamon kept her company, though he didn’t speak. She could feel
his presence, large and reassuring.
“Have you known my—my brother long?” she asked at last.
He lifted a shoulder in equivocation.
“Yes and no,” he said. “We spent a winter together in Quebec, when?
Maybe three years ago. I was a guide for him, a scout. Then we met again by
accident … three months ago? About that.”
“Where did you meet this time?” she asked, curious. “In Canada?”
“Oh. No. In Virginia.” He turned his head at a sudden cracking noise, but
then dismissed it. “A broken branch falling. It was a place called Mount
Josiah. Do you know it?”
“I’ve heard of it. What brought you there?”
He made a small humming sound, but nodded, deciding to tell her.
“Lord John Grey. Do you know his lordship?”
“Yes, very well,” she said, smiling at the memory. “Was he in Virginia,
then?”
“No,” Cinnamon said thoughtfully, “but your brother was.”“Oh. Was he looking for Lord John as well?”
“I don’t think so.” He stood silent for a moment, then added, “He was
looking for other things. Maybe he’ll tell you; I can’t.”
“I see,” she said, wondering. Shocked—and moved—by meeting William,
she hadn’t had time to wonder, let alone ask, what had led him to Savannah,
why he had resigned his army commission, what he thought about his two
fathers … what he thought about her. Who he was.
Her father had said almost nothing about William, and she hadn’t asked.
Time enough, she’d felt. But the time had evidently come.
Still, she didn’t want to pry or discomfit John Cinnamon by asking whether
—or what—he knew about Jamie Fraser.
“William said that he—or rather you—wanted a portrait made,” she said,
changing to what seemed safer ground. “I’d be very happy to do that. Er … is
it meant for some lucky lady?”
That surprised him, and he laughed, a low, warm sound.
“No, I don’t have a woman. I mean to send it to my father,” he said.
“Your father? Where is he?” The clouds had shredded and the light of a
setting moon showed her his broad face, soft-eyed now, and thoughtful. He
would be wonderful to paint.
“London,” he said, surprising her. He saw that he 
had
 surprised her and
ducked his head, abashed.
“I am a bastard, of course,” he said, with a tone of apology. “My father
was a British soldier; he got me on an Indian woman in Canada.”
“I … see.” There didn’t seem anything else she could say, and he gave her
a small, shy smile.
“Yes. I thought—for many years, I thought that Lord John was my father.
It was him who took me when my mother died—I was an infant—and gave
me to the holy fathers at the mission in Gareon. He sent money for my
keeping, you see.”
“That … seems very like him,” she said, though in fact she would never
have thought of him doing such a thing.
“He is a kind man. 
Very
 kind,” he added firmly. “William brought me to
Savannah to talk to him—William thought Lord John to be my father, too—
and it was his lordship who told me the truth. My real father abandoned me;
such things are common.”
His voice was matter-of-fact; probably such things 
were
 common.
“That doesn’t mean it’s 
right,
” she said, angry at the unknown father.He shrugged.
“But Lord John told me his name, and a direction. I know how to—to send
the picture to him.”
“You want a portrait for a man who abandoned you? But—why?” She
spoke cautiously. This young man was patently a realist; did he really think
that a portrait of his half-breed child, now grown, would move the sort of
selfish, coldhearted oaf who—
“I don’t think he will acknowledge me,” he assured her. “I don’t want him
to. I don’t want money or anything he might value. But he has one thing that
I want, and I hope that if he sees my face, he will give it to me.”
“What on earth is that?”
Even the dripping from the trees had ceased by now. The night was so still
that she could hear him swallow.
“I want to know my name,” he said, so low she scarcely heard him. “I want
to know the name my mother called me. He’s the only one who knows that.”
Her throat was too tight to speak. She stepped toward him and put her arms
around him, holding him as his mother might have, had she lived to see him
grown.
“I promise you,” she whispered when she could speak. “Your face will
break his heart.”
He patted her back, very gently, and stepped back.
“You’re very kind,” he said. “You should sleep now.”97
An Excellent Question
JOHN CINNAMON TACTFULLY LEFT William and Brianna soon after
they had made their way back through the debris of the abatis line into the
city, saying that he had business at the riverfront and would see William later
at Lord John’s house.
“I like your friend a lot,” Brianna said, watching Cinnamon’s broad back
disappear into the dappled sunlight of a square whose name she didn’t know.
“So do I. I only hope—” William checked himself, but his sister turned to
him, a sympathetic expression on her face.
“Me, too,” she said. “You mean London, and this Matthew Stubbs?”
“Malcolm, but yes.”
“What sort of man is he?” she asked curiously. “Have you met him?”
“Yes, twice that I recall. Once at Ascot and once at one of my f—one of
Lord John’s clubs.” He glanced at her to see whether she’d noticed, but of
course she had.
“It’s okay—all right, I mean—to call Lord John your father,” she said, the
expression of sympathy transferring itself to him. “Da wouldn’t mind.”
Blood rose in his cheeks, but he was saved from saying what he thought
about Jamie Fraser’s preferences in the matter by Brianna’s instantly
returning to the subject of Malcolm Stubbs.
“So, what’s he like, this Stubbs?”
He couldn’t help a smile at the suspicious tone of “this Stubbs.”
“To look at, very aptly named. Short and thick—with hair just like
Cinnamon’s, though it’s a sort of a sandy blond. It may be gray by now,
though,” he added. “He always wears a wig in public.”
She lifted her brows at him—thick brows, for a woman, and red to boot,
but very expressive.“I don’t know,” he said honestly, in response to the brows’ question.
“There’s the one thing that 
might
 help. Pa—Papa, I mean,” he said, giving
her a brief glare that dared her to comment, “told me that he has a black wife.
Stubbs has, I mean,” he amended. “Not Papa.”
She blinked.
“In 
London
?”
She sounded so shocked that he laughed.
“Why should the place make a difference? I imagine she’d be just as
surprising here”—he waved a hand at the stately, shattered houses
surrounding St. James Square—“if not more so.”
“Hm!” she said. Then, curiously, “Did he free her from slavery, and then
marry her?”
“She wasn’t a slave,” William said, somewhat surprised. “My father said
that he—he and Stubbs both, he meant—had met her in Cuba. Stubbs’s first
wife had just died of some sort of fever, and he brought this woman—
Inocencia, that’s her name, I knew it was some sort of Spanish virtue—
brought her back to London with him and married her. Anyway,” he said,
bringing the conversation back to its point, “I’m sure that Papa said Stubbs
had children by this woman.”
“You mean he wouldn’t necessarily turn his back on John Cinnamon
because of being …” She waved a hand, indicating Cinnamon’s noticeable
Indian-ness.
“Yes.” William felt doubtful, despite the firmness of his answer. Having
children of an unusual hue would cause comment, but wasn’t necessarily a
scandalous thing, provided they were legitimate, which the junior Stubbses
certainly were. Having an enormous and very obviously extra-legal adult
Indian turn up and claim parentage might well be a horse of a different color.
And he found that he very much wanted John Cinnamon not to be hurt.
Brianna made a clicking noise, and her horse moved obligingly out of the
shade of the live oaks and into Jones Street. There were a large number of
people out, William saw; overnight, the sense of fearful oppression had lifted
with the siege, and while the smell of burning still tinged the air and broken
tree limbs were scattered everywhere, people had to eat and business must be
done. The normal tide of daily life was coming in apace.
“Will you go with him? To London?” Brianna asked over her shoulder.
She 
nudged her horse with both heels, reining him out of the way of an
oncoming wagon filled with barrels and sweetly smelling of beer.“London?” William repeated. “I don’t know.” He didn’t, and let so much
uncertainty show in his voice that his sister pulled up a bit to wait for him,
then nodded toward a lane that ran behind the Baptist church, indicating that
he should follow her.
“It’s not my business,” she said, as they passed into the cold shadow of the
church, “but—what are you planning to do? I mean, now the siege is lifted, I
suppose you can go anywhere you want …”
Excellent question.
“I don’t know,” he said honestly. “Truly, I don’t.”
She nodded.
“Well, you have options, don’t you?”
“Options?” he said. He was amused, but the word still gave him a sense
that he’d swallowed a live eel. 
You have no idea, sister mine …
“Lord John says you own a small plantation in Virginia,” she pointed out.
“If you didn’t want to go back to England, I suppose you could live there?”
“It’s possible, I suppose.” He could hear the doubt in his own voice, and so
could she; she glanced sharply at him, eyebrow lifted.
“The place is a ruin,” he said, “though the fields have been kept in fairly
good condition. But the war—” He gestured at the nearest house, pocked by
cannonballs and its bright-blue paint scorched and fire-blackened on one side.
“I think it might not just flow round me like a rock in the water, you know.”
Something odd moved over her face, and he looked at her in considerable
surprise.
“You’ve thought of something?” he asked.
“Yes, but it’s not—I mean—it’s not relevant right this minute.” She waved
away whatever the thought had been. “I know Lord John and your uncle—the
duke still thinks of himself as your uncle, I know—”
“So do I,” William said, wryly, but with a small sense of relief at the
thought. Uncle Hal truly 
was
 a rock, over whom floods and torrents had often
passed, leaving him unmoved.
“They want you to go back to England,” Brianna said. “I was wondering,
myself—you’re an earl; doesn’t that mean you have … people? Land? Things
that need taking care of?”
“There is an estate, yes,” he said tersely. “I—what the devil?” His horse
had stopped dead, and Brianna’s mount was trying to turn around in the alley,
whuffling at some disturbing scent.Then his feebler olfactory sense perceived it, too—a stink of death. A
wagon stood at the end of the alley, its sides draped with black cloth, this
threadbare and bleached by age into rusty folds. The wagon was unhitched,
and there were neither horses nor mules in evidence, but a small group of
roughly clad men, both black and white, stood in a patch of sun just beyond
the alley’s mouth, in attitudes of watchful expectation.
There was a sound of voices in the distance, subdued, but several of them,
a murmuring that was punctuated abruptly by a piercing wail that made the
waiting men flinch and look away, shoulders hunched.
Brianna turned in her saddle, looking over her shoulder and gathering up
her reins, evidently wanting to go back—but there were people coming into
the alley behind them, mourners in dark veils and armbands. Bree glanced at
William, and he shook his head and nudged his own horse toward hers,
jockeying toward the side of the alley in order to give the newcomers space
to pass. This they did, a few sparing a glance at the riders—one or two with
eyes widened at sight of Brianna astride with her skirts hiked up and an
indecent expanse of calf showing—but most so focused on present grief as to
be indifferent to spectacle.
Movement near the wagon drew William’s attention back; they were
bringing out the body—bodies.
He whipped off his hat, pressed it to his heart, and bowed his head. To his
astonishment, Brianna did the same.
There were no coffins; this was a funeral of the poor. Two small bodies
wrapped in rough shrouds were borne out on planks and gently lifted into the
wagon.
“No! No!” A woman, who must be the children’s mother, broke from the
arms of her supporters and ran to the wagon, trying to climb in, screaming,
“Noooo!” at the top of her voice. “No, no! Let me go with them, don’t take
’em away from me, 
no
!”
A wave of horrified, stricken friends closed round the woman, pulling her
back, trying by sheer force of compassion to quiet her.
“Oh, dear God,” Brianna said in a choked voice. William glanced at her
and saw that tears were running down her face, her eyes fixed on the pitiful
scene, and he recalled with a shock the children he had heard playing outside
the Brumby house—hers.
He reached out a hand and grasped her arm—she let go of the reins with
that hand and seized his as though she were drowning, clinging for dear life,remarkable strength for a woman. Several men had come to take up the
shafts, and the wagon’s wheels creaked into motion, the small procession
beginning its mournful journey. The mother had ceased wailing now; she
moved as though sleepwalking after the wagon, stumbling as her knees gave
way every few steps in spite of the support of two women who held her up.
“Where is her husband?” Brianna whispered, more to herself than to
William, but he answered.
“He’ll likely be with the army.” Much more likely, he was dead as well,
but his sister probably knew that as well as he did.
Her own husband … God knew where he was. She’d avoided answering
him when he’d asked, but it was apparent that MacKenzie was a rebel. If he’d
been in the recent battle—but no, he’d survived that, at least, William
reminded himself. 
She didn’t ask about him, while we were in camp … why
the devil not?
 Still, he could feel a small constant tremor running through his
sister’s hand, and he squeezed back, trying to give her reassurance.
“Monsieur?” A high-pitched voice by his left stirrup startled him and he
jerked in the saddle, making his horse shift and stamp.
“What?” he said, looking down incredulously. “Who the devil are you?”
The small black boy—Christ, he was wearing the remnants of a dark-blue
uniform, so he must be, or recently had been, a drummer—bowed solemnly.
His face, ear, and hand were black with soot on one side, and there was a deal
of blood on his clothes, but he didn’t seem to be wounded.
“Pardon, monsieur. Parlez-vous Français?”
“Oui,”
 William replied, astonished. 
“Pourquoi?”
The child—no, he was older than he looked; he stood up straight and
looked William in the eye, maybe eleven or twelve—coughed up a wad of
black phlegm and spat it out, then shook his head as though straightening his
wits.
“Votre ami a besoin d’aide. Le grand Indien,”
 he added as an afterthought.
“Is he saying something about John Cinnamon?” Brianna asked, frowning.
She brushed at the tears streaking her face and sat up straight, gathering her
own wits.
“Yes. He says—I take it you don’t speak French?”
“Some.” She gave him a look.
“Right.” He turned to the boy, who was swaying gently to and fro, staring
at something invisible, plainly in the grip of exhaustion. 
“Dites-moi. Vite!”
This the boy did, with admirable simplicity.“Stercus,”
 William muttered, then turned to his sister. “He says a press-
gang from the French ships heard Cinnamon speaking French to someone on
the shore; they followed him and tried to take him. He got away from them,
but he’s hiding—the boy says in a cave, though that seems unlikely …
anyway, he needs help.”
“Let’s go, then.” She gathered up her reins and looked behind her, judging
the turning space.
He’d almost given up being surprised by her, but evidently not quite.
“Are you insane?” he inquired, as politely as possible. 
“Steh,”
 he added
firmly to his own horse.
“What language are you speaking 
now
?” she said, seeming impatient.
“
‘Steh’
 is German for ‘stand still’—when talking to a horse—and 
‘stercus’
means ‘shit,’” he informed her crisply. “You have children, madam—like the
ones you have just been weeping over. If you don’t want yours to be similarly
afflicted, I suggest you go home and tend them.”
The blood shot up into her face as though someone had lit a fire under her
skin and she glared at him, gathering up the loose ends of her reins in one
hand in a manner suggesting that she was considering lashing him across the
face with them.
“You little bas—” she began, and then pressed her lips together, cutting off
the word.
“Bastard,” he finished for her. “Yes, I am. Go home.” And turning his back
on her, he reached down a hand to the boy and lifted him ’til he could get a
foot on the stirrup and scramble up behind.
“Où allons-nous?”
 he asked briefly, and the boy pointed behind them,
toward the river.
A large feminine hand grabbed his horse’s bridle. The horse snorted and
shook his head in protest, but she held on.
“Has anyone ever told you that being reckless will get you killed?” she
asked, imitating his polite tone. “Not that I care that much, but you’ll likely
get this kid, as well as John Cinnamon, killed too.”
“Kid?” was all he could think of saying, for the collision of words trying to
get out of his mouth.
“Child, boy, lad, 
him
!” she snapped, jerking her chin toward the little
drummer behind him.
“Quel est le problème de cette femme?”
 the boy demanded indignantly.“Dieu seul sait, je ne sais pas,”
 William said briefly over his shoulder.
God knows, I don’t.
“Will you bloody let go?” he said to his sister.
“In a minute, yes,” Brianna said, fixing him with a dark-blue glare. “Listen
to me.”
He rolled his eyes but gave her a short, sharp nod and a glare in return. She
sat back in her saddle a bit but didn’t let go.
“Good,” she said. “I walked up and down that shore nearly every day,
before the Americans showed up, and my k—my children poked into every
cranny in those bluffs. There are only four places that could possibly be
called caves, and only one of them is deep enough that somebody
Cinnamon’s size could have a hope of hiding in.”
She paused for breath and wiped her free hand under her nose, eyeing him
to see if he was paying attention.
“I hear you,” he said testily. “And?”
“And that one isn’t a cave at all. It’s the end of a tunnel.”
The flush of temper left him abruptly.
“Where’s the other end?”
She smiled slightly and let go of the bridle.
“See? You may be reckless, but I knew you weren’t stupid. The other end
is in the cellar of a tavern on Broad Street. They call it the Pirates’ House,
and so far as I know from the talk in town, there’s a good reason for that. But
if I were you—”
He snorted briefly and gathered up his reins. The end of the alley was clear
now, emptied of wagon, mourners, and small shrouded bodies.
“You are my sister, madam,” he said, and with no more than an instant’s
hesitation, added, “and I’m glad of that. But you’re not my mother. In fact,
I’m 
not
 stupid, and neither is John Cinnamon.” He paused for an instant, then
added, “Thank you, though.”
“Good luck,” she said simply, and sat watching as he turned and rode
away.
BRIANNA DIDN’T LEAVE the alley at once. She watched William ride
out, back stiff with determination, the boy clinging to his waist. From the
looks of it, the child had never sat on a horse before, was terrified, and was
damned if he’d admit it. Between him and William, she thought JohnCinnamon might have chosen worse, in terms of allies. She quivered with the
urge to follow William, not to let him go alone, but he was—damn him!—
right. She couldn’t risk something happening to her, not with Jem and Mandy
…
She gathered her reins and clicked her tongue; more people were coming
through the square, toward the church. Soberly dressed, walking close
together. 
This church had no bell, but one was ringing, tolling, somewhere
across the city. More funerals, she thought, and her heart squeezed tight in
her chest. Slowly, she rode out among the mourners and turned up Abercorn
Street.
How many people can you worry about at once?
 she wondered. Jem,
Mandy, Roger, Fanny, her parents, now William and John Cinnamon … She
was still shaken by the dead children and their mother; this, on top of a night
spent in the marshes with Casimir Pulaski, made her feel as though her skin
were about to peel off. A sudden memory of her last sight of the general
surged into her mind, and a high, completely unhinged giggle escaped her.
Just as suddenly, bile rose in her throat and her stomach turned over. “Oh,
God.”
She fought down the surge of nausea, but saw that people were staring at
her and realized that, in addition to laughing like a loon, she was still
clutching her tricorne in one hand, her hair blowing loose, and her legs
scratched and mosquito-bitten, bare from knees to absurdly elaborate shoe
tops—she’d taken off her wet stockings the night before and forgotten to find
them in the morning. Suddenly embarrassed by the sidelong glances and
whispers, she straightened up defiantly, shoulders back. A big hand clutched
the bare calf of her leg, and she yelped and swatted whoever it was with her
hat, making the horse shy violently.
Who it was was Roger, who shied violently, too.
“Christ!”
“Shi— I mean S-word!” she said, grappling her horse back under control.
“What did you do that for?”
“I called, but ye didn’t hear me.” He slapped the horse companionably on
the withers and reached up a hand to her. He looked tired, and his eyes were
creased with worry. “Come down and tell me what the devil’s been
happening. Did ye go to the American camp? I shouldn’t have asked ye to—
God, ye look like death.”Her hands were actually shaking, and in fact, she realized, she felt rather
like death. When her feet touched the ground, she nearly fell into his arms,
hugging him, and began to live again.98
Minerva Joy
LORD JOHN RETURNED FROM a visit to the local hospital, where the
British wounded—along with those Savannah inhabitants injured by flying
splinters or house fires—were being treated, to find his brother sitting at his
desk in the study, looking as though he’d been struck by lightning.
“Hal?” John said, alarmed. “What’s happened?”
Hal’s mouth opened, but only a small wheezing noise came out. There was
an opened letter on the desk, looking as though it had traveled some distance
through rain and mud, and possibly been trampled by a horse along the way.
Hal pushed this wordlessly toward him, and he picked it up.
Friend Pardloe,
I write in torment of mind and spirit, which is increased by the
knowledge that I must oblige thee now to share it. Forgive me.
Dorothea gave birth to a healthy girl, whom we named Minerva
Joy. She was born within the precincts of the prison at Stony Point, as
I was confined there and I would not trust Dorothea’s welfare to the
local midwife, whose competence I doubted.
Mina (as we called her) thrived and bloomed, as did her mother.
There was an outbreak of fever within the prison, though, and fearing
for their health, I sent them into the town, where they took refuge with
a Quaker family. Alas, no more than a week after their departure, I
received a note from the husband of this family, with the dreadful
news that two members of his own family had fallen ill with a bloody
flux, and that my own dear ones showed signs of the same disease.
I sought leave at once to go to treat my family, and was
(reluctantly) granted a temporary parole for the purpose. (Theprison’s commander, valuing my services to the sick, did not wish me
gone for long.)
I was in time to hold my daughter through the final hours of her
life. I thank God for that gift, and for the gift that she was to her
parents.
Dorothea was desperately ill, but was spared by the mercy of God.
She is still alive, but is sorely oppressed in both body and mind—and
there was still much sickness in the town. I could not leave her.
I know thy sense of military honor, but Friends do not hold the laws
of man to be above those of God. I buried my child, and then broke
my parole, taking Dorothea to a place of greater safety, where I
might, with the goodness of God, try to heal her.
I dare not write the name of the place where we are, for fear that
this missive may be intercepted. I have no notion what penalty I might
suffer for having broken my parole if I am captured—nor do I care—
but if I am taken or hanged or shot, Dorothea will be alone, and she is
in no condition to be left alone.
I know thy love for her and therefore trust that thee will send what
help is possible. I have a friend who knows of her whereabouts and
has been of the greatest assistance to us. Thy brother, I think, will
discern his name and direction.
Denzell Hunter
John dropped the letter as though it were on fire.
“Oh, Jesus. Hal …”
His brother had risen from the desk and was swaying, his face blank with
shock and the same grimy, crumpled white as the letter.
John seized his brother, holding him as hard as he could. Hal felt like a
tailor’s dummy in his arms, save for a deep shudder that seemed to pass
through him in long, rolling waves.
“No,” Hal whispered, and his arms tightened round John’s shoulders with a
sudden, convulsive strength. 
“No!”
“I know,” John whispered. “I know.” He rubbed his brother’s back, feeling
the bony shoulder blades under the red broadcloth, repeating, “I know,” at
intervals, as Hal shuddered and gasped for breath.
“Shh,” John said, rocking slowly from foot to foot, taking his brother’s
reluctant weight with him. He didn’t expect Hal to shush, of course; it wasjust the only vaguely soothing thing he could think of to say. The next natural
thing would have been to say, 
“It’ll be all right,”
 but naturally, it never
would.
He’d been here before, he thought dimly. Not in a cluttered office; it had
been in the 
sala
 of an old house in Havana, a painted angel with spread wings
fading on the plaster wall, who watched with compassion as he held his
mother as she wept over the death of his cousin Olivia and her small
daughter.
His throat had a lump the size of a golf ball in it, but he couldn’t give way
now, any more than he had done in Havana.
Hal was starting to wheeze in earnest; John could hear the gasp of his
inhaled breath, the faint whistle as it went out.
“Sit down,” John said, and steered him to a chair. “You’ve got to stop now.
Any more and you won’t be able to breathe and I bloody don’t know what to
do about that. So you just bloody have to stop,” he added firmly.
Hal sat, elbows on his knees and head in his hands. He was still
shuddering, but the first shock of grief had passed, and John heard him now
blowing out his breath and hauling it in again in a rhythmic, measured way
that must be the technique Claire Fraser had taught him for not dying of
asthma. John was—not for the first time in their shared acquaintance—
grateful to her.
He pulled up another chair and sat down, feeling as though his own insides
had been scooped out. For a few seconds, he couldn’t think. About anything.
His mind had gone completely blank. He was gazing beyond Hal to a small
table, though, and on it was a bottle of something. He got up and fetched the
bottle, pulled the cork with his teeth, and took a gulp of the contents, not
caring what it was.
It was wine. He swallowed, breathed, then took Hal’s hand and wrapped it
round the bottle.
“Dottie’s alive,” he said, and sat down. “Remember, she’s 
alive.
”
“Is she?” Hal said, between breaths. “She was—is—ill. Very ill. He said
so.”
“Hunter is a physician and a good one,” John said firmly. “He won’t let her
die.”
“He let my 
granddaughter
 die,” Hal said passionately, forgetting to
breathe. He coughed and choked, his grasp whitening on the neck of the wine
bottle.“The child was his daughter,” John said, taking it from him. “He didn’t let
her die. People do die, and you know it. Stop talking and bloody 
breathe,
 will
you?”
“I know … better … than any … one,” Hal managed, and succumbed to a
fit of coughing. A hank of hair had come loose, and strands were sticking to
his face. The dark hair was streaked with white; John couldn’t tell how much
was powder.
Hal did know, of course. His first child had died at birth, along with its
mother. That had been many years ago, but such things never went away
altogether.
“Breathe,” John said sharply. “We have to fetch Dottie, don’t we? I can’t
find her and then tell her first thing that 
you’re
 dead.”
Hal made a sound that wasn’t a laugh, but might have been if he’d had
more breath. He pursed his lips and blew, though the resulting air was only a
thread. Then his chest relaxed; it was no more than a fraction, but it was
visible, and John took a deep breath of his own. Hal stretched out a hand
toward the letter on the desk, and John fetched it for him.
He picked the ball gingerly apart, smoothing it flat on the table.
“Why didn’t … he fucking … write the bloody … 
date
?” Hal demanded,
straightening up and wiping a hand roughly down his face. “We’ve no …
idea how long … it’s been since it—since it happened. Dottie could be dead
by now!”
John forbore to point out that if that were the case, Hal’s knowing the date
of Hunter’s letter would make no difference. It wasn’t a moment for logic.
“Well, we need to go and get her anyway, don’t we?”
“Yes, and now!” Hal flung himself round, wheezing loudly and glaring at
the things around him, as though daring any of them to get in his way.
Perhaps just a little logic …
“I don’t know what the army would do to Hunter if they catch him,” John
said. “But I know damn well what they’d do to 
you,
 should you just—go.
And so do you,” he added needlessly.
Hal had got himself in hand. He glared at the letter, mouth tight and wet
eyes burning, then looked up at John. He pursed, blew, and gasped, “Well,
what does he mean … 
you
 can 
‘discern’
 his friend’s … name? Why you?”
“I don’t know. Let me see that again.” He took the letter, gently, feeling
the weight of sorrow it bore. He’d seen enough letters stained with tears—
sometimes his own—to know the depth of Hunter’s anguish.He had a good idea what Hunter meant by 
“discern.”
 The man had
traveled in company with Jamie Fraser, he knew that much—and he knew
that Fraser had been a Jacobite spy in Paris, among other things. The word
“spy” gave him a disturbing echo of Percy, but he pushed it aside, holding the
paper up to the light, in case there should be secret writing in vinegar or milk
—sometimes you could see the faint difference in reflection on the paper’s
surface, even though the words would come into view only when heated.
It was simpler than that. There were words written on the back of the letter,
written lightly with a pencil. It looked like a brief paragraph written in Latin.
The words were indeed Latin, but strung together without meaning. 
Even Hal
could have recognized it as a coded message, though he wouldn’t have
known what to do with it.
He smiled a little, despite the seriousness of the situation. It was a cipher,
with “friend” as the key.
Five minutes’ work gave him the name: Elmsworth, Wilkins Corner,
Virginia.
“We’ll send William,” he said to Hal, with as much confidence as he could
manage. “Don’t worry. He’ll bring her back.”
WILLIAM FELT AS though he’d been struck in the chest by a cannonball.
His mouth opened and closed—he could feel it, automatic as the wooden
jaws of a marionette—but nothing came out for a moment.
“That’s very terrible,” he managed at last, in a strangled croak. “Sit down,
Papa. You’re going to fall.”
His father did look as though someone had cut his strings. Dead white, and
his hand trembled when William pushed a glass of brandy into it. He looked
round the inside of the little shed William shared with John Cinnamon as
though he’d never seen it before, then sat down and drank the brandy.
“Well,” he said, coughed, and cleared his throat. “Well.”
“Not all that well,” William said, peering at him. “How’s Uncle Hal?” His
own sense of shock was beginning to subside, though there was still an iron
weight in his chest.
“As you might expect,” his father said, and took a deep, wet breath. “Off
his head,” he added more clearly, having taken another large swallow.
“Wanting to ride off directly and fetch Dottie himself. Not that I blame him.”He took another. “I want to do that, too. But I doubt that Sir Henry would see
it that way. War, you know.”
War, indeed. Half the regiment was set to move on Tuesday, to join
Clinton’s troops at Charles Town. The weight had shifted lower in his body,
and he could breathe now.
“I’ll go, of course,” William said, and in a softer tone, added, “Don’t
worry, Papa. I’ll bring her back.”99
Is. 6:8
“I’M SORRY,” ROGER SAID at last. “I had to …”
“It’s all right,” she said, keeping her voice steady. “You’re back. That’s all
that matters.”
“Well, maybe not 
all
 that matters,” he said, the ghost of laughter in his
voice. “I haven’t eaten since breakfast yesterday and I smell like a rubbish
fire.”
His stomach growled loudly in agreement and she laughed, letting go of
him.
“Come on,” she said, turning back to her horse. “When we get to the
house, just say hi to the kids and wash. I’ll go and tell Henrike that we need
food—”
“A 
lot
 of food.”
“—a lot of food. Go!”
She found both Henrike and Angelina in the kitchen with Cook, buzzing
excitedly. They pounced on her at once, wide-eyed and full of questions. Had
Mr. MacKenzie seen the battle? Was he wounded? What had he said about
the fighting? Had he seen General Prévost there, or Lord John?
She felt as though Angelina had punched her in the stomach. She knew
Lord John had been in the battle, with his brother. She just hadn’t thought
through what that meant. Of course they had fought. Whether either of the
Greys had fired a gun or drawn a sword, they had undoubtedly given orders,
helped light the fuse that had blown up and killed American besiegers.
She heard Lord John’s voice in memory, light and reassuring: “We 
are
 His
Majesty’s army. We know how to do this sort of thing.”
All the blood had left her face and she felt cold and clammy. It hadn’t
occurred to her that they would think Roger had been with the British army.
But of course they would.It hadn’t occurred to her that men she knew, liked, admired had killed
other men for whom she felt the same, just days ago. She felt the cold,
stinking darkness of the tent where Casimir Pulaski lay dead by lanternlight,
and her right hand clenched, feeling the aching muscles and the film of sweat
between the pencil and her skin as she’d sketched through the night,
capturing sorrow, grief, rage, and love as the soldiers came to say farewell.
Pozegnanie.
She managed to ask for food to be sent, for someone to arrange a bath for
Roger, and went up to her room, placing each foot carefully on the steps as
she climbed the stairs. Roger’s discarded clothes lay on the floor by the
window, and the acrid smell of war hung in the air.
Gingerly, she gathered up the remains of Roger’s black suit. It was filthy,
coat and breeches mud-spattered from shoulder to knee, and gray sand sifted
from the skirts when she shook it. There was a large, rough patch on the
breast of the coat where something had dried, nearly the same color as the
black broadcloth, but when she dabbed it with a wet rag, the cloth came away
red and with a faint, meaty smell of blood.
There was something small and hard in the breast pocket. She hooked a
finger inside and pulled out a brownish lump that proved to be a tooth, split,
carious, and with half its root missing.
With a small huff of distaste, she set it on the table and returned to the coat
—there had been something else in the pocket, a paper of some kind.
It was a small note, folded once and stuck together with the blood that had
saturated the coat, but the blood had dried and she was able to separate the
folds by delicate prying, flaking away the blood with the blade of her
penknife.
She shouldn’t have been surprised; she’d smelled the powder smoke when
she’d embraced him. Blood was a good deal more immediate, though. He
hadn’t just been near the battle, he’d been 
in
 it, and she wasn’t sure whether
to be more angry or more scared at the thought.
“What’s 
wrong
 with you?” she muttered under her breath. “Why, for
God’s sake?”
She’d got the paper halfway open—far enough to see her own name. Very
carefully, she broke the last of the dried blood and spread the stained and
crumpled paper out on the table.
Dearest Bree,I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to be here, but I have the strongest feeling
that here is where I should be. It wasn’t quite “Whom shall I send?
Who shall go for us?”—but something close, and so was my answer.
Slowly, she sat down on the bed, with its clean, safe counterpane and spotless
pillows, and read it again. She sat for a few minutes, breathing slowly,
deeply, calming herself.
She was by no means a Bible scholar, but she knew this passage; it turned
up at least once a year in the readings at Mass, and the young priest who had
taught religion at her school had used it when talking to the eighth-graders
about vocations.
It was from Isaiah, the story in which the prophet is awakened from sleep
by an angel, who touches a hot coal to his lips to cleanse him, to make him
capable of speaking God’s word. She thought she knew what came next, but
she rose and went down the quiet hallway to the library, where she knew
she’d seen a Bible in the shelves. It was there, a handsome book bound in
cool black leather, and she sat down and found what she was looking for with
no trouble.
Isaiah, chapter 6, verse 8:
Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and
who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me.
She could feel her lips moving, repeating “send me,” but they moved
silently and the words rang only in her own ears.
Send me.
She sat down, the open book heavy on her knee. Her hands were sweating,
but her fingers were cold, and she fumbled, turning the page.
Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be
wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land
be utterly desolate.
“Jesus Christ,” she whispered. Roger had heard that call, and he’d
answered it. She swallowed painfully, past the lump in her throat.
“You’re an idiot,” she whispered, but it was herself she spoke to, not him.
She’d told him that she’d do everything she could to help him, if he was surethat being a minister was truly his vocation. She’d been schooled by priests
and nuns; she knew what a vocation was. Only she hadn’t, really.
I’m sorry,
 he’d written in his note to her.
“No, 
I’m
 sorry,” she said aloud and, closing the book, sat for a few
minutes, staring into the fire. The house was quiet around her, wrapped in
that peaceful hour before the preparations for supper began.
She’d imagined him doing what he did on the Ridge, though more
officially: listen to people who needed someone to hear them, advise the
troubled, comfort the dying, christen children, marry people and bury them
… but she hadn’t imagined him comforting men dying on a battlefield, in the
midst of cannon fire, nor burying them afterward and coming home bloody,
with a stranger’s shattered teeth in his pocket. But something had called to
him, and he’d gone to do it.
And he had, thank God, come back to her. Come in need of her. She blew
out a long, slow breath and, rising, went to slide the Bible back into its place.
Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?
“Well, 
there’s
 a rhetorical question,” she said. “There isn’t anybody else
who can do that for him, is there?” She took a breath, and clean air from the
sea came in through the open window.
“Send me.”100
The Power of the Flesh
Savannah
THE SIEGE WAS LIFTED, the city largely untouched by battle, save
cannonball holes and minor fires in the houses closest to the fighting.
Savannah was a gracious city, and its grace was still evident, as people
resumed their lives with very little fuss.
John Grey picked up the handkerchief that Mrs. Fleury had just dropped
for the second time and handed it back, again with a bow. He didn’t think it
was flirtation—if it was, she was very bad at it. She was also a good quarter
century his elder, and while she was still sharp of both eye and tongue, he’d
noticed how the spoon rattled in her saucer when she’d picked up her teacup
earlier in the afternoon.
If her hands were palsied, though, her mind was not.
“That girl,” she said, pursing her lips toward Amaranthus, who stood on
the other side of the room, in conversation with a young man he didn’t know.
“Who is she?”
“That is Viscountess Grey, ma’am,” Grey said courteously. “My brother’s
daughter-in-law.”
Mrs. Fleury’s slightly red-rimmed eyes narrowed in closer inspection.
“Where’s her husband?”
Grey felt the usual qualm in his innards at mention of Ben, but answered
smoothly.
“My nephew had the misfortune to be captured by the rebels at the
Brandywine, ma’am. We have had little news of him since, but hope that he
will soon return to us.” 
Even if it’s in a box …
 Hal couldn’t stand much more
uncertainty—and he 
would
 have to write to Minnie soon.“Hmph.” The old lady raised her quizzing glass—yes, definitely palsy; he
could see the chain trembling against her bosom—and gave Amaranthus a
fierce stare through it.
“That young lady don’t act much like she’s pining for him, does she?”
Frankly, she didn’t, but Grey didn’t want to discuss his niece-by-marriage
with Mrs. Fleury, who had used her widowhood to advantage and was quite
obviously an accomplished gossip.
“She bears up bravely,” he said. “Allow me to fetch you another cup of tea,
ma’am.”
While on this errand, he contrived to pass within hailing distance of
Amaranthus and William, who were chatting with each other beneath a large
portrait of the late Mr. Fleury, bewigged and dressed in plum velvet. This
fine impression of a successful merchant was slightly spoilt by the artist’s
effort to add a prosperous paunch to an otherwise lean figure; the alteration
had required a hasty adjustment to Mr. Fleury’s posture, careless
overpainting causing it to appear that the gentleman possessed a ghostly third
leg, which hovered uncertainly behind William’s left ear.
There was no impropriety in their poses at all, but he was strongly aware of
a charged atmosphere between them. It was visible in the effort they made
not
 to touch each other.
As Grey approached them, Amaranthus accepted a plate of cake from
William with such delicacy of touch that he might have just fallen into a
privy, whilst William smiled into her eyes with an expression that anyone
who knew him could have read, and that Amaranthus certainly 
did.
Jesus Christ. Surely they haven’t … maybe not, but they’re bloody thinking
about it. Both of them.
That was disturbing on multiple grounds. He quite liked Amaranthus, for
one thing. And as William’s stepfather, he wanted to think the boy had been
brought up better than to make addresses to a married woman, let alone his
own cousin’s wife.
But he knew all too well the power of the flesh. Strong enough to be
visible to Mrs. Fleury, at any rate.
“John,” said a soft voice behind him, and he stiffened.
“Perseverance,” Grey said, shaking his head as his erstwhile stepbrother
came up beside him, smiling. “Never was a man so well named.”
“You’re looking well, John,” Percy said, ignoring this. “Blue velvet always
suits you. You recall the suits we wore to our parents’ wedding?” The smilewas real, deep in those soft brown eyes, and Grey was astonished and
annoyed to feel it run straight down his backbone and tighten his balls.
Yes, he bloody remembered that wedding and those suits. And—as Percy
so clearly intended—he remembered standing beside Percy in church as his
mother married Percy’s stepfather, his hand and Percy’s touching, hidden in
full skirts of royal-blue velvet, fingers slowly entwining, the touch a promise.
One Percy had fucking broken.
“What do you want, Perseverance?” he asked bluntly.
“Oh, quite a lot of things,” Percy replied, the smile now reaching his lips.
“But principally … I want to talk to Fergus Fraser.”
“You did,” Grey said, setting his half-empty glass on the tray of a passing
servant. “At Coryell’s Ferry. I heard you. And I heard 
him,
” he added. “He
wasn’t having any of you then, and I doubt he’s changed his mind. Besides,
what the devil do you think I could do about it, even if I wanted to?”
Percy’s smile remained, but his eyes crinkled in a way indicating that he
considered Grey’s reply to be humorous.
“I had the pleasure of meeting your son in the summer, at Mrs. Prévost’s
luncheon.”
No. For God’s sake, bloody no.
“And while I did indeed meet Mr. Fergus Fraser again briefly in Charles
Town some little time ago, I had also the privilege of seeing General Fraser at
close range during the 
pourparlers
 before Monmouth.”
“So?” Grey kept his own smile fixed blandly in place, though he was well
aware that Percy could read in his eyes what he was thinking.
Percy blinked, coughed once, and averted his gaze, fixing it instead upon
Mr. Fleury’s phantom leg.
“Bugger off, Percy,” Grey said, not unkindly, and went to fetch Mrs.
Fleury’s tea.
The sense of warmth and faint sexual excitement remained with him,
though, along with a disturbingly exhilarating sensation of Percy’s eyes on
his back. It had been a good many years since he’d felt Percy’s touch, but he
remembered it. Vividly.
He pushed the feeling firmly away. He wasn’t likely to succumb to Percy’s
physical charms nor yet his clumsy blackmail. What if Percy 
did
 decide to go
round telling the world that he thought William’s resemblance to a Scottish
rebel general rather striking? It might stimulate gossip for a brief time, but
William had left the army and remained an earl. His position couldn’t reallybe endangered. All William would need to do, should any question be asked
of him, was to give the querent an icy stare and ignore them.
He was going to have to find out what Percy was up to, though, and why.
A thread of heat ran down his back again, as though someone had poured hot
coffee down his neckband.
Across the room, he saw Amaranthus’s long forefinger come to rest gently
on William’s chest, pointing out something obvious.
HER FINGER RESTED—JUST barely—on the largest of the beetles on his
waistcoat, a two-and-a-half-inch monster in brilliant-yellow silk with black-
tipped horns. And, of course, tiny red eyes.
“Dynastes tityus,”
 she said, with approval. “The eastern Hercules beetle.”
“Really?” William said, laughing. “
Dynastes tityus
 means, if I’m not
mistaken, Tithean rebel. Was Hercules a Tithean?”
“A Titan, was he not?” Amaranthus tilted her head, lifting one brow. Her
brows were soft but well marked, a darker blond than her hair.
“Yes. Perhaps that’s what the person who named this thing meant—but
why rebel? Is this fellow known to be rebellious?” He looked down his nose
at his chest—and Amaranthus’s long, slim index finger. Her wedding band
glimmered on the fourth finger, and he took a deep breath that made her
pointing finger sink slightly into the ochre silk. She smiled up at him, and
slowly withdrew the finger.
“As to the beetle, I wouldn’t know. But you are, aren’t you?”
“Me? How do you mean?”
“I mean that you don’t intend to live your life to please other people’s
expectations. Do you?”
That was a lot more direct than he’d expected—but then, she 
was
startlingly direct.
“Your expectations?” he asked.
“Oh, no,” she said, dimpling. “I expect nothing, William. From you or
anyone else.” She paused for an instant, and her eyes fixed with his. They
were gray now that she wore violet satin, and translucent as rain on a
windowpane. “Unless you refer to the modest proposal I made you?”
In spite of the internal struggle going on inside him, he smiled at her
reference to Jonathan Swift—though in truth, her own proposal had beennearly as shocking as Swift’s satirical essay advocating infant cannibalism as
a remedy for poverty.
“That was what I had in mind, yes.”
“I’m pleased to know that you’re considering it,” she said, and though the
dimple had left her cheek, it was plainly audible in her voice.
He opened his mouth to deny that he was doing any such thing—but while
he had firmly refused to think about her outrageous suggestion, he was aware
that his body had already accomplished its considerations and was making its
equally firm conclusions known to him.
He coughed and glanced casually around the room. Papa was talking to the
French diplomat and not looking in his direction, thank God.
“Well.” He cleared his throat and folded his hands behind his back. “I
don’t know that ‘consideration’ is the right word, precisely—but the matter is
irrelevant for the moment. I came this afternoon to see you—”
“Indeed?” She looked pleased.
“In order to tell you that I am leaving in the morning and don’t know how
long it may be until I return.”
She ceased looking pleased, and he regretted that, but there was nothing to
be done about it.
“Come,” he said, and touched her hand, nodding toward the French doors,
open to the garden. “I’ll tell you why.”
She caught his mood at once and gave a slight nod.
“Not together,” she said. “I’ll go first. Go and have a drink, then take your
leave through the front door and walk round.”
HE 
FOUND HER, at length, at the far end of Mrs. Fleury’s enormous garden,
contemplating a small grotto, in which a stone 
putto
 was urinating on a toad
that sat in the middle of a carved stone basin, its round eyes gleaming black
beneath the stream.
“It’s a real toad,” she remarked, glancing briefly at him before returning
her attention to the amphibian in question. “A 
Scaphiopus
 of some kind.
They live mostly underground, but they do like water.”
“Obviously,” William said, but he wasn’t letting her distract him, and
without ado he told her about the letter Denzell Hunter had sent to Uncle Hal.
She went white and pulled her cape tight across her body, as though stricken
by a sudden chill.“Oh, no. No. Oh, poor woman!” To his surprise, her eyes were full of
tears. But then he remembered that she, too, had a child, and must at once
have imagined losing Trevor in such fashion.
“Yes,” he said, a lump in his own throat. “It’s very terrible. Uncle Hal
naturally wants Dottie here, where he can take care of her, make sure she’s
safe. So I’m going to go and fetch her.”
“Of course.” Amaranthus’s voice was unaccustomedly hoarse and she
cleared her throat with a small, precise 
“hem,”
 then let go of her cape,
straightening up. “I’m glad that your cousin will be restored to her family—to
be alone, with such a dreadful loss … How long do you think the journey will
take?”
“I don’t know,” William said. “If everything goes smoothly, perhaps a
month, six weeks … If it doesn’t—illness, bad weather, travel mishaps—
troop movements …” As usual, he felt a slight pang at thought of the army,
and the sense of constant purpose it embodied. “It could be longer.”
Amaranthus nodded. The toad suddenly inflated its throat and let rip an
enormous, resonant 
whonk!
 It repeated this cry several times, as William and
Amaranthus watched it in astonishment, then gave them an accusing look and
shuffled out of its basin and away under a frond of something green.
Amaranthus giggled, and William smiled, charmed at the sound. The
tension between them had broken, and he reached to draw the cape back
around her shoulders, quite naturally. Just as naturally, she stepped into his
arms, and no one could have said, then or afterward, whose idea the kiss had
been, nor yet what followed.101
On the Road Again
JOHN CINNAMON HEAVED WILLIAM’S saddlebags aboard the mare,
then looked the animal over carefully, circling her with squinted eyes, trying
to pick up her forefoot, attempting to tighten the cinch (and loosening it in the
process), and generally annoying the horse. Cinnamon was somewhat
embarrassed at being rescued from the Saint-Domingue navy and had been
taking particular care not to be a nuisance since the adventure.
“She’s a good horse, but she’ll probably kick you if you don’t leave off
pestering her.” William was amused, but also moved at Cinnamon’s clumsy
solicitude. He knew Cinnamon wished to go with him—probably not trusting
him to manage the task of retrieving Dottie by himself without being arrested,
hanged by accident, or killed by highwaymen—but not enough to leave
without his portrait being finished.
“It will be all right,” he said, clapping Cinnamon on the shoulder and
bending to retighten the cinch. “It will be nearly winter by the time I get to
Virginia. Armies don’t fight in winter. I’ve been in the army; I know.”
“Yes, 
imbécile,
” Cinnamon replied mildly. “
I
 know. Didn’t you tell me
that the last time you were in the army you got hit on the head by a German
deserter and thrown into a ravine, where you almost died and had to be
rescued by your Scottish cousin that you hate?”
“I don’t hate Ian Murray,” William said, with some coldness. “I owe him
my life, after all.”
“Which is why you hate him,” Cinnamon said, matter-of-factly, and
handed William his own best knife, with the beaded sheath. “That, and you
want his wife. Don’t tell me it will be all right. I’ve seen what kind of trouble
you get into when you 
are
 with me. I’ll light a candle to the Blessed Virgin
every day until you come back with your cousin.”“Merci beaucoup,”
 William said, with elaborate sarcasm. “You don’t have
that much money.” But he meant it, and Cinnamon grinned at him.
“Have you got a good thick cloak? And woolen drawers to keep your balls
warm?”
“You look after your own balls,” William advised him, putting his foot in
the stirrup. “Mind yourself, and do what my sister tells you.”
Cinnamon widened his eyes and crossed himself.
“You think I would dare to do otherwise?” he said. “That is a fearsome
woman. Beautiful,” he added thoughtfully, “but large and dangerous. And
besides, I want my portrait to look like me. If I made her angry …” He
crossed his eyes and stuck his tongue out of the corner of his mouth.
William laughed, and tucking the knife into his belt, patted it and took up
the reins.
“Serve you right, 
gonze. Adieu!
”
Cinnamon shook his head.
“Au revoir,”
 he corrected soberly. 
“Et bon voyage!”102
The Winds of Winter
BAR A FEW SHOWERS and one day of solid rain, the weather held and the
roads were not bad. As for armies, though …
His job was to retrieve Dottie and bring her home. No one had mentioned
her husband, who was presumably still an escaped prisoner of war. Granted,
Denzell Hunter might be with Dottie in Virginia, but if he weren’t … He
knew his cousin well; he knew Denzell Hunter well, too, and thought that
once Dottie was safe, Hunter would likely have returned to the Continental
army, as a matter of personal belief as well as military duty. Uncle Hal had
shown him the official dispatches and told him what General Prévost
supposed to be true, regarding both British and American troop dispositions.
Winter was coming, and all hostilities had essentially ceased up north. Sir
Henry Clinton had been lurking in New York since Monmouth, and George
Washington—according to Hal’s dispatches, which his uncle had thought
likely accurate—was still keeping the main body of his men in winter
quarters in New Jersey.
One of Washington’s generals, though—Lincoln, the man who’d mounted
the unsuccessful siege of Savannah—had gone north with his troops and was
presently holding the city of Charles Town, and Clinton wanted it.
“So according to the latest, Sir Henry was intending to send some fourteen
thousand troops down the coast to take the place, once D’Estaing’s frogs quit
New York, but he was delayed by needing to go and protect Newport, which
is where the frogs went next.” Uncle Hal had riffled through the small stack
of dispatches, peering through his half spectacles. “And 
then
 the frogs bloody
turn up here! You did say you thought you’d seen D’Estaing himself?”
“With my own eyes,” William assured his uncle, who snorted briefly.
“And we know that Lincoln left here after the siege failed and went up to
hold Charles Town, which puts something of a stumbling block in Clinton’spath,” Lord John had put in.
“Being that winter is coming, Sir Henry’s intentions may have been further
delayed by the weather—and the minor problem of housing his fourteen
thousand troops, in case Benjamin Lincoln doesn’t immediately oblige by
surrendering Charles Town. That being so, I’ve no idea what you might find
if you go through Charles Town—or anywhere near it—but …”
“But it would be a lot faster to go through Charles Town than round it,”
William finished, smiling. “Don’t worry, Uncle Hal. I’ll get to Virginia as
quickly as I possibly can.”
Uncle Hal’s face, shadowed with tiredness and worry, relaxed into one of
those rare, charming smiles that made you feel as though everything would
be fine, because surely the world could not resist him.
“I know you will, Willie,” he said, with affection. “Thank you.”
William had therefore set out on his mission with a warm heart, stout
boots, a good horse, and a purse full of gold, Uncle Hal meaning to ensure
that he would lack for nothing in transporting Dorothea back to her father’s
arms. Uncle Hal hadn’t happened to mention any role for Denzell Hunter in
these transactions, but Lord John eventually had.
“He’s a Quaker, of course,” he told William, privately, “but he’s also a
surgeon in the Continental army. 
And
 an escaped prisoner of war—he broke
his parole, he says. He may be with Washington now, which means he’s
likely in New Jersey. If he is, bloody leave him there and bring Dottie back
with you at once, no matter what she says—or does—to you.”
“She’s a Quaker now, isn’t she?” William asked. “She won’t do anything
violent.”
Lord John gave him a look.
“Somehow I doubt that religious conviction will be sufficient to overcome
Dorothea’s familial tendencies toward high-handedness. Remember who her
bloody father is.”
“Mm,” William said noncommittally. He was in fact recalling that the last
time he had told a young Quaker woman—Denzell Hunter’s bloody sister, no
less!—that she wouldn’t strike him, she had slapped his face. She’d also
called him a rooster, which he rather resented.
William hadn’t given Denzell much thought during the discussion of
Dottie’s rescue, but if he had, he would have come to the same conclusion as
had Papa and Uncle Hal. He would, he thought, send word to Denzell as to
Dottie’s whereabouts and well-being, at least.William was feeling at once slightly heroic, sentimental, and
magnanimous. This was largely due to his current feelings regarding
Amaranthus, which were confused but suffusingly pleasant. Half of him
urgently wished he had taken advantage of Mrs. Fleury’s summerhouse to
accomplish the first step of the plan Amaranthus had suggested to him. The
other half was rather glad he hadn’t.
In fact, he hadn’t, largely because of Dottie’s baby, and Amaranthus’s
reaction to news of her death, which had abruptly made the child real to him.
Before seeing Amaranthus’s sudden tears, he had himself felt the sadness of
the situation, but it was an abstract sadness, safely distant from himself. But
when Amaranthus wept for the child, he had been struck quite suddenly—and
painfully—by the realization that she, little Minerva Joy, had been an actual
person, one whose death had grievously wounded those who had loved her,
for however short a time.
It was the tenderness engendered by this thought, as much as lust, that had
made him touch Amaranthus, enter that kiss.
He touched his own lips with the back of his hand. Such a strange kiss, and
somehow wonderful. For those few moments, when their lips had met and
their bodies pressed together, kindling each other in the wet, chilly garden, it
was as though some connection had been forged between them—as though
he knew her now, in some way beyond words.
And he’d bloody wanted to know her a lot further—and she him. At one
point, he’d slid his hand up the long bare thigh under her skirts, taken her
mound in the palm of his hand, and felt the fullness, the slickness of her,
wanting him. The pads of his fingers rubbed half consciously against his
palm, tingling.
He swallowed and tried to put the memories of Amaranthus away. For
now.
But the tenderness remained—and the thought of the baby. That’s why
he’d stopped. Because it had suddenly occurred to him that what he was
doing might in fact cause someone real to be born.
And that it somehow wasn’t right that he should oblige that someone to
take on burdens that were—rightfully or not—his own to bear.
But if I married her, and
 didn’t 
go away if she fell pregnant …
 His son—
God, what a thought, his son!—would still inherit Ellesmere’s title and
Dunsany’s, but not until he was ready for it. He could prepare the boy, show
him …“Jesus.” He shook his head violently, driving out the thoughts, or trying to.
The notion was new, frightening—and quite thrilling, in a way. He pushed it
aside, his mind sliding back to its memories of Amaranthus and her soft
blond brows, trickling water, pungent grass, and the gleaming black eyes of
the watchful toad.
He barely noticed the miles pacing away beneath his horse’s hooves, and
stopped only when darkness made the road disappear.103
Virginia Reel
HE STOPPED FOR THE night in a hamlet some thirty miles north of
Richmond. William felt the pull of Mount Josiah: He’d passed within a few
miles of the road that would take him there, and for a few moments he was
there in spirit, sitting on the broken porch with Manoke and John Cinnamon,
eating fried catfish and pig meat smoked underground, the faint sweet scent
of tobacco riding on the evening breeze.
He wondered briefly whether perhaps he should take Dottie there for a
while. The weather was getting colder and rain more frequent; a newly
bereaved woman weakened by illness surely oughtn’t to be required to ride
through storms and mud for weeks. And if Manoke was still in residence, he
and the Indian could easily repair enough of the house to give them shelter …
No. This was a fantasy, born of his own desire to sit still on his shattered
stoop and think about things. He needed to get Dottie back to Uncle Hal as
soon as possible, where she could be taken care of, heal in the bosom of her
family. 
And,
 said a small treacherous voice in the back of his mind, 
you might
just want to see Amaranthus again before too long.
“That, too,” he said aloud, and nudged his horse into a faster pace.
He had enough money to bring Dottie back by coach—but that was
assuming a coach was to be had. The settlement of Wilkins Corner boasted
three oxen, one mule, and a small herd of goats, plus the odd pig or two.
There were only four houses, and a brief inquiry of a woman milking a goat
sent him directly to the door of Fear God Elmsworth.
This gentleman proved to be in his eighties and quite deaf, but his much
younger wife—only sixty or so—was able by shouting into his ear at a
distance of two inches to get across to him William’s identity and mission.
“Dorothea, you say?” Mr. Elmsworth cocked a bushy brow at William.
“What’s he want with her?”“I … am … her … 
cousin,
” William said, leaning down to address the old
gentleman at the top of his voice.
“Cousin? Cousin?” The old man looked at his wife for confirmation of this
unlikely statement, and receiving it, shook his head. “You don’t look nothin’
like her.”
William turned to the wife.
“Will you please tell your husband that Dorothea’s father is my uncle, and
his brother is my stepfather?”
The woman heard this but was plainly baffled by the genealogical
information, for she opened her mouth for a moment, then shut it, frowning.
“Never mind,” William said, keeping his patience. “Please, just tell
Dorothea that I’m here.”
“Dorothea ain’t here,” said Mr. Elmsworth, somehow catching this. He
looked puzzled and glanced at his wife. “Is she?”
“No, she isn’t,” said Mrs. Elmsworth, looking puzzled as well.
William took a deep breath and decided that shaking Mrs. Elmsworth until
her head rattled wouldn’t be the act of a gentleman.
“Where is she?” he inquired, gently.
Mrs. Elmsworth looked surprised.
“Why, her brother came and fetched her, near on a month ago.”
WILLIAM HAD NODDED in automatic response to Mrs. Elmsworth, but
then actually 
heard
 what she’d said and jerked as though stung by a bee.
“Her brother,” he repeated carefully, and both the old people nodded. “Her
brother. What was his name?”
Mr. Elmsworth, who was now lighting his long-stemmed clay pipe,
removed it from his mouth long enough to say, “Eh?”
“He don’t know,” Mrs. Elmsworth said, shaking her capped head in
apology. “I was workin’ in the orchard when the man came, and by the time I
came back, they’d gone away together. Dorothea left a sweet note, thanking
us for looking after her, but she said nothin’ about her brother’s name in it,
and my husband was too deaf to understand what they said, beyond them
making signs to him.”
“Ah.”
It was possible that Mr. Elmsworth had misunderstood the situation
entirely, William reflected, but it 
was
 just possible that it had been Henry.When last he’d seen Henry Grey, the man had been living in Philadelphia
with a very handsome Negro landlady who might or might not be a widow,
recovering slowly from having lost a foot or two of his guts after being shot
in the abdomen. William supposed that Denzell might have paused in
Philadelphia on his way to New Jersey and given Henry word of Dorothea’s
presence, and either had asked Henry to go and fetch her or Henry had
determined to do so on his own.
A sudden thought struck him, though, and he inflated his lungs, leaned
down close to Mr. Elmsworth’s hairy earhole, and shouted, “Did he wear a
uniform
?”
Mr. Elmsworth started and dropped his pipe, which his wife fortunately
caught before it could shatter on the floor.
“Goodness, young man,” he said reprovingly. “’Tisn’t manners to shout
indoors. That’s what I was always taught as a young’un.”
“I beg pardon, sir,” William said, in a slightly lower tone. “Mrs. Hunter
has … two brothers, you see; I wondered which it might be.”
Henry had been invalided out of the army, but his elder brother, Adam, the
middle one of William’s three cousins, was captain in an infantry battalion.
“Oh, ah,” said Mrs. Elmsworth, and set about questioning her husband in a
high-pitched howl, eventually eliciting a dubious opinion that the young
fellow might have been in some sort of uniform, though with so many folk
going about with guns and colored britches and fancy buttons these days,
’twas hard to say.
“We don’t hold with vanity, see,” he explained to William. “Being Friends,
like. Not with armies nor guns, neither, save they’re for hunting. Hunting’s
all right. Folk have to eat, you know,” he added, giving William a faintly
accusatory look.
William kept his patience, there being no choice, and was rewarded with a
more promising thought. He turned to Mrs. Elmsworth.
“Will you ask your husband, please—did the man who came for Dorothea
resemble her?” For Henry and Benjamin were slender and dark-haired, like
their father, but Adam looked like his mother, as did Dottie, both being fair-
haired and pink-cheeked, with rounded chins and large, dreamy blue eyes.
Mr. Elmsworth had grown somewhat tense during the questioning and was
puffing on his pipe with an air of agitation, but relaxed when this was put to
him. He exhaled a great cloud of blue smoke and nodded, hard.“He did, then,” he said. “Very like, very like.” 
Adam.
 William relaxed, too,
and thanked the Elmsworths profusely, though they refused any gift of
money.
As he prepared to take his leave, he had another thought.
“Ma’am—do you still have the note my cousin wrote to you?”
This request resulted in a quarter hour of fussing about the tiny house,
picking up sticky jars of preserves and putting them down again, and
concluding in Mr. Elmsworth’s belated recollection that he had used the note
to light his candle.
“There wasn’t much to it, son,” Mrs. Elmsworth told him sympathetically,
seeing his disappointment. “She only thanked us for keeping her, and said as
how her brother would take her to her husband.”
IT WAS LATE in the day by now, and his horse was tired and in need of
food, so despite his urge to ride off immediately, he reluctantly accepted the
hospitality of the Elmsworths’ small barn for the night. They had invited him
to share their supper as well, but having seen that their supper was to consist
of a dab of cornmeal porridge with a few drops of molasses and a few slices
of hard and curling bread, he assured them that he had a little food in his
saddlebags and retired to the barn to see to Betsy’s needs before seeking the
refuge of his own thoughts.
In fact, he had a bruised apple and a small chunk of hard cheese, this
oozing grease and slightly moldy. He paid little attention to his sparse supper,
though, his mind being occupied with what the devil to do next.
Adam.
 It had to be Adam. The problem was that he didn’t know where
Adam was supposed to be. He’d not seen his cousin in more than a year, and
such conversation as he’d had lately with Papa and Uncle Hal hadn’t touched
on Adam at all, everyone being taken up with Benjamin’s death.
The last he 
had
 heard of Adam, his cousin was a captain of infantry, but
(wisely, he thought) not in his father’s regiment. Hal’s sons had all
concluded, early in their military careers, that their chances of remaining on
good terms with their father depended on not serving under him, and they
purchased their commissions accordingly.
“Well, start from the other end, then, ass,” he said impatiently. “The only
way Adam would have found out where Dottie was, is from Denzell. Weassume Denzell is with Washington, and Uncle Hal says that Washington is
in winter quarters in New Jersey.”
All right, then. He belched slightly, tasting the sweet decay of the apple’s
soft spots, and relaxed a little, hunching his greatcoat up round his ears and
curling his toes inside his cold, damp boots. He didn’t 
need
 to know where
Adam was or had been, if this reasoning was sound. But his guess was that
Adam was with Clinton’s army in New York—if they still were in New
York. If Clinton was intending to go take Charles Town, though, surely he
wouldn’t be doing it so late in the year? Still, if the Hunters were 
not
 with
Washington 
in New Jersey, Adam was his only source of information as to
their whereabouts.
Betsy lifted her tail and deposited a steaming cascade of horse apples, two
feet away from where William sat on an upturned pail. William leaned over
and rubbed his frozen hands above the warmth, thinking.
He did wonder why Denzell had decided to send for Dottie, having placed
her with the Elmsworths for safety, but that wasn’t important. His own choice
seemed clear: either ride on to New York and look for Adam, go to New
Jersey and look for Denzell, or turn round and ride back to Savannah and tell
Uncle Hal what he’d learned.
He dismissed this last option.
It was roughly the same distance from where he was to either New York or
New Jersey—about three hundred miles. He glanced out through the open
half door at the cloudy sky. Maybe a week, if the roads were decent.
“Which they won’t be,” he said, watching small hard flecks of what wasn’t
quite yet snow drift in to land on his hands and face, melting in tiny pinpricks
of cold. “Nothing else to do, though, is there?”
THE NEW YEAR had come before William arrived at Morristown. He’d had
plenty of time on the road to make his decision. And while he assured himself
that Morristown was the logical place to begin his inquiries, since this was
where Denzell was and Dottie would likely be with him by now, his
conscience observed acidly that this decision was the counsel of cowardice as
much as logic. He didn’t want to walk into Sir Henry Clinton’s headquarters
as a shabbily dressed civilian and face the stares—if not the blunt questions
—of men he knew.
He just didn’t.Morristown itself boasted two churches and two taverns, with a cluster of
maybe fifty houses and a large mansion near the edge of town. From the flags
adorning this house, and the sentries before it, it was evidently now
Washington’s headquarters. William wouldn’t mind seeing the fellow, but
curiosity could wait.
Curiosity, though, caused him to ask someone on the town green why so
many folk were waiting outside the churches, lined up and stamping their feet
against the cold.
“Smallpox,” he was told. “Inoculations. General Washington’s orders.
Troops and townspeople alike—like it or not. They been doin’ it in the
churches every Monday and Wednesday.”
William had heard of inoculation for smallpox; Mother Claire had
mentioned it once, in Philadelphia. Inoculation meant doctors, and
Washington’s name meant army doctors. Thanking his informant, he strode
to the head of one line and, tipping his hat to the person at the door, pushed
his way inside as though he had a right to be there.
A doctor and his assistant were working near the baptismal font at the front
of the church, using the altar for their supplies. The doctor wasn’t Denzell
Hunter, but he was a place to start, and William strode purposefully up the
aisle, drawing surprised looks from the people waiting.
The doctor, a fat gentleman with an eared cap pulled down over his brow
and a bloody apron, was standing by the baptismal font, this structure having
been temporarily topped with a wide piece of board on which were the tools
of inoculation: two small knives, a pair of forceps, and a bowl full of what
looked like very thin, dark-red worms. As William approached, he saw the
doctor, his breath wreathing round his face, cut a small slit in the hand of a
woman who had turned her face away, grimacing at the cut. The doctor
swiftly wiped away the welling blood, picked up one of the worms, which
turned out to be threads soaked in something nasty—smallpox? William
wondered, with a brief shudder—with his forceps, and tucked it into the
wound.
As the woman wrapped her hand in a handkerchief, William deftly inserted
himself at the head of the queue.
“I beg your pardon, sir,” William said politely, and bowed. “I am in search
of Dr. Hunter. I have an important message for him.”
The doctor blinked, took off his glasses, and squinted at William, then put
them back on and took up his knife again.“He’s at Jockey Hollow today,” he said. “Probably at the Wick House, but
might be among the cabins.”
“I thank you, sir,” William said, meaning it. The doctor nodded absently
and beckoned to the next in line.
Another inquiry sent him uphill to Jockey Hollow, a rather mountainous
area—Washington was damned fond of mountains—where a scene of
immense devastation spread before him. It looked as though a meteor had
struck a woodland, shattering trees and churning the soil. The Continentals
had cut down what had to be at least a thousand acres of trees—the stumps
poked ragged fingers out of the mud, and bonfires of discarded branches
smoked throughout the camp, each one with a fringe of soldiers holding out
frozen hands to the heat.
Logs were piled everywhere, in a rude order, and William saw that in fact,
sizable cabins were being built. This was clearly going to be a semi-
permanent encampment, and not a small one.
Soldiers, mostly in plain dress or with army greatcoats, swarmed like ants.
If Denzell was in there, it would take no little time to winkle him out. He
walked up to the nearest bonfire and nudged his way into the circle of men
around it. God, the heat was wonderful.
“Where is the Wick House?” he inquired of the man next to him, rubbing
his hands together to help spread the delicious warmth.
“Up there.” The man—a very young man, perhaps a few years younger
than William—jerked his chin, indicating a modest-looking house in the
distance, on the crest of a hill. He thanked the boy and regretfully left the fire,
smelling strongly of smoke.
The Wick House, despite its modest size, was plainly the property of a
wealthy man: there was a forge, a grain mill, and a sizable stable nearby. The
wealthy man either was a rebel or had been forcibly evicted, for there were
regimental flags planted near the door and a blue-nosed sentry outside,
clearly there to weed out unwelcome visitors.
Well, it had worked once … William put his shoulders back, lifted his
head, and walked up to the door as though he owned the place.
“I have a message for Dr. Hunter,” he said. “Will I find him here?”
The sentry gave him a look from rheumy, bloodshot eyes.
“No, you won’t,” he said.
“May I inquire where he is, then?”The sentry cleared his throat and spat, the gob of mucus not quite landing
on the toe of William’s boot.
“He’s inside. But you won’t find him there because I’m not letting you in.
You got a message, give me it.”
“It must be given into the doctor’s hands,” William said firmly, and
reached for the doorknob.
The sentry took two steps sideways and stood in front of the door, musket
held across his chest and his blue nose forbidding in its righteousness.
“You aren’t a-coming in, friend,” he said. “The doctor’s with Brigadier
Bleeker, and he’s not to be disturbed.”
William made a low sound that wasn’t quite a growl. It didn’t affect Blue
Nose, though, and he tried again.
“What about Mrs. Hunter? Is she in camp, perhaps?” God, he hoped not.
He glanced over his shoulder at the sprawling mess below.
“Oh. Aye. She’s in there.” The sentry jerked a thumb backward, indicating
the house. “With the doctor and the brigadier.”
“The brigadier … that would be …?”
“General Bleeker. General Ralph Bleeker.”
William sighed.
“Well, if I can’t go in, would 
you
 be so kind as to go inside and tell her that
her cousin has come with a message for her husband? She can come out and
get it, surely.”
It nearly worked. He could see doubt warring with duty on the man’s face
—but duty won, and Blue Nose doggedly shook his head and waved a hand.
“Shoo.”
William turned on his heel and did so. He strode down the hill, not looking
back—and turned aside as soon as the growth of shrubs and small trees hid
him from the sentry’s view.
It took no little while to circle the hilltop and make his way carefully up
through the grain mill, but he was able to blend in with the people waiting
there to have their flour ground and could easily see the house. Yes, there
was a back door. And no, glory be to God, there was no sentry—at least not
right this moment.
He waited until the small crowd had stopped noticing him and stepped
away in the half-furtive manner of a man going for a piss. Quick past the
forge and up to the door, and … in.
He closed the back door behind him with a surge of pleasure.“Sir?” He turned round, finding himself in the kitchen, and the cynosure of
the gaze of a cook and several kitchen maids. The air was perfumed with the
smell of roasting meat—there was a huge pig turning on the spit in the
spacious hearth and his mouth was watering—but food could wait.
He bowed and lifted his hat briefly to the cook.
“Your pardon, ma’am. I’ve a message for the doctor.”
“Oh, he’s in the parlor,” said one of the younger maids. She looked
admiringly up William’s body, and he smiled at her. “I’ll take you!”
“Thank you, my dear,” he said, and bowed ingratiatingly again before
following her out.
The house was comfortable, but seemed to have quite a few people in it; he
could hear voices and the sound of footsteps overhead—there was a second
story over the back part of the house. The maid led him to a closed door and
bobbed a curtsy. He thanked her again, and as he reached for the porcelain
knob of the door, he heard the unmistakable sound of his cousin Dottie’s
gurgling laugh, and his own face broke into a grin.
He was still wearing the grin when he stepped into the room. Dottie was
sitting in a chair by the fire, some sort of knitting on her lap, her face full of
lively attention as the man in Continental uniform standing by the hearth said
something to her.
Denzell was there, too, by the window, but William scarcely noticed,
frozen to the spot by the sound of the man’s voice.
“William!” Dottie exclaimed, dropping her knitting. The man by the hearth
turned sharply.
“Jesus Christ,” he said, staring in shock. “What the devil are 
you
 doing
here?” The blue of his coat gave his winter-pale-blue eyes a piercing glint.
William felt as though he’d been kicked in the stomach by a mule, but
managed a breath.
“Hallo, Ben,” he said flatly.104
General Fucking Bleeker
BEN LOOKED AT HIM with a cold formality and said, “That would be
General Bleeker to you, sir.” That might have been taken as humor, but it
bloody wasn’t, and wasn’t meant to be.
“Bleeker,” William said, making it almost a question. “All right, if you
must. But 
Ralph
?”
Ben’s face darkened, but he kept his temper.
“It isn’t Ralph,” he said shortly. “It’s Rafe.”
“One of Ben’s names is Raphael,” Dottie said pleasantly, as though
making conversation over the tea table. “After our maternal grandfather. His
name is Raphael Wattiswade.”
“Is?” William said, startled into looking at her. “I thought your mother’s
father was dead.” He switched the look back to his cousin. “For that matter, I
thought 
you
 were dead.”
Dottie and Denzell exchanged a brief marital look.
“I believe Friend Wattiswade has gone to some trouble to give that
impression,” 
Denzell said, carefully not looking at Ben. “Will thee sit down,
William? There is some wine.” Without waiting for an answer, he rose and
gestured to his empty chair, going then to fetch a decanter from a small table
near the door.
William ignored both the invitation and the chair. Ben was slightly taller
than his father, but he was still six inches shorter than William, and William
was not sacrificing the advantage of looking down on him. Ben stiffened,
glaring up at him.
“I repeat, what the devil are you doing here?”
“I came to find your sister,” William replied, and gave Dottie a slight bow.
“Your father wants you to come back to Savannah, Dottie.” Now that he had
a chance to look at her, he thought Uncle Hal had been right to want that. Shewas very thin with dark circles under her eyes, her dress hung on her bones,
and overall she looked like a fine piece of china with a crack running through
it and a chip out of the edge.
“I told thee, thee shouldn’t have written to him,” she said reproachfully to
Denzell, who handed her a glass of wine—and seeing that William was not
about to accept the other one, sat down and took a sip from it himself.
“And I told 
thee
 that thee should go home,” Denzell replied, though
without rancor. “This is no place for any woman, let alone one who—” He
caught sight of Dottie and stopped abruptly. A hectic flush had risen in her
cheeks and her lips were pressed tight. William thought she might either burst
into tears or brain Denzell with the poker, which was near at hand.
Even odds, he concluded, and turned back to Ben, who had gone white
round the nostrils.
“Step outside with me,” William said. “And you can tell me what the
bloody hell you’re doing and why. 
And
 why I shouldn’t go straight back to
Savannah and tell your father. If you feel like it.”
IT WAS COLD outside, and the sky lay low and heavy, the color of lead.
William felt the itch of Ben’s eyes boring a hole between his shoulder blades.
“This way,” his cousin said abruptly, and he turned to see Ben push open
the door to a large shed from which the warm, thick smell of smoke and
grease floated out, surrounding them.
Inside, the smell was stronger, but the air was warm and William felt his
hands tingle in gratitude; his fingers had been half frozen for days. The
bodies of deer and sheep and pigs hung from the beams, streaks of fat
showing gray and white through the slow drift of smoke from the trench
below. Large gaps showed where meat had been taken away—to feed the
officers occupying Wick House, he supposed, and wondered how
Washington proposed to feed his troops through the winter. From his hasty
appraisal of the camp-building in the hollow, there must be nearly ten
thousand men here—many more than he’d thought.
“Adam said you’d resigned your commission.” There was a creak and a
thud as Ben shut the door. “Is that true?”
“It is.” He eyed his cousin and shifted his weight a little. He didn’t have
cause to suppose Ben would try to hit him, but the day was young.
“Why?”“None of your business,” William replied bluntly. “So Adam’s still
speaking to you, is he? 
Where
 is he, come to that?”
“In New York, with Clinton.” Ben jerked his head to the left. His face was
pale in the gray light.
“Does it occur to you that you could get him in serious trouble, talking to
him?—arrested and court-martialed, even bloody 
hanged
? Or does that
consideration not weigh against your new … loyalties?” William’s heart was
still beating fast from the shock of finding Ben alive, and he was in no mood
to mince words.
“How the fuck 
dare
 you?” William said, fury rising suddenly out of
nowhere. “Never mind being a traitor, you’re a fucking coward! You couldn’t
just change your coat and be straight about it—oh, no! You had to pretend to
be fucking dead, and kill your father with grief—and what do you think your
mother will feel when she hears it?”
Despite the dim light, he could see the blood rush into Ben’s face and his
hands clench into fists. Still, Ben kept his voice level.
“Think about it, 
Willie.
 Which would my father prefer—that I was dead, or
that I was a traitor? 
That
 would bloody kill him!”
“Or he’d kill you,” William said brutally. Ben stiffened but didn’t reply.
“So what was it?” William asked. “Rank, 
General
 Bleeker? It can’t have
been money.”
“I don’t expect you to understand,” Ben said, through his teeth. He took a
breath, as though to continue, but then stopped, eyes narrowed. “Or maybe
you do. Did you come here to join us?”
“What—become Washington’s bum-licker, like you? No, I fucking didn’t.
I came to find Dottie. Imagine my surprise.” He made a contemptuous
gesture toward the blue-and-buff uniform.
“Then why resign your commission?” Ben looked him up and down,
taking in the rough clothes and grubby linen, the thick boots with the woolen
stocking tops turned down over them. “And why the devil are you dressed
like that?”
“I repeat—none of your business. It wasn’t political, though,” he added,
and wondered briefly why he had.
“Well, it was political for me.” Ben took a deep, deliberate breath and
leaned back against the door. “Heard of a man called Paine? Thomas Paine?”
“No.”“He’s a writer. That is, he was employed by His Majesty’s Customs and
Excise, but got sacked and started thinking about politics.”
“As one does when unemployed, I suppose.”
Ben gave him a quelling look.
“I met him in Philadelphia, in a tavern. I spoke with him. Thought he was
… interesting. Odd-looking cove, but … intense, I suppose you’d say.” Ben
inhaled too deeply and coughed; William could feel the tickle of smoke in his
own chest.
“Then, later, when I was taken prisoner at the Brandywine …” He cleared
his throat. “I had occasion to read his pamphlet. It’s called 
Common Sense.
And I talked with the officer with whom I boarded and … well, it 
is
 common
sense, dammit.” He shrugged, then dropped his shoulders and looked
defiantly at William. “I became convinced that the Americans were in the
right, that’s all, and I couldn’t in conscience fight on the side of tyranny any
longer.”
“You pompous twat.” The urge to hit Ben was growing stronger. “Let’s get
out of here. I don’t want to go round smelling like a smoked ham, even if you
don’t mind.”
This argument, at least, struck some remainder of sense in Ben. They went
out, and Ben led the way downhill, but away from the town. They collected a
few looks from men carrying lumber toward the camp, but Ben ignored them.
“If you’re a general, won’t people wonder why you haven’t got a flock of
aides and toadies round you?” William asked the back of Ben’s neck and was
pleased to see it flush, despite the cold. It was perishing out; snow had started
to fall in thick, fast flakes that covered the dirty frozen humps of earlier
storms.
“That’s why we’re going where no one will see us,” Ben said tersely, and
stamped off down a trail of churned, cold-hardened mud, toward a large shed
near a frozen creek. It was padlocked, and it took Ben some minutes to open
it, both the key and his hands being cold and uncooperative.
“Let me.” William had kept his hands in his pockets, and while chilly, his
fingers were still flexible. He took the keys from Ben and nudged him aside.
“What do the Continentals have that’s worth locking up?” he asked,
though with no real intent to offend. Ben didn’t answer but pushed the door
open, revealing the shadowy long shapes of guns. Cannon, four- and six-
pounders, nine of them at a hasty count, and a couple of mortars lurking atthe back. The Continental artillery park, apparently. The place smelled of
cold metal, damp wood, and the ghosts of black powder.
“The smoke shed was a bit warmer,” Ben observed, turning to face
William. “Let’s finish whatever business we have, before we freeze stiff.”
“Agreed.” William’s breath came white, and he was already beginning to
long for the company of the dead swine and their fire. “I want Dottie to come
with me, back to Savannah. Surely you can see she needs food, warmth …
her family?”
Ben snorted, his breath puffing from his nostrils like that of an angry bull.
“Bonne chance,”
 he said. “Hunter won’t go, because he’s desperately
needed here. She won’t leave him. QED.”
In spite of Ben’s obvious annoyance, there was something odd in his voice.
Almost a longing, William thought, and the thought sparked the realization
that had been slowly growing, unnoticed, in the back of his mind.
“Amaranthus,” he said suddenly, and Ben flinched. He bloody 
flinched,
 the
lousy poltroon!
“Does she even fucking know you’re not dead?” he asked.
“Yes,” Ben said between his teeth. “It’s on account of her that I— Never
bloody mind. I can’t make Dottie go, short of tying her up in a sack and
loading her into a wagon. Do you think you—”
“What’s on account of your wife?” 
Your wife.
 The words curled up in his
stomach like worms, and he closed his hand, feeling rounded heat and
slipperiness 
in his palm. “Do you mean to say you told her what you were
going to do, and she—”
“I was a prisoner! I couldn’t tell her anything. Not until—until it was
done.” Ben had been glaring at him, but at this, looked away. “I—I wrote to
her then. Of course. Told her what I’d done. She wasn’t pleased,” he added
bleakly.
“Do tell,” said William, with as much sarcasm as he could manage. “Was
it her idea to pretend you were dead? I can’t say I blame her, if so.”
“It was,” Ben said stiffly. His eyes were still fixed on the open black
mouth of a nearby cannon. “She said … that I couldn’t let it be known that I
was a traitor. Not just for her or my father’s sake—for Trevor’s. Father would
—would get over me being dead, especially if I’d died as a soldier. He’d
never get over me …”
“Being a traitor,” William finished helpfully. “No, he bloody wouldn’t.
And little Trev wouldn’t have a good time of it as your heir, either, once hewas old enough to understand what people were saying about you—and him.
You’ve smeared your whole family with your excrement, haven’t you?” He
was suddenly warm, his blood rising.
“Shut up!” Ben snapped. “That’s why I changed my name and had official
word sent that I’d died, for God’s sake! I even went so far as to have a grave
in Middlebrook Encampment marked with my name, should anyone come
looking!”
“Someone did,” William said, anger hot in his chest. “
I
 did, you bastard! I
dug up the body in that grave, 
in
 the middle of the night, in the fucking rain.
If you hadn’t picked a thief to bury in your stead, you might have got away
with it, damn you—and I wish to God you had!”
Underneath the anger was a sharp pain in his chest. Just where the
Hercules beetle had been, and Amaranthus’s long slim finger.
“Your wife—”
“It’s not your fucking business!” Ben snarled, red in the face. “Why
couldn’t you keep your nose out? And what 
about
 my wife? What the hell do
you have to do with 
her
?”
“You want to know?” William’s voice came low and venomous, and he
leaned toward Ben, fists clenched. “You want to 
know
 what I’ve had to do
with her?”
Ben hit him. Hard, in the belly. He grabbed Ben by the arm and punched
him in the nose. It broke with a satisfying crunch and hot blood spurted over
his knuckles.
Ben was shorter and slighter, but he had the Grey family’s inclination to
fight like badgers and count the cost later. William crashed backward onto
one of the big guns, Ben at his throat, and heard the blue coat rip as his
cousin tried seriously to throttle him. William was furious; Ben was insane.
With difficulty, William got a knee up between them and managed to
break Ben’s grip long enough to rabbit-punch him in the back of the neck.
Ben made a noise like a gut-shot panther, and lowering his head, butted
William in the chest, knocking him over, then fell on him with both knees in
William’s stomach. They were crushed together, wrestling in the narrow
space between two gun carriages, and William’s knuckles were barked from
hitting wood and metal as much as from hitting Ben in the mouth.
There was one moment, when he caught sight of his cousin’s face in a ray
of light, when he truly believed that Ben meant to kill him.Then, suddenly, the flurry of punches stopped and the weight lifted. Ben
was standing up, swaying over him, dripping blood, and William realized,
through the daze of fighting and the shadows of the cannon, that the light was
coming through the open door of the shed, and there were voices.
“A saboteur,” Ben rasped, and spat blood. It struck one of the cannon and
dripped slowly down the cold iron curve, falling onto William’s wrist. “Take
him to the stockade. He’s to speak to no one. Take him, I said!”
WILLIAM WAS NOT a fussy eater, by any means, and the lukewarm beans
and dry corn bread offered him after a very cold night in the stockade were
ambrosia—and not too hard to chew, even with a sore jaw.
It really 
was
 a stockade, though a small one, with a block containing half a
dozen brick-built cells inside a palisade fence and a guardhouse outside.
There was no more than a six-inch hole in the bricks to provide light and air,
and the cell might have been sunk in a wintry sea, the air cold, dim, and
damp, swirling with mist that seeped in from the outer world. He swiped the
last bit of corn bread round his wooden trencher and then licked the last of
the bean juice off his fingers. He could have eaten three times as much, had it
been available, but as it was, he washed it down with the quart of very small
beer he’d been given, belched, tightened his belt, and sat down to wait on the
wooden bench that composed the sole furniture of the cell.
He had bruises and scrapes aplenty, and his ribs hurt him when he
breathed, but he’d slept the night through from sheer exhaustion and washed
his face from a bucket this morning without flinching, though he’d had to
break a solid half inch of ice on it first. The small injuries were nothing to
bother him much. Other than as a reminder of his cousin Ben.
Logically, Ben should have William executed as a saboteur. This was
obvious, as the only certain way to keep him from revealing the sordid truth
about Brigadier Bleeker—to Uncle Hal, Aunt Minerva, Ben’s regiment, the
London papers …?
Well, not the papers, no. Letting it become an open scandal would—as
he’d told Brigadier Bleeding Bleeker—destroy the whole family.
He hadn’t been overstating it when he’d told Ben that he’d get Adam into
trouble, either. Wait ’til Sir Henry found out that Adam had been conversing
on the quiet with an enemy combatant! Because he would find out if they
kept doing it, and the fact that said enemy was Adam’s brother would justmake it worse. If 
that
 was known, it would be assumed by everyone that
Adam was a turncoat as well, passing information to his brother.
He had a dim memory of his father telling him that a secret remained a
secret only so long as just one person knew it.
The memory came with a vision of a deep, deep lavender sky, and Venus a
bright jewel just above the horizon. That was it; they’d been lying on the
quay at Mount Josiah, watching the stars come out while Manoke cleaned
and grilled the fresh fish they’d just caught.
He breathed in nostalgically, half expecting to smell the dusty scent of flax
and the mouthwatering richness of fish rolled in cornmeal and fried in butter.
The lingering taste of the corn bread gave it to him for a moment, before
withdrawing and leaving him with the smell of the slop bucket in the corner
of his cell. He got up and used it, then straightened his clothes and splashed
another handful of water onto his face.
The only thing he was sure of was that he wouldn’t have to wait too long.
Ben wouldn’t dare keep him for long where people could become curious.
“And you couldn’t think of anything better than to call me a saboteur,” he
said aloud to his cousin. “That’ll make 
everybody
 curious, you nit.”
William was curious, too, about what might happen next—but in fact not
really worried that Ben would have him formally executed, much as he might
like to. William’s mind paused on the picture of Ben’s face when
Amaranthus had entered the conversation. Yes, he definitely had wanted to
kill William right then and undoubtedly still did.
The thought of Amaranthus summoned her as though she stood before him
physically, blue-gray eyes creasing with her smile. Tall and buxom, smelling
of grape leaves, with a faint sweet aroma of rice powder and baby poo. And
her long, slender, water-cool fingers touching his …
He squared his shoulders and blew out his breath. Time enough to deal
with 
her
 when he was out of this place.
If Ben hadn’t had him shot at dawn, he wasn’t going to kill him. Aside
from the fear that William would start shouting incriminating things on his
way to the firing squad, there was Dottie. William had no doubt that she
loved Ben and Adam and Henry; it was a close-knit family. But Dottie was
fond of 
him,
 too—and beyond that, she was a Quaker now. Having spent
some time traveling with Rachel and Denzell Hunter, William had
considerable respect for Quakers in general, and while Dottie was what he
thought was called a professed Friend rather than a born one, she certainlypossessed enough native stubbornness to give any born Quaker a run for his
or her money.
He was therefore not surprised when a guard abruptly opened the door to
his cell an hour later and Denzell Hunter walked in, his scuffed physician’s
bag in hand.
“I trust I see thee well, Friend,” he said. His voice was pleasant, neutral—
but his eyes were warm behind their spectacles. “How does thee do this
morning?”
“I’ve done better,” William said, with a glance at the door. “I’m sure a
drink of brandy and a bit of Latin will fix me right up, though.”
“It’s a bit early for brandy, but I’ll do my best. Take off thy britches and
bend over the bench, please.”
“What?”
“I mean to give thee a clyster to settle thy humors,” Denzell said, jerking
his head toward the door. “Of course, ice water is not the 
best
 medium for the
purpose …” He walked to the door and rapped sharply. “Friend Chesley?
Will thee fetch me a bucket of warm water, please?”
“Warm water?” The guard had, of course, been standing just outside the
door, listening. “Er … yes, sir … I suppose … you’re sure as you’re safe in
there with him, sir? Maybe you’d best step out here while I get the water.”
“No, Friend, there is no danger,” Denzell said, motioning William to lie
down on the bench. “He is suffering from an injury to the head, among other
things; I doubt he can stand.”
There was a scraping noise as Chesley unbolted the door and peered
suspiciously in. William emitted a faint moan and swooned, one hand pressed
to his brow, the other trailing off the bench in a languishing sort of way.
“Ah,” said Chesley, and closed the door again. Footsteps crunched away.
“He didn’t bolt it,” William whispered, sitting up abruptly. “Shall I run for
it now?”
“No, thee wouldn’t get far and it’s not necessary. Dottie is giving
Benjamin his breakfast and convincing him that the best thing to do is to give
orders for thee to be taken to General Washington’s headquarters; that’s the
Ford house in Morristown. I am meant to be administering smallpox
inoculations at the church this afternoon; I will therefore insist upon
accompanying thee to Washington, to support thee in thy infirmity.” Here he
paused to look William over, grinned briefly, and shook his head. “Theelooks convincingly battered. I think thee might suffer an effusion of blood to
the brain and unfortunately die as a result before we reach the general.”
“A fine physician 
you
 are,” William said. “Ought I to have a fit and foam
at the mouth, to be convincing?”
“Moaning loudly and soiling thyself will be adequate, I think.”105
Four Hundred Miles to Think
THE ROADS WERE EITHER half-frozen slush or knee-deep mud, and the
trees held their brown sticky buds tight to their twigs, refusing to let a single
leaf poke its tender head out into this inhospitable climate. Still, William
could feel the restlessness of the air; a sense of something alive and wild
moving in the air between the soft, fat flakes of snow.
After parting from Denzell in Morristown, he’d resisted the strong impulse
to go to Mount Josiah when he reached Virginia. He didn’t need solitude or
contemplation now, though; the choice was clear enough, and all the thinking
he needed to do could be done on horseback.
He’d had nearly four hundred miles and three weeks of riding to make up
his mind, and it wasn’t nearly long enough. 
Good thing I’ve got another four
hundred miles to think,
 he thought, grimly dismounting and picking up the
horse’s mud-clogged left fore. Betsy had pulled up lame, and William hoped
it was just a stone, and not a strain or a hairline crack in the bone. The
thought of having to shoot her and leave her for the wolves and foxes was
worse than the thought of walking for another thirty miles through ice and
mud—but not by much.
Betsy was an obliging horse and let William squeeze her leg, feel his way
down the cannon bone, and gently work her pastern joint. So far, so good.
His fingers burrowed through the frozen mud caked thick around the mare’s
hoof, his thumbs working into the frog—and there it was. A sharp stone,
wedged solid beneath the edge of his shoe.
“Good girl,” he said, relief puffing out with his breath. He got the stone
out, eventually, and walked Betsy for a bit, but the mare seemed sound, and
they resumed their usual pace, going as fast as the road allowed. Weary of
thinking, and hungry, William shoved all concerns beyond reaching a village
before nightfall out of his head.He succeeded, and it wasn’t until he’d looked after Betsy, eaten a decent
supper, and retired to a fireless room and a cold, damp bed with a mattress
stuffed with moldy corn husks that he resumed his cogitations.
Who first?
Every day he’d gone back and forth, back and forth in his mind, until his
head buzzed and the road blurred before his eyes.
He was going to have to talk to all of them, but whom should he tell first?
By rights, it should be Uncle Hal. Benjamin was his son; he had to know. But
the thought of telling his uncle, of seeing realization wash over his haggard
face … William had heard more than one English father declare fiercely that
he should rather his son be dead than a coward or a traitor. How many of
them really meant that, he wondered—and was Uncle Hal one of those who
would?
His strong urge was to go to his own father first. Tell Papa everything,
seek his advice, and … he smacked his fist into the squashy mattress. Whom
was he trying to fool? He wanted to hand the burden of his knowledge over to
Papa and let 
him
 tell Uncle Hal.
“Coward,” he muttered, turning restlessly over. He’d gone to bed fully
dressed and in his greatcoat, only removing his boots, and moving destroyed
the fragile layer of warmth he’d managed to build up.
Coward.
Without his consciously making a choice, it had gradually become clear to
him, and now, in this clammy, dark, fireless room smelling of frozen sweat
and burnt meat, that word at last gave him his answer.
Her. It had to be her.
He tried telling himself that this was the fair thing to do: Amaranthus
needed to know first that he’d discovered Ben, in order to take whatever
action she could to protect herself once the truth was known. But he’d had
enough of lies and lying, and he’d be damned if he lied now to himself. She’d
made a fool of him and damn near dragged him into her web.
He wanted to tell Amaranthus because he wanted to see the look on 
her
face when he did.
Decision made, he went to sleep and dreamed of beetles with tiny red eyes.
WILLIAM 
TOOK HIS greatcoat off for the first time when he reached New
Bern. It was raining, but it was a soft rain that smelled of spring and his skinyearned for air and freshness, and his limbs for a good stretch. It would need
to be a good deal warmer before he took much else off, but he did find an inn
with a stable for Betsy, and once having seen to the horse’s needs, he walked
down to the shore, shucked his boots and filthy stockings with a sigh of
relief, and walked out onto the cold, wet sand above the tide.
It was twilight and there was no one on the beach here, though he could
smell a wood fire and boiling crabs from a distant cluster of shacks. His belly
rumbled.
“I must be thawing out,” he said aloud, his voice sounding rough and
cracked to his ears. He hadn’t consciously thought of food since recovering
from the bang on the head in Morristown. Denzell Hunter had fed him then,
insisting he eat something before setting out on the road home. He had tried
to refuse, knowing that it was likely Denzell’s entire ration for the day—but
hunger and Hunter’s insistence had won out. He’d eaten now and then, of
course, on his way south, but without much noticing what.
He wished he had been able to persuade the Hunters to come back with
him, but at least Dottie had written a letter for her parents. He touched the
inner pocket of his coat and was reassured by the crackle of paper.
The wind had dropped, and there was no sound but the soft hiss of the tide
coming in.
Thought of Dottie’s letter brought Uncle Hal to mind—not that he’d been
far distant. The feel of sand underfoot and the sight of his own footprints,
long and high-arched, like a series of commas following him down the beach,
brought back again that conversation by the marsh in Savannah. 
Treason.
“At least there’re no bloody alligators,” he muttered, but looked over his
shoulder by reflex, then snorted and laughed at himself. What with one thing
and another, he’d given the quandary of his earldom not a single thought in
weeks, and realized with some surprise that he felt at peace with himself and
was reluctant to pick that burden up again. He didn’t care who he was—but
he wasn’t the Earl of Ellesmere. He’d have to do something about that, but
not now.
At least Amaranthus’s suggestion is right out.
 Not, he assured himself, that
he would have taken her up on it in any case, but knowing that her husband
was still alive quashed the notion out of hand.
The hand in question closed involuntarily, wet with rain, and he rubbed his
fingers against his palm, erasing the memory of the kiss she’d left there, with
a tiny warm touch from the tip of her tongue.Damn Ben. Selfish sod.
A sudden rush of seawater surged up about his ankles, the cold running
through his body like the electric shock from a Leyden jar, the water sucking
the sand out from under his feet. He staggered back, blinking rain from his
lashes and realizing that his shirt was damp and the shoulders of his jacket
wet.
A lift of the air brought him once more the smell of food, and he left the
beach, his footprints disappearing behind him as the tide came in.106
The High Ground
Kings Mountain, Tennessee County
April 1780
TAKING POSSESSION OF THE high ground was one of the cornerstones
of military strategy. Jamie’s da had told him that, once, when he and Murtagh
had sat up late before the fire, drinking whisky and talking. Jamie had been
hunched up on the floor in a corner with the dogs, hoping to be overlooked so
he could stay and listen.
Neither man was unobservant, though, and they’d spotted him soon
enough—but by then, they’d had a few drams and so his da had let him stay,
now curled up next to Da on the settle, warmed by the fire and the heat of his
father’s solid body, the big hand that wasn’t holding a whisky glass resting
absently on Jamie’s back.
“Ye remember hidin’ in the bracken?” Murtagh was saying, his eyes
glinting with memory. “Up on the hillside, waitin’ for the start of it?” A small
rumble of laughter under his father’s ribs had tickled Jamie’s ear.
“I remember you standin’ up to piss and Enoch Grant behind ye pokin’ ye
in the arse with the end of his bow and hissin’ like a snake through his teeth
to make ye set down again. Not that ye did set yourself down,” Da added,
fairly.
Murtagh had made a disgruntled 
hmph!
 and Jamie had ventured to ask
what he’d done instead then?
The result was another, louder 
hmph!
 and his da laughed again, out loud
this time.
“He turned round and pissed on Enoch Grant and then jumped down his
throat and gave him laldy wi’ the hilt of his dirk.”
“Mm,” said Murtagh, clearly relishing the memory.The hapless Grant had escaped worse injury, though, because just then the
officers started shouting and the enemy—visible on the field at Sheriffmuir
these last two hours—began to move.
“And a few minutes later, we popped out o’ the bracken like a swarm o’
brobhadan
 and the archers fired their arrows and those of us wi’ swords and
targes ran down upon the 
Sassunaich,
” Da said to Jamie.
“Aye, much good havin’ the high ground did 
us,
” Murtagh said, glowering
slightly. “I near as breakfast got an arrow in the back from our own men. It
went through the sleeve o’ my shirt!”
“Well, ye did piss on Enoch Grant,” Da said reasonably. “What would ye
expect him to do?”
Jamie smiled to himself, hearing the two of them talking, clear as day, and
feeling in his bones the memory of the comfort of sleep coming for him,
wrapped in the warmth of the firelit room at Lallybroch.
He was warm now, sweating from the climb, and he wasn’t sleepy. It was a
small mountain, not even half the height of a Scottish 
beinn,
 but the sides
were steep and thickly forested. He was following a cattle track across the
face of the mountain—the local people grazed their stock sometimes on the
top of the mountain, because there was a good meadow—but oak and maple
saplings and a scurf of low bushes were creeping over it, and the track had
vanished altogether by the time he made it to the summit through a screen of
pines.
He stood at the edge of a long meadow, growing in a sort of saddle-shaped
depression. It was late in the afternoon by now, and several deer were grazing
at the far end, close to the shelter of the trees. One or two lifted their heads
and looked at him, but he was still, and they went back to their business
among the growing shadows.
There were rocky outcroppings near the edges of the plateau. Not large
ones, but for a single rifleman, a decent vantage point—if you could make it
that far and not be picked off struggling up the mountainside.
Aye, he could see well enough what Patrick Ferguson would think. With
plenty of ammunition and a well-armed band of militia, it would be a simple
matter to hunker down near the edges and fire downhill at the attackers.
Except, as Frank Randall had recounted it, this strategy would work only
so long as the attackers were kept at a distance. Let them get too high, too
close to the wee meadow, and Ferguson would switch to bayonet tactics at
that point. But the problem was that the attackers who’d survived to get highenough and had eluded the bayonets would come over the edge with their
weapons loaded and mow down the Loyalists who were fighting with
unloaded guns equipped with butcher knives for bayonets. According to the
damned book, Ferguson had little experience in battle—he’d been shot in the
elbow in the only battle he’d fought, and the wound had crippled him—and
he’d not understood either the terrain or the character of the men who would
be climbing that mountain.
Randall hadn’t mentioned it, but Jamie was sure that Ferguson would have
been using his own patented breech-loading rifle—he’d always use it, being
unable to load a regular gun with his crippled elbow.
Strange to think of this man, this Ferguson, minding his own business
somewhere just this minute, having no notion what was coming for him.
But you know the same is coming for you.
 A strange quivering ran down
the backs of his legs, and he tensed his back and curled his fists to make it
stop.
“Nay, I don’t,” he said defiantly to the shade of Frank Randall. “Ye’ve not
been here; ye won’t be here. I’m no going to believe you just because ye
wrote it down, aye?”
He’d spoken aloud and the deer had vanished like smoke, leaving him
alone in the gathering twilight.
The evening was peaceful, but not the meadow. He’d brought his own
disturbance with him, and the wind made long, rippling furrows through the
grass, as though small creatures were being chased, running for their lives.
There ought to be some ritual for facing one’s death—and in fact, there
were many, but none seemed quite appropriate for this situation. Lacking any
other notion, though, he turned sunwise and walked the edge of the grass,
making a circle completely round the mountaintop and the shades of the
battle to come. The first sun charm to come to his mind was the deasil charm,
said to bless a new child and protect him from harm.
William.
 Of course it would be William, always there in the back of his
mind, the inner chambers of his heart. This might be the only thing of value
that he could leave this child of his, and he let the prayer fill his heart as he
said it aloud:
Wisdom of serpent be thine,
Wisdom of raven be thine,
Wisdom of valiant eagle.Voice of swan be thine,
Voice of honey be thine,
Voice of the Son of the stars.
Sain of the fairy-woman be thine,
Sain of the elf-dart be thine,
Sain of the red dog be thine.
Bounty of sea be thine,
Bounty of land be thine,
Bounty of the Father of Heaven.
Be each day glad for thee,
No day ill for thee,
A life joyful, satisfied.
It was only as he left the mountaintop and started the slippery, rocky,
awkward descent through the fluttering new leaves of the sugar maples that it
occurred to him how much of that blessing had in fact been his. Had one of
his parents said this charm for him when he was small?
“A life joyful, satisfied,” he murmured to himself, and let peace fill him.
It wasn’t until he’d reached the bottom of the mountain that he wondered
whether, when he came to die, Da or his mother might be there to greet him.
“Or maybe Murtagh,” he said, and smiled at the thought.Part Five
FLY AWAY HOME
107
Away in a Manger
Fraser’s Ridge
WE HAD ACQUIRED TWO yearling heifers in the summer, one mostly
white with black splotches and the other mostly red with white splotches.
Their names, according to Mandy, were Moo-Moo and Pinky, but Jemmy
had been browsing my 
Merck Manual
 and had nicknamed them Leprosy and
Rosacea. Jamie said practically that it scarcely mattered what they were
called, as he’d never met a cow that would answer to its name, in any case;
he
 called them Ruaidh and Ban—“Red” and “White,” in Gaelic.
At the moment, he was calling the red one something in Gaelic that I
translated roughly as “Misbegotten daughter of a venomous caterpillar,” but I
supposed that I might be missing the finer shades.
“It’s not 
her
 fault,” I said reprovingly.
He made a Scottish noise like a cement mixer, and gritted his teeth. He had
one arm inserted into Rosacea’s backside up to the elbow, and his face in the
flickering lanternlight was as red as her hide.
It truly 
wasn’t
 the poor cow’s fault—she’d been bred too young, and was
having a lot of trouble delivering her first calf—but I didn’t blame him,
either. He’d been trying for a quarter of an hour to get hold of both feet so he
could pull the calf out, but Rosy was skittish and kept swinging her rear end
away. The calf’s nose poked out now and then, nostrils flaring in what I
thought must be panic. I felt much the same way, but was fighting it down.
I wanted to help, get my own much smaller hands into the cow and at least
locate the hooves. I’d cut my right hand badly during the day, though, and
couldn’t countenance exposing a raw wound to what Jamie was handling at
the moment.“Nic na galladh!”
 he said, jerking back and shaking his hand. In the scrum
and poor light, he’d accidentally shoved his hand into the wrong orifice, and
was now flapping his arm to dislodge a coating of very wet, fresh manure. He
caught sight of my face and pointed a slimy, menacing finger at me.
“Laugh, and I’ll rub your face in it, Sassenach.”
I put my bandaged hand solemnly over my mouth, though I was quivering
internally. He snorted, wiped his filthy hand on his shirt, and bent again to his
labors, muttering execrations. Within moments, though, the execrations had
turned to urgent prayers. He’d got the feet.
I was praying myself. The poor cow had been in labor since the night
before, and was beginning to sway, her head hanging in exhaustion. That
might
 help. If she was tired enough to relax … Jamie snatched up the rope
bracelets 
he had made—essentially two small nooses joined by a common
rope—and shoved them over the tiny hooves before they could slip out of his
hand. Then was squatting behind Rosy, pulling for all he was worth. He
stopped when the contraction eased, panting, resting his forehead against the
cow’s haunch.
It was dark in the byre; it was a small cave with a gate across the front, and
there was no light save a small oil lantern hung from a nail pounded into the
rock. Even so, I saw the ripple of a new contraction start and leaned toward
Jamie, trying to will my own strength into him, to help.
He set his feet hard in the straw and pulled, making an inhuman noise of
effort, and with a squashy sort of 
glorp!
 the calf slid out in a cascade of blood
and slime.
Jamie got up, slowly. He was panting from the effort, face and clothes
smeared dark with blood and manure, but his eyes never left the calf and his
face was alight with the same joy I felt as we watched the new mother—
remarkably placid, considering recent events—sniff her new offspring and
then begin to lick it with long, rhythmic swipes of her tongue.
“She’ll be a good mother.”
For an instant, I thought Jamie had said it, but he was facing me, looking
surprised, and there was a faint movement behind me. I swung round with a
small yelp and saw the man who had stepped soundlessly into the byre with
us.
“Who the 
hell
—” I began, groping for a weapon, but Jamie had raised his
hand in greeting to the man.“Mr. Cloudtree,” he said, and paused to wipe his forearm across his blood-
slimed face. “I trust we see ye well, and your family?”
“They’re well enough,” the young man answered, keeping a wary eye on
me and the wooden shovel I’d seized. “And since I got the chance, ma’am, I
meant to thank you for it. For my babies, I mean.”
“Oh,” I said, rather blankly. 
Cloudtree.
 The pieces of memory fell into
place around that name. The fecund smell of the byre, the swamp of blood
and birthwater, brought back that night out of time in a small cabin, the
endless effort, and the timeless forever when I held a small blue light in my
hands, praying with heart and soul for it not to go out. I swallowed.
“You’re very welcome, Mr. Cloudtree,” I said. 
Aaron.
 That was the name
of Agnes’s nasty stepfather: Aaron Cloudtree. I eyed him with much less
favor, but he didn’t notice, his attention fixed on Jamie and the scene before
us.
“A nice bit of work there, man,” he said to Jamie, nodding approvingly at
Rosy and her calf, the latter looking round-eyed and bewildered, its hair
swirled in all directions. “Near as good as your wife’s.”
“Taing,”
 Jamie said, and bent to pick up the grimy linen towel, wiping his
face as he stood. “What brings ye to us at this time o’ the night, Mr.
Cloudtree?”
“I come earlier, but you was at table,” Cloudtree said, shrugging. “You had
the old witch there; I couldn’t’ve spoke before her.”
Jamie glanced at me and settled himself, slowly wiping his hands.
“Speak now,” he said.
“The old witch’s son, Cunningham. You know he’s been trading, down to
the Cherokee villages, just the other side o’ the Line?”
Jamie nodded, eyes fixed on Cloudtree’s face. He was mixed blood, a
handsome man with silky long brown hair, though with a petulant curve to
his mouth.
“Not everybody listens to him,” Cloudtree assured him. “But he’s got some
few men down there, maybe twenty, will follow him. He calls ’em his militia,
but he ain’t fought Indians before or he’d know better. They take his guns,
his powder, and his medals, though, and they’d likely do what he asked—for
a while.”
“What is it that he’s asking?” Jamie had stopped wiping his hands and now
held the towel twisted between them.“I ain’t heard this from him,” Cloudtree said, leaning in and lowering his
voice, “but I heard it from two o’ the men in Keowee, ones he paid. There’s a
redcoat officer named Ferguson, set to go to and fro in the mountains, raising
Loyalist militias and arresting rebels, hangin’ men and burning houses.
Cunningham’s wrote Ferguson a letter, naming your name and saying he
ought to come here with his troops, ’cuz you a king beaver ’mongst the rebels
and your pelt would be worth the trouble to take it.”
All the air seemed to have been sucked out of the byre. After a moment,
though, Jamie took a long breath and let it out slowly.
“Do you know when?” he asked calmly.
Cloudtree shrugged.
“I don’t know ’bout Ferguson. Seems he’s got plenty to keep him busy
where he is. But Cunningham’s got tired o’ waitin’ for an answer. The men I
talked to say he means to arrest you himself and take you to Ferguson—so’s
Ferguson can hang you for show, I mean. They say”—he looked at his hands
and folded down the fingers, counting—“eight days from yesterday.
Cunningham’s waitin’ on a fellow name of Partland, who’s comin’ from
Ninety-Six with some more men.”
Jamie’s eyes met mine, and I knew we were thinking the same thing:
Seven nights from now was Lodge night. If they were coming for Jamie, that
would be the logical time to do it. It was a good two hundred miles from the
settlement of Ninety-Six to the Ridge, but Partland and friends might well
make it.
“That bloody 
snake
!” I said. I was alarmed and angry, but anger was
definitely on top. “How dare he?”
“Well, I did take their guns away, Sassenach,” Jamie said mildly. “I told ye
they’d resent it.”
He looked thoughtfully at Aaron and absently wiped the back of his hand
across his mouth. He grimaced, rubbed the hand on his breeches, and spat
into the straw.
“Aye,” he said. “Ye’ve done me a service, Mr. Cloudtree, and I will
remember it. Tell me—d’ye ken a man named Scotchee Cameron?”
Aaron had been looking around the byre, interested, but came to attention
at that name.
“Everybody does,” he said, switching the interest to Jamie. “Indian
superintendent, ain’t he? Friend of yours?”
“We’ve shared a pipe now and then. I was an Indian agent, for a time.”I glanced at Jamie. I knew he’d smoked with the Cherokee when he visited
with them, but I’d never asked him what sort of conversation this involved.
I’d likewise never met Alexander Cameron, but like everybody else, knew of
him. A Scotsman, he’d married and chosen to live among the Indians,
hunting and trading. He’d become an Indian superintendent after Jamie’s
resignation, though, and as it was now widely known that Jamie was a rebel,
he had therefore courteously not sought Scotchee out when he traded in the
Cherokee lands. Cameron was still respected, though, Jamie said, trusted and
known everywhere.
“Do you ken where he is just now?” Jamie asked.
Aaron pursed his lips, thinking. 
Is he thinking where Cameron is?
 I
wondered. 
Or wondering what he can make out of the situation?
“Yes,” he said, though with a tinge of doubt in his voice. He scratched his
head to assist thought.
“He lives with the Overhill people, but he was in Nensanyi last week, so
he’s likely come to Keowee by now. That’s where we live,” he said, turning
to me. “Susannah and the young’uns and me.” He seemed to want to justify
himself to me, possibly remembering—as I certainly did—his slapping
Agnes on the night her mother gave birth. And he might be afraid of what
Agnes had told me about him.
“I’m glad to hear that you have a place,” I said, smiling a little stiffly at
him. “Do please give my regards to Susannah and tell her that if she should
ever need a doctor again, please send to me and I’ll come.”
His expression lightened and he nodded to me.
“That’s real good of you, Missus. Ah … d’you want me to find Scotchee
and tell him ’bout this trouble o’ yours … sir?” he added to Jamie, looking
uncertain. “Might be as he could talk sense to any of the Cherokee that have
dealings with Loyalists.”
“I do,” Jamie said. He gave the cows a quick look-over, but the new calf
had staggered to its feet, shaking its head. He nodded to himself, then bent
and picked up the filthy towel he’d been using.
“Come down to the house, will ye, Mr. Cloudtree? My wife will find ye
something to eat while I write a wee word for Scotchee. We can find a bed
for ye, too, if ye like?”
Cloudtree shook his head.
“I like to walk in the night,” he said simply. “It talks to me. But I wouldn’t
say no to a sup and a bite, Missus.”I HAD COME up to our bedroom—after providing Jamie and Mr. Cloudtree
with a plate of rolls stuffed with cheese and my backwoods version of
Branston pickle—but I was in no mood for sleep. My backbone had gone
cold at Aaron’s story and hadn’t thawed a bit, though my innards were
pulsing with an angry heat.
I’d been trying to distract my mind by reading 
The Two Towers,
 which
Jamie had left by the bed, but kept imagining Captain Cunningham as Shelob
in a gold-laced hat and wondering whether I might nickname my syringe
Sting.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I muttered, putting the book aside and
flouncing out of bed. The floor was cold underfoot, but I didn’t care. I paced
round the room like a dog in a kennel, fuming. I did realize that I was stoking
my anger in order not to be overwhelmed by fright, but it was a losing battle.
How the bloody hell was I going to look Elspeth Cunningham in the face? I
was bound to see her on Sunday, if not before. Bunking off church wouldn’t
help; if she thought I was ill, she’d be round promptly to dose me.
Did she know what the captain was up to? I wondered, stepping over Adso,
who was stretched out on his side on the rag rug in front of the hearth,
flattened in sleep. If she did—what might she do?
Likely nothing.
 She’d warned me, after all. And I’d warned 
her.
A burning stick broke in the hearth with a sharp 
crack
 and sparks sprayed
up in a tiny fountain. A few caught in the fire screen Bree had made, glowing
red for an instant before dying. The cat twitched an ear, but remained
unperturbed.
I felt, rather than heard, the front door closing: a muffled vibration through
the bones of the house. Aaron Cloudtree was gone. I pulled my wrapper close
and went downstairs, leaving Adso to mind the fire.
“DO YOU THINK this Scotchee can help?” I asked dubiously. Mr. Cloudtree
had departed, full of whisky and pickle, with a sealed note—written in Gaelic
and carefully unsigned, in case of interception or indiscretion—in his pocket,
and we were sitting by the kitchen fire, sharing the rest of the whisky with the
peace of the resting house around us. It was very late—perhaps two or threeo’clock in the morning, judging from the deep, chilly stillness of the air
outside—but neither of us wanted to go to bed.
“I dinna ken,” Jamie admitted. He rubbed both hands over his face, then
shook his head, leaving his hair rumpled and flyaway, short hairs rising from
his crown, red in the firelight. He yawned, blinked, and shook his head, more
to dispel mental fog than to acknowledge onrushing sleep, I thought.
“It depends,” he said, after a meditative sip. “Where he is, who he can talk
to. And whether he can still read the 
Gàidhlig,
” he added, with a rueful smile.
“If not, we’re nay worse off than before. If we’re lucky, he may be moved to
find out who Cunningham’s been dealing with among the Cherokee, and
maybe drop a word to the headman of that village.”
I nodded, dubious. The Cherokee territory was a vast country, with
hundreds of villages. On the other hand, Jamie was well known there as the
Indian agent before Scotchee, and I rather thought that while Charles
Cunningham’s accomplices might be familiar with some of the Cherokee
headmen, Cunningham himself almost certainly wasn’t. Alexander Duff and
his son lived within a quarter mile of the Cunningham cabin; Donald
MacGillies within a stone’s throw of the Duffs. Sandy Duff and Donald
MacGillies were Ardsmuir men, wholly to be trusted, and I knew they had
been keeping an eye on the comings and goings over the Treaty Line.
“What did you do with the rifles you took from Cunningham?” I asked,
pouring another cup of hot milk and adding a drizzle of honey.
“Gave most of them to men I can trust. Speaking o’ that …” he said, and
yawned again. “Oh, God … I’ll have to send word to the Overmountain 
men,
though I canna reach them all in time. Sevier might come, though; he’s the
closest, and a solid man. And he doesna much like Indians.”108
Lodge Night
Seven days later
JAMIE COULDN’T EAT SUPPER, though he hadn’t eaten anything since
the night before. His wame was closed as a knotted glove, and he didn’t feel
hungry; the lack of food sharpened his bones and cleared his head. He felt
calm but as though he was standing behind a sheet of glass, watching himself.
“Eh?” Claire had said something to him, and he hadn’t heard. He made a
brief gesture of apology, and she narrowed her eyes at him—not in
annoyance, in concern.
“It’s fine, Sassenach,” he assured her. “Cunningham doesna want me dead.
The worst that can happen is that he takes me prisoner tonight.”
“What about what happens after that?” she demanded. She was wound
tight as a new watch; he could see her wee gears spinning, and smiled. One of
her eyebrows went up, and he leaned over and kissed it.
“Dinna fash, 
a nighean.
 After that, the captain has a choice, doesn’t he?
Get me off the Ridge—and good luck to him if that’s his choice—or try to
take me over the Line and through the Cherokee lands to get to Ferguson—
wherever that poor bastard is now. And while Cunningham’s friends have
friends among the Cherokee—so do I, and if Aaron Cloudtree either found
Scotchee Cameron or spoke of the matter to anyone else—and I’d wager my
best stockings that he did; ye can tell he’s a blabbermouth—the captain might
have a good deal more trouble in taking me anywhere than he might think.”
“Oh, good,” she said, and the line between her brows eased a bit. “So after
you start a small war over the Treaty Line, the captain will just have to kill
you all by himself.”
Jamie shrugged. He hadn’t thought that far, but it didn’t matter.
“He can try.”She didn’t look much less worried, but she smiled at him, despite herself.
Seeing that made him want suddenly and urgently to have her, and it plainly
showed on his face, for her smile deepened—though her sidewise glance at
the door convinced him that she wasn’t going to let him bend her over the
table and try to finish before wee Aggie came in.
“After Lodge, then,” he said, grinning at her.
She took a deep breath and nodded.
“After Lodge,” she said, trying to sound as certain as he did.
I 
WAS THUMBING through my 
Merck,
 roaming from pleural disorders and
the use of thoracentesis to a gripping account of inflammation of the rectal
mucosa, but while my cerebellum could be coaxed into a momentary
distraction, my brain stem, spinal cord, and sacral nerves were having none of
it. If I’d had a tail, it would have been pressed tight between my legs, and
small jolts of something between electricity and nausea spurted unexpectedly
through my abdomen.
The girls knew that something was afoot. They’d been silent as mice at
supper, gazing as though hypnotized at Jamie. I’d been likewise hypnotized,
watching him dress afterward.
I’d stayed to help clear the table, put away the remnants and orts from the
meal, and smoor the fire in the kitchen hearth, and when I came up to our
bedroom, I found him facing away from me, on the far side of the room. He
didn’t turn round; I thought perhaps he hadn’t heard me come in. His face
was reflected in the window he stood in front of, but I could see that he
wasn’t looking at his reflection.
He wasn’t looking 
anywhere.
 His eyes were fixed and full of darkness, and
his fingers moved swiftly, twitching buttons free, unwinding his neckcloth,
loosening his breeches—all as though he were somewhere else, completely
unaware of what his hands were doing. He was preparing to fight.
His plaid lay on the bed, along with a clean shirt and his leather jerkin. He
turned, presumably to fetch it, and saw me. He looked blank, and then the life
flowed back into him.
“Ye look as though ye’ve seen a ghost, Sassenach,” he said, in a voice that
was almost normal. “I ken I’ve aged a bit, but surely it’s none sae bad as all
that?”
“You’d scare the Devil himself,” I said. I wasn’t joking, and he knew it.“I know,” he said simply. “I was remembering how it was, just before the
charge. At Drumossie. Folk were shouting and I could see the 
gunna mòr
across the field, but it didna mean anything. I was shedding my clothes,
because there was nothing left but draw my sword and run across the moor. I
kent I’d never make it to the other side, and I didna care.”
I couldn’t speak. Neither did he, but went quietly about the business of
washing, of putting on his clean sark and his belted plaid, and when he got to
his feet, he smiled at me, though his eyes still held memories.
“Dinna fash, Sassenach. Cunningham wants to hand me over to Patrick
Ferguson and take the credit. It’s his best chance to make his name among the
Loyalist forces.”
I nodded obediently, knowing as well as he did that the motive for starting
a fight often had nothing to do with how things turned out.
He started for the door, then stopped, waiting for me. I came slowly to
him, touched him. He hadn’t put on his coat yet, and his arm was solid and
warm through the cloth of his shirt.
“Will it be today?” I blurted. Twice before, he’d left me on the edge of a
battlefield, telling me that while the day might come that he and I would part
—it wouldn’t be today. And both times, he’d been right.
He cupped my cheek in one hand and looked at me for a long moment, and
I knew he was fixing me in his memory, as I had just done to him.
“I dinna think so,” he said at last, soberly. His hand fell away, my cheek
suddenly cool where he’d touched it. “But I willna lie to ye, Claire; I think it
will be an evil night.”
LODGE NIGHT, BY custom, began roughly two hours after supper, to let
everyone digest their food, finish their evening chores, and make their way
from wherever they lived. Some homesteads were a good five or six miles
from the Meeting House.
Jamie urgently wanted to arrive early, both to anticipate any ambush and to
have a quiet keek around, in case Cunningham had thought to post men in the
nearby woods. He didn’t, though. He stopped at the stable to check the
welfare of his kine, then paused by the pigpen and counted the shadowy,
stertorous forms clustered in the straw, noting that the straw had best be
changed this week.Then he walked slowly up the hill toward the Meeting House. The weather
had warmed abruptly and bats were flickering through the air between the
trees, snatching insects too fast to see. Brianna had told him how they did it,
and if he listened close, he thought he could sometimes catch their high-
pitched cries, thin and sharp as broken glass.
Tom MacLeod stepped out of the trees and fell into step beside him with a
quiet “Mac Dubh.” It gave him an odd feeling, sometimes, when one of his
Ardsmuir men called him that. Memories of prison, the hard things—and
they were hard—but also the fleeting, regular pulse of the kinship that had
kept them alive and would bind them for life. And at the bottom of his heart,
always, a faint sense of his father, the Black One whose son he was.
“Dean Urnaigh dhomh,”
 he whispered. Pray for me, Da.
He could hear men among the trees now, coming along the mountain trails
in ones and twos and threes, recognized the voices: MacMillan, Airdrie,
Wilson, Crombie, MacLean, MacCoinneach, two of the Lindsay brothers,
Bobby Higgins, coming up behind him … He smiled at thought of Bobby.
Bobby was one of the ten men he had told about tonight. Bobby hadn’t
fought anyone save the occasional raccoon in some years, but he’d been a
soldier and remembered how. And of the ten, for all he’d been an English
soldier, Bobby Higgins was one of the men he would trust with his life.
He wasn’t given to vain regrets, but for a piercing instant, he thought how
different this night might be if he had Young Ian by his side, and Roger Mac.
If he had Germain and Jeremiah, too, waiting outside and ready to run for
more help if it was needed.
At least ye won’t get any of
 them 
killed.
 He wasn’t sure if that was his own
thought or his father’s voice, but it was a small comfort.
The Crombies and Gillebride MacMillan were waiting outside the Meeting
House. So were several men he knew to be quiet Loyalists—maybe
Cunningham’s, maybe not—but they’d likely not lift a hand to save him, if
that’s what it came down to. He thought one or two of them looked at him
oddly, 
but the light was dim through the oiled hides over the windows; he
couldn’t say for sure, and put the thought away.
He made no move to go in yet; it was customary to have a wee blether
outside before they settled down to business. He replied to conversation, and
laughed now and then, but caught no more than the barest sense of what was
said to him. He could feel Cunningham. Out in the dark trees behind his back,
waiting.He wants to see how many men I have.
Jamie wanted to see how many men Cunningham had—and who they
were. And to that end, Aidan Higgins was hiding in the brush beside the main
trail that led to the Meeting House from the western part of the Ridge, and
Murdo Lindsay up near the trail that led from the eastern part. If any
Cherokee came to take part in tonight’s doing, they’d come that way, and
God and Murdo willing, he’d hear about it in time to take action.109
De Profundis
MY RIGHT HAND WAS throbbing, in time with my heartbeat. The cut
across my palm had healed, superficially, but it had been deep enough that
the nerves in the dermis had been injured, and they woke every now and then
to protest the insult. I turned the hand over, checking idly for swelling or the
red streaks of belated blood poisoning, though I knew quite well there was
nothing of that kind.
It’s just that broken things always hurt longer than you think they will.
Plainly I wasn’t going to sleep until—and unless—Jamie came home, more
or less in one piece. I lit the small brazier in my surgery and fed the infant fire
with hickory chips. “Like a bloody Vestal,” I muttered to myself, but I did
feel a slight comfort from the burgeoning light.
I’d already checked and refurbished my field kit, in case of emergency. It
hung on its accustomed nail, by the door. I’d put aside the 
Merck Manual;
 I
couldn’t settle myself to read.
Bluebell and Adso had both wandered into the surgery to keep me
company; the dog was asleep under my chair and Adso was draped over the
counter, his big celadon eyes half closed, purring in brief spurts like a distant
motorcycle being revved.
“Thanks for small mercies,” I said to him, just to break the silence. “At
least Jamie will never break his neck riding a motorcycle.”
He might never do a lot of other things, too …
I cut that thought off short and, reaching over the cat, started taking bottles
and jars out of the cupboard in a determined sort of way. I might as 
well take
inventory: throw out things that were too old to be pharmaceutically active,
make a list of things we needed next time Jamie went (
yes, he will too go!
)
into a town, and maybe grind a few things, if only for the sake of pretending I
was grinding Charles Cunningham’s face … or maybe the King’s …Bluebell’s head came up suddenly and she gave a small 
hurf!
 of warning.
Adso instantly uncoiled and leapt on top of the tall cabinet where I kept
bandages and my surgical implements. Clearly, we had company.
“It’s too early,” I said aloud. He’d left the house no more than an hour ago.
Surely nothing could have happened yet … But my body was far ahead of my
thoughts and I had reached the front door before I completed that one. I
hadn’t barred it after Jamie left, but I had shot the mortised-bolt lock and
opened it now with a sharp, decisive 
thunk!
 It didn’t matter who had come to
tell me what. I had to know.
I was startled, but not truly surprised.
“Elspeth,” I said. I stepped back, feeling as though I did it in a dream.
“I had to come,” she said. She was white as a ghost and looked exactly as I
felt—shattered.
“I know,” I said, automatically adding, “Come in.”
“You 
know
?” she said, and her voice held both doubt and the horror of
realizing that there was no doubt left.
I shut the door and turned away to go to my surgery, leaving her to follow
as she liked.
Once we were both inside the surgery, I dropped the heavy quilt that still
served me as a door, sheltering us from the night. Bluey was on her feet, just
behind my knee, and was growling in a low, menacing sort of way. She knew
Elspeth and normally would have gone to her for a friendly sniff and pat. 
Not
tonight, Josephine,
 I thought, but said, “Leave off, dog. It’s all right.”
The hell it is
 was written all over Bluebell’s face, but she stopped growling
and backed up slowly to the hearth rug, where she lay down, but kept her
hackles raised and a deeply suspicious gaze fixed on Elspeth, who didn’t
seem to notice.
I waved Elspeth to one of the two chairs. Without asking, I took down the
bottle of JF Special and filled two cups to their rims. Elspeth accepted hers
but didn’t drink immediately, though it was clear that she needed it. I didn’t
hesitate to take my own dose.
“I’d thought I might—pray with you,” she said.
“Fine,” I said, flatly. “There’s nothing else we can do now, is there?”
I drank, hoping against hope that I was right and that she hadn’t come to
tell me that her son had killed or captured my husband. But she hadn’t; I
could see as much through the firelight that painted her face with the illusion
of health. She’d come to me in fear, not pity. Her lean, weathered hands wereboth wrapped round her cup, and I thought that if she squeezed it much
harder, the pewter would bend.
“It hasn’t happened yet?” I asked, and was surprised that I sounded almost
casual.
“I don’t know.” At last she raised the cup to her lips, still holding it in both
hands. When she lowered it, she looked a little less rattled. She sat silent for 
a
long moment, studying my face. For once, I wasn’t bothered by the fact that I
had a glass face; it might save explanations.
It did. She’d been shaken and pale when she came in. Now she was stirred,
and a flush had risen in her sunken cheeks.
“How long has he known?” she asked. “Your husband.”
“About a week,” I said. “We found out by accident. I mean—none of your
son’s associates betrayed him.” I wasn’t sure why I offered her this scrap of
charity; I supposed there wasn’t anything left between us now but the
memory of kindness.
She nodded slowly, and looked down into the smoky amber of the whisky.
I was surprised to realize that she, too, had the sort of face that didn’t hide its
owner’s thoughts, and the realization restored a small part of my feelings for
her.
“We know everything,” I said, quite gently. “And Jamie knows that the
captain doesn’t mean him immediate harm. He won’t kill your son.”
Unless he has to.
She looked up at me, a nerve twitching the corner of her mouth.
“Unless he has to? Let me offer you the same assurance, Mrs. Fraser.”
“Claire,” I said. “Please.” The surgery smelled of hickory smoke and
healing herbs. “Do you know any good prayers suitable to the occasion?”
WEAPONS WERE FORBIDDEN in Lodge, both in symbol of the members’
Masonic ideals and more pragmatically to increase the chances of those
ideals being upheld, at least for the hourly meeting. Nonetheless, Jamie had
come in midafternoon to place a loaded pistol under a stone near the door,
and he had cartridges and balls in his sporran and Claire’s best knife sheathed
and tucked into the small of his back, the hilt hidden by his coat and the tip of
it tickling the crack of his arse.
He didn’t often wear his belted plaid to Lodge but was glad he’d taken the
trouble tonight; it would keep him warm if he was taken prisoner and obligedto spend the night tied to a tree or locked up in someone’s root cellar. And he
had a 
sgian dubh
 in his belt in front, concealed by his Masonic apron. Just in
case.
“Ciamar a tha thu, a Mhaighister.”
 Hiram Crombie looked just as usual—
dour as a plate of pickled cabbage—and Jamie found that a comfort.
Dissimulation was not one of Hiram’s gifts, and if he’d known anything was
afoot, he’d likely not have come tonight.
“Gu math agus a leithid dhut fhein,”
 Jamie said, nodding to him. Well,
and the same to you.
“Will I have a word with you, after?” Hiram asked, still in the Gaelic.
“Aye, of course.” Jamie answered him in the same tongue, and saw a
couple of the non-Gaelic-speaking tenants glance at them—with a touch of
suspicion? he wondered.
“Will it be to do with your wee brother, then?” he asked, changing to
English, and was pleased to see that hearing the Tall Tree referred to as his
wee brother made the corner of Hiram’s mouth quiver.
“Aye.”
“Fine, then,” Jamie said pleasantly, trying to ignore the beating of his
heart. “But ken, 
a charaid,
 I’ve said I willna let Frances be married before
she’s sixteen—and not then, if she doesna choose to.”
Crombie shook his head briefly.
“It’s naught to do wi’ the lassie,” he said, and went into the Meeting
House, followed by his kin and nearby friends.
And here the man himself came with his two young lieutenants, them in
half-dress uniform and himself in pale linen breeches and a light-gray cloak,
with a slouch hat against the rain. Plain, by his lights. Jamie caught the
movement as Kenny Lindsay ducked his head to hide a smirk, but Jamie
wasn’t so sure. Aye, it was possible that a sailor wouldn’t think what sort of
target he’d make in the dark—but it was also possible either that
Cunningham hadn’t thought that he might 
be
 a target, or that Cloudtree’s
news was wrong, and the ambush—if there was meant to be one—wasn’t
meant to be tonight.
Then Cunningham emerged into the fall of light from the open door, saw
Jamie, and bowed to him.
“Worshipful Master,” he said.
“Captain,” Jamie replied, and his heart thumped hard in his ears as he
bowed, because Cunningham was no card player and the truth was written inthe narrowing of his eyes and the hardness of his mouth.
A formal occasion, then, is it?
 He had a sudden mental picture of them
squaring up to fight a duel, in kilt, cocked hat, and their Masonic aprons.
What would be the weapons? he wondered. Cutlasses?
“Dèan ullachadh, mo charaidean,”
 he said casually to the men who stood
with him. Stand ready.
The meeting went well enough—outwardly. The ritual, the words of
brotherhood, fellowship, idealism. But he thought the words rang hollow,
with a sense of ice among the men, covering their hearts, separating one from
another, leaving all in the cold.
Things felt easier when it came to Business: the small things they did as a
matter of community. A widow unable to deal with her late husband’s stock;
a man who’d fallen through his own roof whilst repairing his chimney and
broken both an arm and a leg; an auld quarrel betwixt the MacDonalds and
the MacQuarries that had broken out in a fistfight at market day in Salisbury
and had come home with them, still trailing clouds of ill will.
Things that were not really the business of the Lodge but that should be
brought up: talk that Howard Nettles was having to do with a woman who
kept shop at Beardsley’s Trading Post, whose husband was a bargeman and
spent weeks away from home.
“Is there anyone here who kens Nettles well enough to drop a word in his
ear?” Jamie asked. “If it’s Mrs. Appleton that’s bein’ talked about, I’ve seen
her husband and he’d make two of Howard.”
A small murmur of humor ran through the room, and Geordie MacNeil
said he didna ken Howard well enough to say what he needed to hear, but he
did ken Howard’s cousin, who lived in a wee settlement near the Blowing
Rock, and he could have a word next time he passed that way.
“Aye, well enough,” Jamie said, thinking that Claire’s bees would enjoy
hearing about this. “And we’ll hope it’s soon enough to save Howard’s neck.
Thank ye, Geordie. Anything else before we start the beer?” From the corner
of his eye, he saw Cunningham move suddenly but then catch himself and
subside.
It’ll be outside, then.
 He took a deep breath and felt a distant 
bodhran
 start
to beat in his blood.
Hiram Crombie had brought the beer tonight, it being his turn. Skinflint he
might be—all the fisher-folk were, having lived in stark poverty all their lives—but he kent what was right, and the beer was good. Jamie wondered what
was ado with wee Cyrus, but it didn’t look urgent ….
On the far side of the room, Cunningham was talking. About loyalty.
About his service in the Royal Navy. About loyalty to the King.
Jamie slowly got his feet under him. All right, there was nothing that
prevented men talking of politics or religion outside of Lodge, but this was
not quite far enough outside, and everyone knew it. Silence spread from the
men who surrounded Cunningham—Jamie took note of their faces—and a
coldness ran through the room like spreading frost as the others began to
listen and hear what was being said.
Then it stopped. Cunningham still stood, unmoving save for his eyes,
which took note in turn of each face in the room. Jamie had been listening
intently, not so much for Cunningham’s words but composing answers to
them. Then Jamie rose to his feet. His own words fell away, and others rose
in their place.
“I will say but one thing to ye all, 
a charaidean.
 And that is not my own,
but a thing said by our forefathers, four hundred years ago.” A faint stir broke
the sense of ice, and men shifted on their stools, drawing themselves up to
hear. Glancing sideways, to see how matters lay.
It had been a long—a very long—time since he’d read the Declaration of
Arbroath, but they weren’t words you’d forget.
“As long as but a hundred of us remain alive, never will we on any
conditions be brought under English rule. It is in truth not for glory, nor
riches, nor honours, that we are fighting …”
 He paused and looked
Cunningham straight in the eyes. 
“… but for freedom—for that alone, which
no honest man gives up but with life itself.”
He didn’t wait for the deep rumble of response but turned on his heel and
went out the door, as quick as he could, and broke into a run as soon as he
was outside, knife in hand.
There were three or four of them, waiting for him. But they’d thought he’d
talk on, and he caught them staring, moon-faced in the light from the
suddenly open door. He hit one in the jaw, shouldered another out of the way,
and was into the wood before they could move. He heard the shouting and
confusion as the men in the Meeting House all tried either to get out or to
punch each other.
The moon wasn’t yet up and the woods were pitch-dark, but he’d chosen a
large boulder near a huge spruce for his hiding place and had the pistol in hishand within moments. It was loaded and primed, but he didn’t cock it yet.
His heart was pounding in his ears as he slid through the brush—he daren’t
run, in earshot of the Meeting House—but he thought he heard
Cunningham’s quarterdeck roar. He was bellowing, “All hands!” and Jamie
would have laughed, if he’d had breath.
His freedom—and probably his life—depended on two things now, and he
had no control over either one. 
If
 Scotchee Cameron had got his note, and 
if
he thought it was worth keeping the Cherokee from being involved in a fracas
over the Line—that was one thing. The other was whether John Sevier had
been able to find Partland and his men at Ninety-Six and stop them.
Hiram Crombie and the rest were keeping Cunningham and his men busy,
from the sounds of it. But if either Cameron or Sevier had failed him, it was
going to be a bloody night.
IT WAS WELL past midnight; I’d sent the girls and Bluebell up to bed two
hours ago, and now exhaustion hung over the kitchen like a low veil of
chimney smoke. We had exhausted everything: prayer, conversation,
industry, food, milk, and chicory coffee. Elspeth didn’t drink alcohol
recreationally, pious Christian that she was, and had refused more than the
one medicinal cup of whisky tonight. While I longed to obliviate myself, I
felt that I had to stay sober, had to be ready. For what, I didn’t want to think
—thinking was another thing I had exhausted.
For a time, I had been conscious every moment of what 
might
 be
happening at the Meeting House. Visualizing the Lodge meeting—or what I
knew of it, for Jamie observed the Masonic vows of secrecy, and while he
laughed with me over the apron and dagger, he said nothing about their
rituals. Wondering where the crisis would come.
“Nothing will happen during the meeting, Sassenach,” he’d said, in an
effort to be reassuring. “Cunningham’s an officer and a gentleman, and a
Mason of the Thirty-third Degree. He takes an oath seriously.”
“Such men are dangerous,” I’d said, quoting 
Julius Caesar.
 I was striving
for levity, but Jamie had just nodded soberly and taken the best of his pistols
from its place above the mantelpiece.
But now my mind was blank, having room only for a formless dread. I’d
stirred up the fire; I stared into the flames, my face hot and my hands cold as
ice, lying useless in my lap.“It’s raining.” Elspeth broke the silence, lifting her head at the sound of the
spatter of raindrops against the closed shutters. We were sitting by the
kitchen fire again, having left the surgery spick-and-span. Fresh bandages.
Linen towels. Surgical instruments recleaned and sterilized, laid out on their
own fresh towel on the counter. The brazier cleaned and filled with new
hickory chips, a selection of cautery irons ready beside it. Without speaking a
word to each other about what we were doing, we had prepared for sudden
and dire emergency.
“So it is.” The silence fell again. The sound of the rain had rekindled my
thoughts, though. Would it keep them inside the Meeting House?
Nonsense, Beauchamp,
 my mind replied. 
When has rain stopped a
Highlander from doing anything whatever? Nor yet a naval office, I suppose
…
“I’m sorry.” Elspeth spoke abruptly and I glanced at her, startled. Her
hands were folded tight in her lap. Her face was pale and her lips pressed
together, as though sorry she’d spoken.
“It’s not your fault,” I said automatically, and then more consciously, “Nor
mine.”
Her lips relaxed a little at that.
“No,” she said, softly. She was silent for a bit, but I could see her throat
working faintly, as though she was arguing with herself about something.
“What is it?” I said at last, very quietly. She looked at me, and I saw her
stringy throat bob as she swallowed.
“Five years,” she blurted.
“What?”
She looked away, but then back, dark eyes fixed on mine with an odd look,
apology mingled with something else—relief? Triumph?
“When Simon died—my grandson … two years ago …”
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” I said, and a lance of real fear stabbed me in
the heart. Like everyone else present at the time, I’d been deeply moved by
Charles Cunningham’s maiden sermon, and the story of his son’s death—and
his last words. 
“I’ll see you again. In seven years.”
“
What
 did you say?” Elspeth asked, incredulous. I flapped a hand at her in
dismissal. If the captain believed his son’s word—and very plainly he 
did
—
then he must conclude that he was essentially immortal for the intervening
years. Five years now.“Holy Lord,” I said, finding a more acceptable interjection. There was an
inch of buttermilk left in my cup, and I tossed it back as though it were bad
whisky.
“That—I mean … it doesn’t mean that he will kill your husband,” Elspeth
said, leaning forward anxiously. “Only that your husband will not kill him.”
“That must be a comfort to you.”
She flushed, embarrassed. Of course it was. She cleared her throat and
tried to offer comfort, saying that Charles didn’t mean to kill Jamie, only to
take him prisoner, and …
“And take him off to Patrick Ferguson to be hanged,” I finished, nastily.
“For the sake of his own bloody advancement!”
“For the sake of his King and his honor as an officer of that King!” she
snapped, glaring at me. “Your husband is a pardoned traitor and now he has
forfeited the grace of that pardon! He has earned his own—” She realized
what she was saying—what she plainly had been thinking for quite some
time—and her mouth snapped shut like a trap.
The rain turned suddenly to hail, and hailstones beat upon the shutters with
a sound like gunfire. We glanced at each other, but didn’t speak; we couldn’t
have heard each other if we had.
We sat for some time by the fire, our chairs side by side, not speaking. 
Two
old witches,
 I thought. Divided by loyalties and love; united in our fear.
But even fear becomes exhausting after a time, and I found myself
nodding, the fire making white shadows flicker through my closing eyelids.
Elspeth’s breathing roused me from my doze, a hoarse, rough sound, and she
shifted suddenly, leaning forward with her elbows on her knees, her face
buried in her hands. I reached across and touched her and she took my hand,
holding tight. Neither of us spoke.
The hail had passed, the wind had dropped, the thunder and lightning had
stopped and the storm settled down to a heavy, soaking, endless rain.
We waited, holding hands.110
… Confused Noise and Garments Rolled in
Blood …
SOMETIME LATER—TIME HAD CEASED to have meaning by then—we
heard them. The sounds of a body of men and horses. Trampling and the
sounds of urgency.
The noise had roused Fanny and Agnes; I heard their bare feet pattering
down the stairs.
I was at the door with no memory of getting there, fumbling with the
mortise bolt—I hadn’t barred the door when Elspeth came. I yanked the
heavy door in as though it weighed nothing, and in the dark and flickering
candlelight I saw Jamie, among a many-headed mass of black confusion, a
head taller than his companions and his eyes searching for me.
“Help me, Sassenach,” he said, and stumbled into the hall, lurching to one
side and striking the wall. He didn’t fall, but I saw the blood on his wet shirt,
soaked and spreading.
“Where?” I said urgently, seizing his arm and looking for the source of the
blood. It was running down his arm beneath the sleeve of his jacket; his hand
was wet with it. “Where are you hurt?”
“Not me,” he said, chest heaving in the effort to breathe. He jerked his
head backward. “Him.”
“CHARLIE!” ELSPETH’S CRY made me jerk round to see Tom MacLeod
and Murdo Lindsay negotiating a makeshift stretcher composed of jackets
strung on hastily lopped branches around the doorjamb, trying not to drop or
injure the contents. Said contents being Charles Cunningham in a noticeable
state of disrepair.They knew where the surgery was and proceeded there at a trot. Jamie
pushed himself off the wall and called to them hoarsely in Gaelic, at which
they immediately slowed down, walking almost on tiptoe.
“He’s shot in the back, Sassenach,” Jamie said to me. “Maybe … a few
other places.” His hand was trembling where it pressed against the wall, and
his fingers left bloody smears.
“Go and sit down in the kitchen,” I said briefly. “Tell Fanny I said to get
your clothes off and find out how bad it is, then come and tell me.”
The stretcher party had reached the surgery and I rushed in behind them, in
time to superintend the moving of the captain onto my table.
“Don’t pick him up!” I shouted, seeing them about to lay the stretcher on
the floor. “Put the whole thing on the table!”
Cunningham was alive, and more or less lucid. Elspeth was already on the
other side of the table, and between us we cut his clothes off, as gently as
possible, she speaking reassuringly to him, though her hands were shaking
badly.
He’d been shot twice from the front; a ball in the right forearm that had
broken the radius just above the wrist, and a shot that had scored his ribs on
the left but fortunately not entered the body. One side of his face was
scratched and bruised, but from the presence of bark in some of the scratches,
I thought he had likely collided with a tree in the dark, rather than been in a
fistfight with one.
“Jamie says you’ve been shot in the back,” I said, bending low to speak to
him. “Can you tell me where the wound is? High? Low?”
“Low,” he gasped. “Don’t worry, Mother, it will be fine.”
“Be quiet, Charles!” she snapped. “Can you move your feet?”
His face was dead white, beard stubble like a scatter of pepper across his
skin. I had my hands under him, feeling my way between the jackets of the
stretcher and the layers of his own clothes, trapped under him. His clothes
were sodden, but so were those of all the men—I could hear the dripping out
in the hall, as several men were crammed in the doorway, listening. I pulled
one hand out from under him, gingerly, and looked at it. It was scarlet to the
wrist. I glanced at his feet. One of them twitched and Elspeth gasped. She
was stanching the blood from his arm, but at this stopped and bent over him.
“Move the other, Charles,” she said urgently.
“I am,” he whispered. His eyes were closed and water ran from his hair. I
looked down the table. Neither foot was moving.Fanny pushed her way through the men at the door and came in, her hair
loose over her wrapper and her eyes huge.
“Mr. Fraser has a bad cut from his right shoulder down across his chest,”
she told me. “It just missed his left nipple, though.”
“Well, that’s a bit of good news,” I said, repressing a mildly hysterical
urge to laugh. “Did you—”
“We put a compress on it,” she assured me. “Agnes is pushing on it. With
both hands!”
“How fast is the blood soaking through?” I had my hands back under
Captain Cunningham, feeling my way through layers of sopping cloth, in
search of the wound’s exact location.
“He soaked the first compress, but the second one is doing better,” she
assured me. “He wants whisky; is that all right?”
“Make him stand up,” I said, reaching the waistband of the captain’s
breeches. “If he can stand upright for thirty seconds, he can have whisky. If
not, give him honey-water and make him lie down flat on the floor. No
matter 
what
 he says.”
“We’ve already been giving him honey-water,” she said, and looked
closely at our patient. “Should the captain maybe have some, too?” I had one
hand on the captain’s femoral artery—we’d cut his breeches, jacket, and shirt
down the fronts and peeled the cloth away from his body—and the other
underneath him. His pulse was surprisingly strong, which encouraged me. So
did the fact that while blood was dripping off the table, it wasn’t pulsing out
into my hand. I thought the shot hadn’t struck a major vessel. On the other
hand … his feet still weren’t moving.
“Yes,” I said. “Bring some; Mrs. Cunningham can give it to him while I …
see about this.”
Elspeth laid her son’s bandaged arm gently across his middle and
smoothed the wet hair off his forehead, wiping his face with a towel.
“You’ll be all right, Charles,” she said. She spoke gently now, but her
voice was rock-steady. “You’ll be warm and dry in no time.”
I closed my eyes, the better to listen to what my hands were telling me. I’d
found the wound in his back, and it wasn’t good. A ball had entered between
the last thoracic and first lumbar vertebrae. It still 
was
 between the vertebrae;
I could feel it with my middle finger, a small hard lump, and stuck fast; it
didn’t move when I pushed it a little. The flesh of his back was hard and cold,
the muscles all in spasm.He was shivering, though the room was quite warm. I told Elspeth to put a
blanket over him, nodding at the vomit-yellow woolen coverlet, folded neatly
on top of the cabinet.
The men who had brought him in were still in the hallways, talking in low
voices. I recognized the voices; they were Jamie’s trusted men.
“Gilly!” I called over my shoulder, and Gillebride MacMillan peered
cautiously round the doorjamb.
“Seadh, a bhana-mhaighister?”
“Is anyone hurt? Beyond the captain and Jamie, I mean?”
“Ach, it’s nay more than a few bruises and cracked ribs, mistress, and I
think it may be that Tòmas has the broken nose.”
I had moved to the counter and was choosing my instruments, but was still
thinking and talking at the same time.
“What about the others? The men who—were with the captain?”
He lifted a shoulder, but smiled, and I heard a brief laugh from someone in
the hall. They’d won, I realized, and the adrenaline of victory was still
holding them up.
“I could not say, 
a bhana mhaighister,
 save that I broke a shovel over the
head of Alasdair MacLean, and there were knives, and two or three who
came to grief in the landslide, so …”
“The landslide?” I looked over my shoulder at him, startled, then shook my
head. “Never mind; I’ll hear about it later.”
“They will have gone to—to my house.” Elspeth spoke softly. “The
wounded Loyalists who didn’t come here. I’ll—I’ll need to go and tend
them.” She was holding her son’s hand, though, fingers tightly laced with his,
and her face was full of anguish when she looked at him.
I nodded, my throat tight in sympathy. I didn’t need to see the thoughts
racing across her face to know what they were: love and fear warring with
duty. And I knew the deeper fear that was beginning to bloom within her. Her
eyes were fixed on his bare feet, willing them to move.
“Gilly, go to the kitchen, will you, and fetch Agnes?”
He left, and I turned to Elspeth.
“He’s not going to die,” I said, low-voiced but firm. “I don’t know if he’ll
walk again—he might, he might not. The ball didn’t go all the way through
the spinal cord, but it’s clearly done some damage. That 
might
 heal. I’m
going to take the ball out and dress the wound, and when the swelling goesdown and the bruising heals …” I made a small gesture, equivocating hope
and doubt.
She drew a long, quavering breath and nodded.
“Stay while I take the ball out,” I said, and reached to take her hand. “It
won’t take long, and you’ll be sure he’s alive.”111
Morning Has Broken
IT WAS STILL RAINING, but the day was near. I made my way slowly
toward the dim glow of the kitchen, not quite leaning on the walls as I passed,
but letting my fingertips touch them now and then, to make sure that I was
where I thought I was. The house was still and smelled of blood and burnt
things, but the air was cool and gray with coming dawn, the desk and chairs
in Jamie’s study a monochrome still life painted on the wall—and yet my
fingertips passed through empty air as I walked past the doorway, my
footsteps inaudible to my own ears, as though I were the ghost who haunted
this house.
Most of the men had left for their own homes, but there were a few bodies
on the floor of the parlor. I had left Charles Cunningham sleeping on the
table, under the influence of a lot of laudanum, and Elspeth dozing in my
surgery chair, head nodding on her neck like a dandelion. I wasn’t going to
wake her; the Loyalist wounded would have to see to themselves—or their
wives would.
In the kitchen, Fanny was sound asleep, sprawled facedown on one of the
wide benches, one leg dangling comically to the side. Bluebell was curled up
below her, also sound asleep, and Jamie was on his back on the hearth rug,
looking like a desecrated tomb effigy in the dying light of the fire. It was
smoking and nearly out; no one had smoored it properly. He opened his eyes
at the sound of my footsteps and looked up at me, heavy-lidded but alert.
“Come and sit down, Sassenach,” he murmured, and lifted a finger vaguely
at a nearby stool. “Ye look worse than I do.”
“Not possible,” I said. But I did sit down. Tiredness flooded up from the
aching soles of my feet, closing my eyes as it rose through my body like a
spring tide—filled with churning sand and fragments of sharp shell and
seaweed. A warm hand curled around my ankle and rested there.“How do you feel?” I murmured. I did want to know, but was having
trouble opening my eyes to look.
“I’ll do. Hand me the wee jar, Sassenach.” The hand left my ankle and rose
up to my lap, where I was holding the small jar of alcohol and sutures. “I’ll
do it.”
“You’ll do 
what
?” I opened my eyes and stared at him. “Stitch your own
chest back together?”
“I thought that might wake ye up.” He dropped his arm. “Help me get up, 
a
nighean.
 I’m stiff as parritch on the third day and I dinna want ye crouchin’
on the floor to stitch me. Besides, I might wake the wee lassie if ye make me
howl.”
“Howl, forsooth,” I said, rather cross. “Serve you right if I did. Let me see
it, at least, before I try to get you on your feet.” The floor around him was
littered with wadded cloths, rusty with drying blood, and there were smears
of it across a wide swath of floorboards. I slid gingerly down onto my knees
beside him.
“It smells like an abattoir in here.” He smelled of blood and mud and
smoke, but most strongly of the curdled sweat of violence.
He put his head back, sighed, and closed his eyes, letting me look at his
chest. The girls had put his wet plaid over him for warmth, and underneath
was a folded linen towel soaked in water. A faint scent of lavender and
meadowsweet drifted up, along with the sharp copper tang of fresh blood. I
was surprised and wondered which one of them had thought to use a wet
compress to keep the edges of the wound moist. Whoever it was had also
thought to take his shoes off and put the bundle of his rolled-up jacket and
shirt under his feet to raise them. Or maybe Jamie had told them, I thought
vaguely.
Fanny’s description of the wound had been completely accurate; it was a
deep slash that ran downward from the middle of his right clavicle, across the
center of his chest—I could see a faint shadow of white bone under the raw
red scrape where the cutlass had almost touched his sternum—and ended two
inches below his left nipple—which demonstrated its resiliency by hardening
into a tiny dark-pink nub when I brushed it. By reflex, I touched the other
one.
“They both work,” he assured me, squinting down his chest. “So does my
cock, if ye’re reckoning such things.”
“Glad to hear it.”I picked up his wrist to check his pulse, though I could see it plainly in his
neck, banging steadily along at a tranquil rate. The feel of him, warm and
solid, was restoring my sense of my own body. I yawned suddenly, without
warning, and the rush of oxygen spiked my blood. I began to feel somewhat
more alert.
“That’s going to hurt like the devil if you try to get up by yourself,” I
observed. Putting any pressure on his arms would tighten the severed muscles
and skin.
“I know,” he said, and immediately started trying to do it anyway.
“
And
 you’ll make it bleed more,” I added, putting a hand on his throat to
stop him. “And you haven’t an ounce of blood to spare, my lad. Stay,” I said
sternly, as though to a dog, and he laughed—or started to. He went white—
well, whiter—and stopped breathing for a moment.
“See?” I said, and got awkwardly to my feet. “Don’t laugh. I’ll be back.”
I was moving much better on my way back to the surgery, my head
clearing and my brain beginning to work again. Aside from the impressive
knife wound across his chest, he seemed uninjured. No signs of shock or
disorientation, and the wound was clean, that was good …
Elspeth was still sitting in my surgery chair, but she was awake. My 
Merck
Manual
 lay open on her lap. I stopped dead in the doorway, but she’d heard
me coming. She looked up at me, the skin of her face white and stretched so
tight across her bones that I could see plainly what she’d look like dead.
“Where did you get this?” she whispered, one hand spread across the page
as though to hide it. I could see the words “Spinal Cord Injuries” at the top of
the page.
“My daughter brought it to me from—er … Scotland,” I said, improvising
out of a momentary panic. But then I remembered: I’d destroyed the
copyright page. No one outside the family knew, or could know, and I
breathed again.
“I can ask Fanny to copy out some of the passages for you, if you’d like.
Though I don’t know how much use they might be,” I added reluctantly.
“Some of the procedures they mention just aren’t available in the colonies—
nor yet in most of Europe.” I crossed my fingers under my apron, thinking,
Nor anywhere else in the world.
 “And even as advanced as some of the things
mentioned there are … they might not be useful to—to your particular
concerns.”I looked at Charles Cunningham as I said this, and wanted to cross my
fingers again—for luck, this time. Instead, I drifted to the foot of the table
and gently lifted the bottom of the vomit-yellow coverlet to expose his bare
feet. They looked perfectly normal.
But of course they would. Even if his spinal cord hadn’t been severed—
and I didn’t 
think
 it had—it had clearly been compressed and damaged to
some extent. And spinal cord injuries were often permanent. But it would
take a little time for the visible effects—wasting of muscles, twisting of limbs
—to become apparent. A sharp stink made my nostrils twitch and compress.
Loss of bowel and bladder control.
 Expected, but not good.
“Have you seen anyone like this before?” Elspeth’s voice was sharp and
she rose to her feet, as though drawn to defend her son.
“Yes,” I said, and she heard everything in my voice and sat down again as
though she, too, had been shot in the back.
Jesus, who shot him? Please, God, don’t let it have been Jamie …
I pushed back the coverlet and cleaned him gently with a wet cloth. He was
unconscious and didn’t stir. Nothing stirred under my hands, and my lips
tightened. Men have very little conscious control over their erectile
responses, as Jamie had just demonstrated to me, and I’d had a lot of men
with quite severe wounds stiffen at my touch. Not this one. Still, it might be
the laudanum … that really 
did
 affect libidinal response.
I held on to that minuscule shred of hope for the moment and covered the
captain again. Elspeth was sitting upright now, but her attention was inward,
and I knew she was envisioning the same things I was: caring for a beloved
child for whom there was no real hope. Her last child. Months, years—
Five
years,
 came the searing thought—of wiping his arse and changing his sheets,
moving his dead legs four times a day to prevent atrophy. Of dealing with the
bitterness of a man who had lost his life, but had not died.
There was light behind the shutters now, though it was pale and watery;
the sound of the rain had settled to the steady drumming of an all-day
downpour. I walked behind Elspeth and opened the shutters, then cracked the
window enough to bring a waft of cold, clean, damp air into the room.
I had to go and see to Jamie; there was nothing more I could do here. I
turned and put my hands on Elspeth’s shoulders and felt her bones, hard and
brittle under the black of her shawl.
“He’ll be able to talk and to feed himself,” I said. “Beyond that … time
will tell.”“It always does,” she said, her voice colorless as the rain.112
We Met on the Level …
AS I LEFT THE surgery, the front door opened behind me, admitting
Lieutenant Esterhazy. He looked as shocked and disordered as everyone else
this morning, but was at least on his feet and not visibly damaged.
“Come with me,” I said, seizing him by the arm. “Your captain is sleeping
and won’t need you for a bit, but I do.”
“Of course, ma’am,” he muttered, and shook his head as though to throw
off some heavy thought before following me to the kitchen.
“Where is Lieutenant Bembridge?” I asked, glancing over my shoulder. I
half-expected him to come through the door; the two lieutenants were so
seldom apart that I sometimes forgot which was which.
“I don’t know, ma’am,” he said, his voice quivering a little. “He—didn’t
come back to the rendezvous last night, nor this morning—I went down by
the Meeting House and walked round, calling out. So I came to report to the
captain, before I go back to look for him some more.”
“I’m sorry to hear that,” I said, sincerely. “I heard there was a landslide last
night—were you there when that happened?”
“No, ma’am. But I heard. So when Gilbert didn’t come back, I thought
perhaps …”
“I see. What about this landslide I hear so much about?” I said to Jamie,
who had managed to get himself up on one elbow and was eyeing the
lieutenant with some wariness. “What happened?”
“A good bit of hillside came down wi’ the rain,” he said. “Trees and rocks
and mud. But I canna say more than that. I dinna even ken where we were
when it happened. Maybe somewhere near the wagon road.” He touched his
chest gingerly, grimacing.
“
That
 happened in a landslide?” I knew a cutlass wound when I saw one—
and had an eight-inch scar down the inside of my left arm to prove it.“Just before,” he said tersely. He hadn’t taken his eyes off young
Esterhazy, and it finally occurred to me that the lieutenant 
might
 just be
young enough, foolish enough, and under sufficient mental strain as to think
he could take Jamie captive in his own house. He 
was
 wearing a pistol and an
officer’s dirk. 
And Jamie isn’t armed.
 A small, cold finger touched the back
of my neck, but then I looked carefully at the young man, then back at Jamie.
I shook my head.
“No,” I said simply. “He’s worried about his friend. And probably his
captain, too,” I added. Esterhazy turned sharply to stare at me, eyes wide.
“What’s happened to the captain? You said he was sleeping!”
“Shot,” I said briefly. “He’ll live, but he’s not going anywhere for the
moment.”
“Did you shoot him, sir?” The young man addressed Jamie seriously.
“I tried,” Jamie replied dryly. “I fired just as he came at me wi’ his cutlass.
I dinna ken if I hit him or no—but it wasna me that shot him in the back, I
can tell ye that much. I saw his face plain, in the lightning. And then the
mountain fell on us,” he added, as a distinct afterthought.
“Shot in the back?” Esterhazy turned to me, shocked.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said, only halfway under my breath. “Yes. I
took the ball out and he’s resting comfortably. Now, if you wouldn’t mind,
Lieutenant, I need you to help me get Colonel Fraser off the bloody floor and
up to his bed. 
Now,
” I repeated, seeing that he was disposed to ask further
questions.
The conversation roused Fanny, and Agnes appeared from above, frowsty
with sleep. Both of them were mortified at being seen by the lieutenant in
their nightdresses and wrappers, but I made them go and start slicing onions
for a poultice, grinding up goldenseal root, and seeing to Mrs. Cunningham’s
bodily needs while Lieutenant Esterhazy and I levered Jamie up in stages,
first to a seat on the bench, where Bluebell nosed him anxiously and licked
his bare knees, and then to his feet, with the two of us gripping his elbows for
dear life as he swayed to and fro, on the edge of fainting.
I grabbed him round the waist and the lieutenant got an arm round his rib
cage from the back, and we lurched out of the kitchen and up the stairs like a
mob of drunks being chivvied by the police.
We dropped him on the bed like a bag of cement and I was obliged to lean
over and put my hands on my knees, gasping for air until the small black
flecks left my field of vision. When I could stand up again, I thanked thelieutenant, himself red in the face and breathing like a steam engine, and sent
him downstairs to be given something hot to drink. Then I went to stir up the
fire and open the shutters; I was going to need both heat and light.
Jamie lay flat on the bed, pale as wax, the stained compress pressed grimly
to his chest. I put a hand on his and pried his stiff fingers loose. Seen in the
watery daylight from our window, the wound looked nasty but not terribly
serious. It hadn’t severed any tendons, nor had it gone entirely through the
pectoralis, and I thought it had barely nicked his collarbone.
“It bounced off your sternum,” I told him, as I prodded gently here and
there. “Otherwise, it would have cut down deep into your chest on this side.”
“Oh, good,” he murmured. His eyelids were closed tight, but I could see
the eyes under them moving restlessly to and fro.
“All right.” I swabbed the area carefully with saline and fished a threaded
silk suture out of the jar. “Do you want something to bite on while I stitch
this, or would you rather tell me what the hell happened last night?”
He opened bloodshot eyes and considered me for a moment, then closed
them again, and—muttering something in which I 
thought
 I distinguished the
words “Spanish Inquisition …”—he clenched both fists in the bedclothes,
took a deep breath, and relaxed as much as possible under the circumstances.
“Have ye got a piece of paper nearby, Sassenach?” he asked. I glanced at
the bedside table, where I’d left my current journal—nothing in the way of
Deep Thoughts or spiritual meditations; more a noting of the trivia of which
days are composed: the small copper pot had been left on the fire too long
and had a small hole melted in it; I must remember to send it to Salem to be
mended when Bobby Higgins went there next week; Bluebell had eaten
Something Awful and the hearth rug in the girls’ room should be boiled …
“Yes,” I said, piercing the skin with a quick jab. He grunted but didn’t
move.
“Will ye set a paper handy, then, Sassenach, wi’ something to write with?
I’ll be tellin’ ye names as I go.”
I put in three more stitches, then swiveled round to get the journal. As I
normally wrote in bed, I used a small stick of graphite wrapped round with a
strip of rag, rather than ink and a quill, and I fetched that, too.
“Shoot,” I said, returning to my repairs. “If you don’t mind the reference.”
His stomach twitched in brief amusement.
“I don’t. It’s a list of the Loyalists who were wi’ Cunningham last night.
Put down Geordie Hallam, and Conor MacNeil, Angus MacLean, and—”“Wait, not so fast.” I picked up the pencil. “Why do you want a list of
these men? You obviously remember who they are.”
“Oh, I kent who they were, well before last night,” he assured me, with
some grimness. “The list is for you and Bobby and the Lindsays, in case they
kill me in the next few days.”
The graphite snapped in my hand. I put it down, wiped my hand carefully
on a wet rag, and said, “Oh?” in as calm a voice as I could manage.
“Aye,” he said. “Ye didna think last night settled matters, did ye,
Sassenach?”
Given the current state of Captain Cunningham, actually I had rather
thought that. I swallowed hard and picked up the needle again.
“You mean there’s a possibility that we may have a visitation by the
Cherokees?”
“Aye, them,” he said thoughtfully, “or maybe Nicodemus Partland, wi’ a
band of men from over the mountain. Mind, it may not happen,” he added,
seeing my face. “And my own men will be ready if it does. But just in case,
ye’ll need to get rid of the Loyalists here, if I’m gone. So ye need to ken who
they are, aye?”
I paused to pick up a fresh suture thread and breathed carefully, my eyes
on my work.
“Get rid of them?”
“Well, I dinna mean to let them stay on as my tenants,” he said reasonably.
“They tried to kill me last night. Or take me off to be hanged, which isna
much better,” he added, and I saw the rage simmering under the thin skin of
reason.
“That’s a point, yes.” I dabbed blood away from the wound and made two
more stitches. I’d poked up the fire and added fresh wood, but I felt cold to
the marrow. “Can you—I mean, will they just … leave, if you tell them to
go?”
He’d been looking at the ceiling, but now turned his head to look at me. It
was the patient look of a lion who’d been asked if he could really eat that
wildebeest over there.
“Um,” I said, and cleared my throat. “Tell me about the landslide.”
His face lightened, and he told me about his flight from the Lodge, four or
five of his own men close behind him, and the Loyalists running into them, to
be delayed while he escaped into the darkness.“Only the trail I meant to take was washed away by the rain—ouch—and I
got lost for a bit, looking for another. Then it began to thunder and the
lightning was strikin’ close enough I could smell it, but at least I could see
my way now and then.”
He’d struck back in the direction he thought home to be, hoping to
encounter some of his men, whom he’d told to guard the New House from
the rear and capture such men of Cunningham’s as came that way.
“Capture them?” I said, tying a suture, clipping it, and picking out a fresh
thread. “Where did you mean to put them? Not the root cellar, I hope.” Our
food levels were perilously low after a long winter, and such dried fruits and
early vegetables as we had were all in the root cellar, along with bags of
chestnuts, walnuts, and peanuts, and I could just imagine the havoc a lot of
resentful captives might wreak in there.
He shook his head. His eyes were open now, fixed on the ceiling joists in
order to avoid looking at what I was doing to his chest.
“Nay, I’d told Bobby they should put anyone they caught into the pigs’
cave, tied up.”
“Dear God. And what if the White Sow took it into her mind to show up?”
While the legendary Beast of the Ridge had declined to establish a new lair
under the present house—thank God—she did still roam the mountainside,
eating her fill of chestnut mast and anything else that took her fancy, and she
did, now and then, visit the pigpen and liberate a few of its inhabitants, most
of these her own descendants.
“The fortunes of war,” he said callously. “They should ha’ kent better than
to follow a man who canna choose between the King and God. Ng!”
“We’re more than halfway,” I said soothingly. “As for the captain … most
Loyalists would assure you that as God appointed the King, His interests lie
in the same direction. Go on telling me about last night.”
He grunted and shifted his weight uneasily, but then settled again and took
a cautious breath.
“Aye. Well, by the time I could tell for sure where I was, I was close to
Tom MacLeod’s place—did Gillebride say Tom’s nose is broken?—and I
thought I’d best take refuge there. So I was sloggin’ through the mud and
bushes, trying to keep track of where I was by what I could see when the
lightning went, and all of a sudden there was a thunderclap that split the sky
and a monstrous flash that left me blind, and the rain turned to poundin’ hail,
just like that—” He snapped his fingers. “So I pulled my plaid over my headto shield it, and next thing I ken, the captain’s run into me in the dark. Only I
didna ken who it was, and neither did he, and then the lightning went again
and I went for my pistol and he went for his cutlass and …” He waved a hand
at the half-sewn gash in his chest.
“I see. You said you fired at him?”
“Well, I tried. My powder was damp, and little wonder. The gun fired, but
I doubt the ball even reached him.”
“It might have,” I observed, reaching for another length of suture. “I took
one ball out of his forearm.”
“Good. Can I have a wee drop, Sassenach?”
“Since you’re already lying down, yes.”
I’d been paying no attention to anything beyond Jamie’s chest for the last
little while, but when I rose to get the whisky, I heard voices downstairs.
Raised voices. One seemed to be Lieutenant Esterhazy’s, and I thought there
was a female voice—Elspeth? Someone else that sounded familiar, but—
Jamie sat up abruptly and made a noise like a stuck pig.
“Bloody lie down!”
“That’s Cloudtree,” he said urgently. “Go fetch him, Sassenach.”
I grabbed the discarded compress, slapped it into his hand, and shoved the
hand against the unstitched side of his chest, which was now bleeding freely.
“Bloody lie down and I will!”
As it was, though, I didn’t have to. Feet came pounding up the stairs
amidst an agitation of voices, and with a cursory knock the door opened.
“I told him he couldn’t—” Agnes began, scowling over her shoulder, but
her stepfather pushed past her, only to be grasped by the arm by an irate
Lieutenant Esterhazy.
“You stop right there, sir!”
“Leave go o’ me, you shit-sucker! I have somethin’ to tell the colonel.”
“Lieutenant!” I said, raising my own voice to command level. I didn’t have
occasion to use it often, but I remembered how, and the lieutenant stopped,
mouth open as he looked at me. So did Agnes and Aaron Cloudtree.
“The colonel wants to speak to him,” I said mildly. “Agnes, take the
lieutenant downstairs. Go and see how the captain is doing.”
He glared at me for a long moment, turned the glare on Cloudtree—who
was elaborately brushing his rain-damp sleeve as though to remove finger
marks—and left, followed by Agnes, who tossed her stepfather a glare of her
own, though he didn’t seem to notice.“I seen Scotchee, Colonel,” Cloudtree began, advancing on the bed. Then
he noticed the state of Jamie’s chest and his eyes sprang wide. “Jesus Christ,
man! What happened to you?”
“Quite a few things,” I said shortly. “Perhaps you—”
“And what did Scotchee say, then, Mr. Cloudtree?” Jamie was still sitting
up, apparently oblivious of the slow drops of blood oozing down his ribs.
“Oh.” Aaron took a moment to recollect, but then nodded reassuringly at
Jamie.
“He said to tell you, you owe him big for this, but he doesn’t think you’re
gonna live long enough to pay him back, so dinna fash unless there’s
whisky.”113
And We Parted on the Square
March 30, A.D. 1780
Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina
From James Fraser, Proprietor of Fraser’s Ridge
To the Following Men:
Geordie Hallam
Conor MacNeil
Angus MacLean
Robert McClanahan
William Baird
Joseph Baird
Ebeneezer Baird
William MacIlhenny
Ewan Adair
Peadair MacFarland
Holman Leslie
Alexander MacCoinneach
Lachlan Hunt
As you have, each and all, conspired and acted to attack and arrest
me, with the desired End of causing my Death, the Contract of
Tenancy signed between us is, as of this Date, rendered Null and Void
in its Entirety.By such Actions as you have undertaken, you have broken my Trust
and betrayed your sworn Word.
Therefore, you are, each and all, hereby Evicted from the Land you
presently occupy, dispossessed of your Title to said Land, and are
required to depart, with your Families, from Fraser’s Ridge within
the Space of Ten Days.
You may carry away such Food, Clothing, Tools, Seedcorn,
Livestock, and Personal Property as you possess. All of your
Buildings, Outbuildings, Sheds, Corncribs, Pens, and other Structures
are forfeit. Should these be burnt or damaged by way of Spite, you
will be apprehended and your Belongings confiscated.
Should you seek to return privily to Fraser’s Ridge, you will be shot
on Sight.
James Fraser, Proprietor
“CAN YE THINK OF anything I’ve left out?” Jamie asked, watching as I
read this.
“No. That’s … quite thorough.” I felt a cold heaviness in my stomach.
These were all men I knew well. I’d greeted them and their wives as they’d
come to the Ridge, many of them with nothing save the clothes on their
backs, full of hope and gratitude for a place in this wild new world. I’d
visited their cabins, delivered their children, tended their ills. And now …
I could see that Jamie felt the same heaviness of heart. These were men
he’d trusted, accepted, given land and tools, encouragement and friendship. I
set the letter down, my fingers cold.
“Would you really shoot them if they come back?” I asked quietly.
He looked at me sharply, and I saw that while he might be heavy of heart,
that heart was also burning with a deep anger.
“Sassenach,” he said, “they betrayed me, and they hunted me like a wild
animal, across my own land, for the sake of what they call the King’s justice.
I have had enough of that justice. Should they come within my sight, on my
land, again—aye. I will kill them.”
I bit my lip. He saw and put a hand on mine.
“It must be done so,” he said quietly, looking into my eyes to make sure I
understood. “Not only because they’ll make trouble themselves—but these
are not the only men on the Ridge and nearby whose minds turn in thatdirection, and I ken that well. Many have kept quiet so far, watching to see
am I weak, will I fall or be taken? Will someone come here, like Major
Ferguson? They’re afraid to declare themselves one way or the other, but was
I to show these”—he flicked his other hand at the notice—“mercy, allow
them to keep not only their lives but their land and weapons, it would give
the timid ones confidence to join them.”
Not only their lives …
I felt the world shift, just slightly, under my feet. To this point, I’d been
able to think that whatever might be happening in the world outside the
Ridge, the Ridge itself was a solid refuge. And it wasn’t.
Not only their lives. Ours.
He didn’t need to say that he might not command sufficient men—or guns
—to stand off a larger-scale insurrection on the Ridge by himself.
“Yes, I see that,” I said, and swallowing, picked up the paper gingerly,
seeing not only the names of men but the faces of women. “It’s only—I can’t
help feeling for the wives.” And the children, but mostly for the wives,
caught 
between their homes, the needs of their families, and the danger of
their husbands’ politics. Now to be evicted from their homes, with nothing
but what they could carry away and nowhere to go.
I had no idea how many women might share their husbands’ opinions, but
share them or not, they’d be forced to live or die by the outcome.
“Bell, book, and candle,” he said, his eyes still on my face, and not without
sympathy.
“What?”
“Ring the bell, close the book, quench the candle,” he said quietly, and
touched the paper on my knee. “It’s the rite of excommunication and
anathema, Sassenach—and that’s what I have done.”
Before I could think of anything whatever to say, I heard solid male
footsteps coming up the stairs, and a moment later there was a knock at the
door.
“Come,” Jamie said, his voice neutral.
The door opened, revealing Lieutenant Esterhazy, his face twenty years
older than his age.
“Sir,” he said formally, and stood ramrod-straight in front of the bed. “My
—that is—Lieutenant Bembridge has not returned. May I have permission to
go and look for him?”I was startled at that, and looked at Jamie, who was not startled. It hadn’t
occurred to me that the lieutenant was no longer a friend of the house but
rather Jamie’s prisoner—but evidently they both thought so.
Jamie was completely able to hide what he was thinking, but he wasn’t
bothering to do so at the moment. If he let Esterhazy go, who might he see,
and what might he tell them? It was obvious that Jamie was in no condition to
defend himself or his house, let alone police the Ridge. What if the lieutenant
went out and came back with a small mob? Left altogether and went to join
Ferguson, with intent to lead him back here?
I was sure nothing of the sort was in the boy’s mind; he hadn’t any thought
but his friend at the moment. But that didn’t mean he mightn’t think of other
things, once away from the house.
“You may,” Jamie said, as formal as the lieutenant. “Mrs. Fraser will go
with you.”114
In Which the Earth Moves
“Y
E HAVE TO, SASSENACH.”
Those words wouldn’t leave my ear; they remained stubbornly trapped
inside, a tiny, high-pitched echo that buzzed against my eardrum.
That’s what Jamie had said, when Oliver Esterhazy had left the room to go
and take leave of his chief—or rather, of Elspeth—in the surgery.
“There’s nobody else,” Jamie said reasonably, making a slight gesture
toward the empty corners of the bedroom. “I canna send Bobby or the
Lindsays, because I need them here. Besides,” he added, leaning back on his
pillow with a grimace as the movement pulled on his stitches, “if nothing’s
happened to Mr. Bembridge, he’d be here now. Since he isn’t, it’s odds-on
he’s hurt or dead. You’d be the best one to deal with him once he’s found,
aye?”
I couldn’t argue with that, as a logical statement, but I argued anyway.
“I’m not going to leave you here alone. You’re in no shape to fight back, if
anyone—”
“That’s 
why
 I need the Lindsays here,” he said patiently. “They’re guardin’
the door. Doors,” he corrected. “Kenny and Murdo are on the stoop and
Evan’s round the back.”
“And where’s Bobby?”
“Gone to fetch a few more men and to spread the word that the captain is
…” He hesitated.
“Hors de combat?”
 I suggested.
“In no condition to be moved,” he said firmly. “I dinna want anyone
thinkin’ they ought to come storm the house and try to get him back.”
I stared at him. He was slightly whiter than the sheet covering him, his
eyes were shadowed and sunken with exhaustion, and his hand trembled
where it lay on the coverlet.“And just when did you make all these arrangements?” I demanded.
“When ye went to the privy. Go, Sassenach,” he said. “Ye have to.”
I went, perturbed in mind. It went against my grain to leave wounded men,
even if they were all stable at the moment and unlikely to take a sudden turn
for the worse. And Elspeth, Fanny, and Agnes were completely capable of
handling any minor medical emergency that might arise, I told myself.
“… so I’m going out with Lieutenant Esterhazy to look for his friend,” I
said to Elspeth, taking down my field kit from the hook where I kept it. She
didn’t look much better than Jamie, but nodded, her eyes fixed on her son. He
was beginning to twitch and moan.
“I’ll manage things here,” she said quietly, and glanced up at me,
suddenly. Her eyes were red-rimmed and bagged with fatigue, but alert. “Be
careful.”
I stopped, looking at her, and a faint pink rose in her cheeks.
“I don’t know what’s happening,” she said. “But things seem … very
unsettled. To me.”
“Do you mean Nicodemus Partland?” I said bluntly. “And the men he’s
meant to be bringing from Ninety-Six?”
The pink in her cheeks vanished like a frost-bitten flower.
“Hmph,” I said, and left.
Oliver was waiting for me on the porch, and at once offered to take the
pack with the field kit.
“No, I’ll keep that. You take this one.” I handed him another pack, this one
with water, honey-water, some food, a folded blanket, a jar of leeches, and a
few other things that might come in handy. “All right, then—where shall we
start?”
He looked off the porch, bewildered.
“I don’t know.” Nobody had slept last night, and neither had he. While a
nice, cheerful young man, he was in fact not the brightest person I’d ever
met. Now, between worry and exhaustion, he didn’t seem to have more than
a few brain cells still working. I took a deep breath of morning air,
summoning patience.
“Well, where did you see him last?” I asked.
This question invariably annoyed the members of my household searching
for lost items, but Oliver Esterhazy blinked and then squinted in
concentration, finally saying, “Near the Meeting House.”
“Then we’ll start there.”“I already looked there.”
“We’ll 
start
 looking there.”
The rain had stopped, but the forest was dripping and my skirts were wet to
the knee before we were halfway there. I didn’t mind. Birds were chirping,
the air was alive with the sharp, fresh scents of red cedar and spruce,
sprouting dogwood and rhododendron, and the mountainside was running
with dozens of tiny rills and streams. Spring was in the air, and the peace of
the morning wood was seeping into me, the anxiety of the night and the
urgencies of the morning settling into something approaching perspective.
Jamie wasn’t dying or in any immediate danger of doing so. Everything
else could be handled, and true to form, he was doing just that, even flat on
his back and too weak to sit up by himself.
I still wanted to be with him, but he was right—there was no one else he
could have sent, under the circumstances. Though his concern lest Lieutenant
Esterhazy raise a mob of Loyalists seemed unnecessary at the moment. We
saw and heard no one on the trail, and everyone seemed to be keeping
deliberately out of sight. We knocked at two cabins on the way, to inquire
after Lieutenant Bembridge, but were met with closed faces and negative
shakes of the head.
The Meeting House itself was abandoned. The door had been left open,
half the benches were overturned, beer was puddled on the floor, and two
raccoons were inside, busily chewing on a Masonic apron that someone had
dropped.
“Get out of here!” Oliver grabbed a broom that had also been knocked to
the floor and drove the raccoons out with the fervor of an Old Testament
prophet, then tenderly retrieved the remnants of the apron. It was a luxurious
one, of white leather, with a white silk pleated edging and canvas ties,
somewhat gnawed. The Masonic compass had been painted on it, with
considerable skill.
“The captain’s?” I asked, watching him fold the garment, and he nodded.
Small accoutrements, like the wooden bucket and dipper for the
refreshment of long-winded speakers and a stack of paper fans that the
children had made for the coming summer, were scattered over the room. We
stood for a moment in silence, looking at the wreckage, but neither of us
chose to mention the irony—if that was the word—of a meeting of
Freemasons, theoretically dedicated to the ideals of liberty, equality, andbrotherhood, disintegrating into riot and mayhem. So much for not talking
politics in Lodge …
We stepped outside and Oliver carefully closed the door. Then we walked
to and fro in widening circles, shouting Gilbert Bembridge’s name.
“Would he perhaps have taken refuge with … one of the captain’s
followers?” I asked delicately when we met again outside the Meeting House.
“If he was wounded, perhaps?”
“I don’t know.” Oliver was growing agitated, glancing around as though
expecting his friend to spring out from behind a tree. “I—I think maybe he
was with the men who were, um …”
“Chasing my husband?” I said, rather acidly. “Which way did they go?”
He said he wasn’t sure, but set off downhill with a sudden burst of
determination, me following more cautiously in order not to turn an ankle on
the rocks and gravel the sudden freshets had left exposed on the trails.
I was beginning to think that there was something odd about Lieutenant
Esterhazy’s behavior. He was sweating heavily, though the woods were still
very cold, and though he cast aside from time to time, he did so in brief,
erratic bursts before returning to a path of his own choosing. I rather thought
he 
knew
 where he was going, and wasn’t really surprised when we suddenly
came to a spot where the woods … weren’t.
We were standing at the edge of a copse of scraggy oak saplings, and
below our feet, the ground fell away in a tumble of raw black earth, full of
broken trees and shattered bushes, with great gray rocks that had been
dislodged by the fall and now lay half buried in the dirt, their undersides
exposed, stained and wet with mud and dislodged worms.
“Well,” I said, after a moment’s silence. “So this is the famous landslide.
Were you here when it happened?”
He shook his head. His hair was coming out of its neat naval plait and
straggled over his sweating face. He wiped it back, absently.
“No,” he said, then repeated, “No,” more definitely.
It wasn’t a huge landslide, though if one was standing at the bottom of it in
the dark, it had probably been startling enough. About fifty feet of the
mountainside had slipped, rumbling down a steep slope of granite and half
blocking a small brook.
“Do you think—” the young man began, then stopped and swallowed, his
oversized Adam’s apple bobbing in his throat. “Gilbert could be … in there?”“I suppose it’s possible,” I said, eyeing the rubble dubiously. “If he is,
though …” We were plainly not equipped to dig through a landslide with our
bare hands, and I was on the point of saying so when the lieutenant grabbed
my arm with a startled cry, pointing down.
“There! There!”
A smudge of navy blue, mud-smeared and nearly the color of the wet
earth, was sticking out of the soil, about twenty feet from where we stood,
and before I could say anything, Oliver was sliding and staggering through
the wet clods, falling to one knee, then rising again and pushing onward.
I stumbled after him, gripping my emergency pack, though after the first
convulsive leap, my heart had sunk like a stone. He couldn’t be alive.
Oliver had unearthed an arm and, leaping to his feet, heaved on it with all
his might. I heard something crack and Gilbert’s head, with its dead-white
face, burst from the ground in a shower of clods and gravel.
Oliver had let go Gilbert’s arm as though it were red-hot and was more or
less gibbering in shock, but I didn’t have time to spare for him. I dropped to
my knees and rubbed a hand hard over Gilbert’s face. I thought—but—no. I
was right; I 
had
 seen a twitch of his eyelids—I saw it again now and my heart
sprang into my throat.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ! Oliver! I think he’s alive—help me get him
out!”
“He—wh-wh-what … he 
can’t
 be!”
I’d dropped my pack and was digging like a badger with my bare hands.
Something warm touched my skin—a wisp of breath.
“Gilbert—Gilbert! Hang on, just hang on, we’re getting you out of there
…”
“No,” said Oliver’s voice behind me. It was hoarse and high-pitched and I
glanced over my shoulder, to see him pulling a torn-off branch out of the
muck.
“No,” he said again, more strongly. “I don’t think so.”
JAMIE WOKE FROM a feverish doze to see Frances standing beside his
bed, looking grave.
“What’s happened?” he asked. His throat was dry as sand, and the words
came out in a faint rasp. “Where’s my wife?”“She hasn’t come back yet,” Frances said. “She and Lieutenant Esterhazy
only left an hour ago, you know.” 
“You know”
 came out with a faint tone of
question and he made an attempt at a smile. Not a good one; his face was as
tired as the rest of him. Frances looked at him assessingly, then lifted the cup
she was holding.
“You’re to drink this,” she said firmly. “One full cup each hour. She said
so.” The 
“She”
 was spoken with the respect due to the local deity, and his
smile got better.
He managed to raise his head enough to drink, though she had to hold the
cup while he did so. It was only moderately horrible and Frances, the dear
child, had evidently taken Claire’s direction “with a little whisky” not only
literally but liberally. He laid his head back on the pillow, feeling slightly
dizzy, though that might just be the lack of blood.
“I’m to check and see if you’re oozing pus,” Frances told him, in the same
firm tone.
“I’m in no condition to stop ye, lass.”
He lay still, breathing deep and slow, as she untied the bandage and lifted
the wet compress from his chest. He was interested to see that she handled his
body without the slightest hesitation or compunction, pressing here and there
beside the line of stitching, a small frown between her soft dark brows. He
wanted to laugh, but didn’t; even such breathing as he was doing hurt quite a
bit.
“What d’ye think, 
a nighean
?” he asked. “Will I live?”
She made a small grimace meant to acknowledge that she understood he
was jesting, but the frown remained.
“Yes,” she said, but stood for a moment, frowning at his patchworked
chest. Then she seemed to make up her mind about something and replaced
the compress and retied the bandage in a business-like way.
“I want to tell you something,” she said. “I would have waited for Mrs.
Fraser to come back, but Lieutenant Esterhazy will be with her.”
“Speak, then,” he said, matching her formality. “Sit, if ye like.” He waved
a hand toward the nearby stool and drew in his breath sharply at the resultant
sensation. Frances looked at him in concern, but after a moment decided that
he wouldn’t die, and sat down.
“It’s Agnes,” she said, without preamble. “She thinks she’s with child.”
“Oh, Jesus Christ!”“Just so,” she said, nodding. “She thinks it’s Gilbert’s—Lieutenant
Bembridge, I mean.”
“She 
thinks
 it’s him? Who else might it be?”
“Well, Oliver,” she said. “But she only did it once with him.”
“Sasannaich clann na galladh!”
“What does that mean?”
“English sons of the devil,” he told her briefly. He was struggling to get his
elbows bent enough to sit up; this wasn’t news he could deal with lying flat.
“Did either of the gobshites … er … try to … with you?”
Surprise wiped the frown off her face.
“I’m 
never
 going to lie with a man,” she said with complete certainty, then
looked at him, with a little less. “You said I didn’t have to.”
“Ye don’t and ye never will,” he assured her. “If anyone tries, I’ll kill him.
How long have ye kent this—about Agnes?”
“She told me just before I came up here,” Frances said, with a slightly
guilty look over her shoulder. “I wath—
wasn’t
 sure I should tell you but …
she’th—she 
is
 afraid that Oliver killed Gilbert last night because he found out
she was …”
“Does she ken for sure he found out?”
Frances nodded soberly.
“She told him. Yesterday. He asked her to marry him and she said she
couldn’t, because …”
He wanted very badly to go downstairs and shake Agnes until her silly
head rattled, but something much worse was dawning on him, and he pushed
himself upright, disregarding pain and dizziness.
“Go down and get Kenny Lindsay for me,” he said urgently. “
Now,
Frances.”
“YOU DON’T 
THINK
 so?” I said, staring at Oliver Esterhazy.
“I mean—he’s dead, Mrs. Fraser! Come away, don’t touch him!” Oliver
grabbed my arm, but I shook him off.
“He’s not dead,” I said, “but he may well be in the next few minutes, if we
don’t get him out. Get down here and help me!”
He looked at me, mouth half open, then looked wildly at Gilbert—who did
indeed 
look
 dead, but …“Help me!” I said, and began scrabbling at the wet, heavy earth. I dug
madly, trying to free enough of Gilbert’s chest for him to draw breath. He
was lying mostly on his side, and luckily there wasn’t a lot of earth over his
upper body, though his legs seemed to be buried more deeply. If only I could
get him free enough to do chest compression and his bones weren’t shattered
…
Oliver squatted beside me. He was cursing steadily under his breath, and
now nudged me, trying to push me aside.
“Let me do it,” he said curtly. “I’m stronger.”
“I’m—”
“Move!” he said violently, and pushed me to the side. I lost my balance,
fell sprawling, and the loose earth moved under me. I rolled in a shower of
wet dirt, arms and legs flung out, and skidded to a stop against the exposed
root tangle of an uprooted tree, partway down the slope. I was dazed and
frightened, my heart pounding. I’d been so concerned with rescuing Gilbert
Bembridge that it hadn’t occurred to me that the slipped earth was by no
means settled in its new bed and might easily slide further. I rolled onto my
hands and knees and began crawling back up the slope, as fast as I could
manage without losing my precarious balance.
Oliver Esterhazy was digging, but not around his friend. He pawed a
broken pine branch half free of the clinging mud, then stood up and yanked it
free. He turned toward Gilbert’s protruding head, and with a determined
expression staggered through the mud and swung the branch down on it.
“You … 
swine
 …” came a sepulchral voice from under the muddy pine
needles. It was labored and hoarse, but plainly propelled by breath. Before I
could rise to my feet, Gilbert’s free arm swung into the air and grappled the
end of the branch.
Completely panicked, Oliver let go and leapt back. I saw one booted foot
sink calf-deep in the loose dirt and then he, too, lost his balance and with a
muffled shriek toppled over backward and hurtled down the slope like an
ungainly toboggan.
I sat back on my heels and breathed for a minute. I’d lost my hat and my
hair had escaped. I shoved it out of my face and started my laborious climb
once more. I had to reach Gilbert and free him—or arm myself (I had a
scalpel and two probes in my emergency pack—to say nothing of a few
poisonous toadstools I’d collected last time I was out) before Oliver got hold
of himself and caught up with me.I glanced over my shoulder; Oliver was about forty feet downslope,
wrapped around a stout poplar that had withstood the landslide. Someone was
standing beside him, looking down at him.
I jerked round to look again. Loyalist or rebel, I didn’t care; either one
would help me.
I waved my arms and shouted, “Hallooo!” and the man looked up. It was
an Indian, and one I didn’t know. I suffered a brief spurt of panic when I
thought that Scotchee Cameron might have failed us after all, but a second
glance told me that this man wasn’t Cherokee. He was medium height and
quite slender, and his hair was gray, roached and tied in a knot at the back of
his neck. He wore a breechclout and leggings, with an embroidered silk vest
—and nothing else above the waist but a collection of silver bracelets. He
waved a hand to me, clinking audibly.
“I say, madam!” he called, in something like an English accent. “Are you
in need of assistance?”
“Yes!” I shouted back, and pointed at Oliver’s body. “Is that man dead?”
The Indian glanced down and toed Oliver in the buttock. Oliver twitched,
groaned, and reached back to swat away the nuisance.
“No,” he said, and put a hand to his belt, where I now saw that he carried a
substantial knife of some sort. “Do you want him to be?”
I got to my feet and edged crabwise down the slope until I was in
conversational range of the stranger—and Oliver, whose eyes were squinched
shut, but who was plainly conscious and wishing he weren’t.
“Having you dead would solve a good many problems,” I told him. “But
I’m told that two wrongs don’t make a right.”
“Really?” said the Indian, smiling. “Who told you that?”
“Never mind,” I said. “At the moment, I need to look at this man and be
sure that he isn’t badly hurt, and if not, then I need to go back up there”—I
jerked a thumb over my shoulder—“and finish digging up the man who’s
buried, so I can take care of him.”
“He’s not dead?” the Indian asked, shading his eyes with his hand as he
surveyed the slope. “He looks dead.”
He did, but I was hoping that appearances might be deceiving. I was about
to say this when a slight rustle in the wet brush betokened another arrival, and
Young Ian stepped out, holding a little boy who was sucking his thumb and
regarding me warily.“Oh, there ye are, Auntie,” said Young Ian, his face lighting at sight of me.
“I thought I heard your voice!”
I felt as though I might just dissolve with relief, and flow downhill myself,
to puddle at the bottom.
“Ian!” I waded out of the mud and seized him in a one-armed hug. “How
are you? Is this Oggy? He’s so big! Where’s Rachel?”
“Ach, all the women are havin’ a pish in the woods,” he said with a shrug.
He nodded at the elderly Indian. “I see ye’ve met the Sachem. This is my
auntie, Okàrakarakh’kwa; the one I told ye about.”
“Ah,” said the Sachem, and bowed, hand on his embroidered waistcoat. “It
is my pleasure, honored witch.”
“Likewise, I’m sure,” I replied politely, twitching my mud-clogged hem in
the ghost of a curtsy. Then I turned back to Ian.
“What do you mean, 
‘all the women’
? And who,” I added, suddenly
catching sight of a larger boy of perhaps seven or eight, hovering shyly in the
shadow of the wood, “is this?”
“This is 
Tsi’niios’noreh’ neh To’tis tahonahsahkehtoteh,
” he said, smiling
as he put his free hand on the boy’s shoulder. “My elder son. We call him
Tòtis.”115
Little Wolf
THE RAIN RESUMED WITH uncommon force, and it was some time
before Gilbert Bembridge was completely excavated, cursorily treated for
shock, diagnosed with a minor concussion, and his wound—a long but
shallow slash over one shoulder blade, where his friend had tried to stab him
—field-dressed. Oliver Esterhazy was treated for shock of various kinds and
several cracked ribs. Luckily Kenny Lindsay and Tom MacLeod appeared at
this point with two canvas-wrapped rifles and a mule, rain pouring from their
hats, and took charge of the two lieutenants with the intent of removing them
to Kenny’s cabin, which was no more than a mile away.
“Dinna fash, Missus,” Kenny said, wiping the back of his hand under his
big red nose. “My wife can see to them until the rain stops. You’d best go
home before Himself has an apoplexy, if he hasna already done it.”
“He hasn’t got enough blood left for a good apoplexy,” I said, and Kenny
laughed, apparently thinking I was being witty.
Ian’s party, reassembled from the woods, had trooped down to the road
where they’d left their wagon, and were huddling—with the unhitched horses
—under the meager protection of a broad limestone shelf and a few pieces of
waxed canvas.
I had reached the point of total saturation long since, my hands were a
mottled blue with cold, and I couldn’t feel my feet. Even so, I felt a surge of
joy at seeing Rachel’s face peering out of the tiny shelter. Her look of anxiety
flowered into happiness and she ran out into the rain to grasp my frozen
hands and tow me into a warm jumble of bodies, which all burst into
questions, exclamations, and intermittent shrieks from what seemed like a
large number of children.
“Here,” said a familiar voice beside me, and Jenny handed me a canteen.
“Drink it all, 
a leannan,
 there’s no much left.” Despite being so wetexternally, I was parched with thirst and gulped the contents, which seemed
to be a dilute spiced wine mixed with honey and water. It was divine and I
handed back the empty canteen, now in sufficient possession of myself as to
look round.
“Who …?” I croaked, waving a hand. 
“All the women,”
 Ian had said—and
that’s what he’d meant, allowing for age. In addition to Rachel and Jenny,
there was a pale, stick-thin woman huddled beside one of the horses, two
round-eyed young girls soaking wet and plastered against her legs, and
another, perhaps two years old, in her arms.
“This will be Silvia Hardman, Auntie,” Ian said, ducking into the shelter
and handing Oggy off to Rachel. “Uncle Jamie asked me to see to her needs
in Philadelphia, and what wi’ one thing and another, I thought she and the
bairns had best come along wi’ us. So … they did.”
I caught an echo behind that casual 
“one thing and another,”
 and so did
Mrs. Hardman, who flinched slightly but then drew herself up bravely and
did her best to smile at me, her hands on her skinny little daughters’
shoulders.
“I met thy husband two years ago, by chance, Friend Fraser. It was most
kind of him to have sent his nephew to inquire as to our circumstances, which
were … difficult. I—I hope our momentary presence here will not discomfit
thee.”
This last was not quite a question, but I managed a smile, though my face
was stiff with cold and fatigue. I could feel a lukewarm trickle of water
running slowly down my spine, finding its way through the layers of sodden
cloth sticking to my skin.
“Oh, no,” I said. “Um. The more the merrier, don’t they say?” I blinked
hard to clear water from my lashes, but it didn’t seem to help. Everything was
gray and blurring round the edges, and the wine was a small red warmth in
my stomach.
“Claire,” said Jenny, grabbing my elbow. “Sit down before ye fall on your
face, aye?”
I DIDN’T FALL on my face, but did end up being transported by wagon with
my head in Rachel’s lap, surrounded by soggy but cheerful children. Lizard,
who so far had not uttered a word, chose to walk with Ian, Silvia, and the
Sachem, while Jenny drove the wagon and kept up a running stream ofcommentary over her shoulder, pointing out things of interest to the little girls
and reassuring them.
“Ye’ll have a wee cabin to live in with your mam,” she assured them.
“And no man will trouble her, ever again. My brother will see to it.”
“What happened?” I said to Rachel. I spoke in a low voice, but one of the
ragged little girls heard me and turned to look at me seriously. She wasn’t
pretty, but both she and the sister close in age had an odd dignity about them
that was at odds with their years.
“Our father was taken by Indians,” she said to me, speaking precisely. “My
mother was left with no way to keep us, save her garden and small gifts from
men who came to call.”
“Some of them were not kind,” her sister added, and they both pursed their
lips and looked out into the dripping woods.
“I see,” I said, and thought I probably did. Jamie had told me, very briefly,
about the Quaker widow who had taken care of him for a day or two when
his back had seized up while he was in her house, having met there with
George Washington—and I did wonder what the hell George Washington
had been doing there, but hadn’t asked, owing to the press of events at the
time.
“Mrs. Murray is right,” I assured them. “Mr. Fraser will find a place for
you.” After all, we would shortly have a number of cabins vacated by Jamie’s
evicted tenants …
Patience and Prudence—those were the oldest girls’ names, and the little
one was Chastity—glanced at each other and nodded.
“We told Mummy that Friend Jamie would not see us starve,” one of them
said, with a simple confidence that moved me.
“It would have been fun to stay with the Indians,” her sister said, a little
wistfully. “But we couldn’t do that, because of Father.”
I made a sympathetic noise, wondering exactly what had happened to their
father. Rachel wiped my face with the edge of her flannel petticoat, which
was damp but not sopping.
“Speaking of Friend Jamie,” she said, smiling down at me, “where is he? I
can’t wait to hear how you came to be in a landslide with two English— Are
they soldiers? I think one said he was a lieutenant. But is Jamie at home,
then?”
“I sincerely hope so,” I said. “There was what he’d call a stramash of sorts
last night, and he was wounded. But it isn’t bad,” I added hastily.“Everything’s all right. For the moment.”
Hearing this, Jenny turned round and gave me a piercing look. I looked as
reassuring as possible, and she snorted slightly and turned back, snapping the
reins to hurry the horses along.
I sat up, cautiously, bracing myself against the side of the wagon. My head
swam briefly, but then things steadied. The sky was still dark gray and
turbulent, but at ground level, the air had stilled, and I heard the cautious
chirps and calls of birds pulling their heads out from under their wings and
looking about to see what of the world was still left.
“I seem to recall someone telling me that Oggy’s finally got a name,” I
said to Rachel, nodding toward Oggy himself, who was curled up with his
head in the lap of either Patience or Prudence. The other girl had a large,
thick-haired puppy in her lap, also soaking wet with its coat in spikes, but
sound asleep. Rachel laughed, and I thought how pretty she was, her face
fresh from the cold air, and her lightness of spirit rising with the road toward
home.
“He has,” she said, and touched the round of his bottom affectionately.
“His name is Hunter James Ohston’ha Okhkwaho Murray. ‘James’ for his
great-uncle, of course,” she added.
“Jamie will love that,” I said, smiling myself. “What does the Mohawk part
of his name mean?”
“Son of the Wolf,” she said, with a glance behind the wagon. “Or Little
Wolf, if you like.”
“
The
 Wolf?” I asked. “Not just any old wolf, I mean?” She shook her head,
glancing at Ian, who was explaining the concept of a blood pudding to Tòtis,
who seemed intrigued.
“You can’t really tell, in Mohawk, but I’m reasonably sure there’s only
one Wolf of importance here,” Rachel said. I thought a slight shadow crossed
her face at that, but if so, it cleared when I asked if she had chosen the name
Hunter for her brother.
“No,” she said, and her smile blossomed again. “Ian’s first wife chose that
name. Being guided of the spirit, no doubt,” she added circumspectly. She
stretched out a hand and scratched the puppy’s head, causing it to wiggle
with ecstasy and scramble into her lap, licking her fingers.
“But I chose 
his
 name,” she said, ignoring the muddy paw prints on her
skirt. “He’s called Skénnen.”
“Which means?”“Peace.”116
In Which New Friends Are Met
BY THE TIME WE reached the dooryard, I had so far recovered myself as to
have devised a plan of action. And a good thing, too, as the door opened and
Bluebell shot out, barking as though an invading army had just arrived. Not
far from the truth, either, I thought, climbing down from the wagon. I paused
to shake as much half-dried mud as I could from my skirts, then shooed
everyone up the steps.
“Jenny, will you take everyone through to the kitchen? Fanny will be here
in a mo— Oh, there you are, sweetheart! We have company, and all of it is
hungry. Will you and Agnes rummage the pantry and the pie safe and see if
you can find at least bread and butter for everyone? And have you put on
anything for supper yet?”
“Yes, ma’am,” Fanny said, casting an interested eye over the serried ranks
bunching up at the front door—and lingering speculatively on Prudence and
Patience—and then the new puppy, which squatted at her feet and made a
puddle.
“Oh, you’re so 
sweet
!” she cried, and forgetting everything else she
squatted down herself to pet Skénnen, with Bluebell lurking behind her,
nosing her elbow with discontented grunts.
“Kitchen,” I repeated to Jenny, who was already marshaling everyone.
“Except you,” I said, catching Young Ian by the arm.
“I’m only goin’ up to see Uncle Jamie,” he protested, gesturing toward the
stairs.
“Oh, good,” I said, and broke into a smile. “That’s what I wanted you to
do. I just want to be there when he sees you. Wait just one second, though—”
The quilt was covering the surgery door, and I didn’t hear voices on the other
side. I lifted the quilt far enough to put my head in and saw the captain,
apparently dozing on the table, and Elspeth asleep in my big chair, her headfallen backward and her long gray hair undone from its pins and reaching
nearly to the floor.
Poor things,
 I thought, but at least they could wait a few moments.
The bedroom door was shut, and I rapped lightly. Before I could open it,
though, a firm male voice from the other side called out, “I’m havin’ a pish,
Frances, and I dinna want help with it! Go up to the springhouse and fetch
down some milk, aye?”
Young Ian turned the knob and opened the door, revealing Jamie, who was
sitting on the side of the bed in his shirt, the bed linens rumpled and shoved
aside. He was in fact 
not
 using the chamber pot, but was pale and sweating,
fists pushed hard into the mattress on either side, apparently having tried to
rise but been unable to gain his feet.
“Lyin’ to wee lassies, is it, Uncle?” Ian said with a grin. “Ye can go to hell
for that sort o’ thing, I hear.”
“And where the bloody hell do you think you’re 
going
?” I demanded of
Jamie. He didn’t answer. I didn’t think he’d even heard me. His face suffused
with delight at sight of Ian and he stood up. Then his eyes rolled up and he
turned dead white and fell with a crash that shook the floor.
JAMIE CAME ROUND again in his bed, surrounded by a number of
women, all frowning at him. There was a sharp pain in his chest, where
Claire was repairing some stitches that had apparently torn loose when he fell
over, but he was too happy to be bothered about either the needle or the
scolding he was plainly about to get.
“Ye’re back, then,” he said, smiling at his sister, and then at Rachel,
standing beside her. “How’s the wee mannie?”
“Bonnie,” she assured him. “Or ought it to be ‘braw,’ if it’s a boy we’re
speaking of?”
“I suppose it could be both,” he said, waggling one hand in equivocation.
“Braw’s more a question of fine character—brave, ken? Which I’m sure the
laddie must be, wi’ such parents—and bonnie means he’s well favored to
look at. And if he still looks like you, lass— Ach, Jesus!” Claire had reached
the end of her stitching and without a word of warning had sloshed a cupful
of her disinfectant solution over the raw wound.
Wordless only because he couldn’t say the words that came to his tongue
in front of Rachel, Frances, and Agnes, he panted through the blinding sting.The women were looking at him with expressions ranging from sympathy to
strong condemnation, but all with faces—even Rachel’s—tinged with the sort
of smugness women were apt to display when they thought they had the
upper hand of a man.
“Where’s Ian?” he said, forestalling the rebuke he saw rising to his wife’s
lips. An odd shimmer of some feeling he couldn’t name ran through the
women. Amusement? He frowned, looking from face to face, and raised his
brows at his sister. She smiled at him, and he saw relief and happiness in her
face, though it was lined with tiredness and her hair was straggling out of her
wilted cap.
“He went outside to talk to a man who came lookin’ for you,” she told him.
“I dinna ken what he—”
He heard Ian’s footsteps running up the stairs, taking them two and three at
a time, and struggled to sit up, causing cries of alarm from the women.
“Let it bide, Sassenach,” he said, taking the cloth out of Claire’s hand. “I’ll
do.”
Ian came in, a letter in his hand, and a bemused look on his face.
“Were ye expecting a visit from Mr. Partland, Uncle?” he asked.
“I was,” Jamie replied guardedly. “Why?”
“I dinna think he’s coming.” Ian handed over the letter, which was written
on decent paper and sealed with someone’s thumb and a glob of candle wax.
Jamie broke the seal, what was left of his blood prickling along his jaw as his
heart sped up.
To Colonel James Fraser of Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina
Dear Sir,
I write to tell you that when I received your Instruction of the 10th
inst., I assembled a Party of some twenty Men and rode toward
Ninety-Six without Delay, to see if the Gentleman you named should
be abroad there and in a Way of causing Mischief.
The Gentleman was known to me by Sight, and when I perceived
him riding down the Powder Mill Road with some Men, I accosted
him and desired to know his Errand. He curst me with some Heat and
desired me to go to Hell before he would tell me Anything that was
not my Business to know. I said any Business involving a Group ofarmed Men a-horse near my Land was mine to know and he had best
tell me the Truth of the Matter at once.
At this, one of his Men, whom I also recognized, drew his Pistol
and fired at one of my Men, with whom he had a long-standing
Disagreement over a Woman. His shot missed its Mark, but several of
the Horses were unsettled by the Noise and began to dance, so it was
hard to come at the Fellows and engage with them. The Gentleman,
attempting to raise his Rifle and fire upon me, had the Misfortune to
be unseated when his own Horse collided with Another, and he was
dragged some little Way, his Horse taking Fright and himself trapped
by his Bootheel having become entangled with his Stirrup.
Seeing this, his Minions mostly fled, and my Boys rounded up three
that were slower than the Rest, as well as the Gentleman, whom we
rescued from his Predicament.
I have sent these Men under Guard to Mr. Cleveland, who acts as
Constable of the District, with a Note informing him of your Interest.
I remain, sir, Your Most Obedient Servant,
John Sevier, Esq.
Jamie took a long, slow breath, folding the letter neatly, and closed his
eyes, silently thanking God. So it was over. For the moment, the Ridge was
safe, Ian and Rachel and Jenny had come back, and while it would seem that
there were a few loose ends to tidy up … He opened his eyes; Ian had just
said something to him.
“What?”
“I said,” Ian repeated patiently, “that there’s someone who wants to pay
her respects, Uncle.” His eye passed critically over Jamie, assessing. “If ye’re
fit to meet her.”
TO JAMIE, SILVIA Hardman looked like a splinter of rock maple: a lovely
subtle grain, but thin, sharp, and hard enough to serve as a needle, could one
poke a hole in her for thread. He didn’t think anyone could, and smiled at the
thought.
The smile seemed to ease her slightly, though she went on looking as
though she expected to be eaten by a bear at any moment. Without herdaughters around her, she seemed terribly alone, and he stretched out a hand
to her in impulse.
“I’m glad to see ye, Friend Silvia,” he said gently. “Will ye not come and
sit by me, and take a little wine?”
She glanced to and fro in indecision, but then nodded abruptly and came
and sat by his bed, though she didn’t meet his eyes until he took her hand in
his.
They sat, he propped up on his pillows and she on her stool, and looked at
each other for some moments.
“Thee does not seem in much better case than thee did when last I saw
thee, Friend,” she said at last. Her voice was hoarse, and she cleared her
throat.
“Ach,” he said comfortably, “I’ll do. It’s no but a few drops of blood
spilled. Are your wee lassies well?”
At last she smiled, though tremulously.
“They are awash in pancakes with butter and honey,” she said. “I expect
they will have burst themselves by now.” She hesitated for a moment, but
then burst out herself, “I cannot thank thee enough, Friend, for sending thy
nephew to me. Has he told thee of—of the straits in which he found us?”
“No,” Jamie said mildly. “Does it matter? Ye took me in without question
and tended me—will ye not let me do the same for you?”
A dull red washed her face and she looked down at her battered shoes. The
side of one had come unstitched and he could see her grimy little toe. She
would have taken back her hand, but he wouldn’t let go.
“Thee means …”
“I mean that I offer ye the succor and refuge of my home, just as ye did for
me. Of course, ye rubbed hellfire into my backside, too, and I dinna think ye
require any such service, thank God. But I hope that ye might find the Ridge
pleasant, and if so, I should be honored if ye would consent to live among
us.”
The red burned more fiercely.
“I could not. I—I should be a scandal to thy tenants.”
He cocked an eyebrow at her.
“Were ye planning to get up in Meeting and tell everyone what ye were
obliged to do to save your bairns from starvin’?”
She gaped at him.“Meeting? There are 
Friends
 here?” She looked as though she wanted to
stand up and run, and he tightened his grasp a little.
“Just Rachel,” he assured her. “But we do have a Meeting House, and
she’s there for Meeting on First Day with anyone who chooses to join her.
She isna going to be shocked, is she?”
The flush faded slightly from her thin cheeks.
“No,” she admitted, and a tiny, rueful smile touched her lips. “She already
knows the worst. So does thy nephew, thy sister, all of Philadelphia Yearly
Meeting, Joseph Brant, and any number of Mohawk Indians.”
“Well, then,” he said, and letting go of her hand, patted it. “Thee has come
home, Friend.”117
Fungus, Beavers, and the Beautiful Stars
BEYOND OUR CORDIAL INTRODUCTION on the landslide, I’d seen
little of the Sachem. Fanny and Agnes were in what we called the children’s
room, Silvia and her girls were occupying Brianna and Roger’s room, and the
third bedchamber on the second floor was a guest room, though more often
used for patients who needed to be kept longer than overnight. I’d offered
him a bed in the third-floor attic, which was now weatherproofed and walled;
we could tack hides or oiled parchment over the unglassed windows. He’d
declined with grace, though, saying that he would remain with the wolves for
now—that, apparently, being his term for the miscellaneous Murrays. I
wasn’t sure whether he was drawn by having Ian to speak Mohawk with—or
by Jenny.
“SHALL I SPEAK to yon man?” Jamie had asked Ian, a week or two into the
Sachem’s visit. Jamie had come with me on a visit to the Crombies, and we’d
stopped to pass the time of day with Ian and Rachel on our way home,
finding the Sachem sitting in the rocking chair on the porch, watching Jenny
churning buttermilk.
“If ye mean ye think I should ask him his intentions,” Ian said, “I did. He
laughed, and told my mother. 
She
 laughed.”
“Och, aye, then,” Jamie muttered, but cut his eyes sideways at the Sachem,
who smiled cheerfully at him. He turned and said something to Jenny, who
nodded and went on churning. He got up and came down the steps toward us.
“Honored witch,” he said, bowing. “Are you at leisure?”
“Yes,” I said, warily. “Why?”
“I have found a strange thing—an 
ohnekèren’ta,
 but one I do not know.
Would you come with me to look at it? I think it has some power, but I can’ttell whether it is for good or for evil.”
“A toadstool,” Ian said, in answer to my questioning glance. “Or maybe a
mushroom; I havena seen it.”
Jamie was radiating caution, but Ian nodded to him.
He gave a one-shouldered shrug, saying in Gaelic, “If he was up to
something, I’d know by now.”
“Exactly so,” said the Sachem, beaming.
Jamie’s brows went up. “Ye have the 
Gàidhlig
?”
“Why, no,” said the Sachem. He glanced over his shoulder at Jenny. “But
perhaps I will learn.”
HE TOOK ME to the Saint’s Pool, the spring with a large white stone at its
head.
“Who is the saint of this place?” he asked, kneeling in the grass to drink
from a cupped hand. “I heard stories of many saints, in London. You know
the one called Lawrence? I saw him in a window. He was roasted alive on a
gridiron, but made jokes as his flesh steamed and split and his blood fried. He
would have been a good Mohawk,” he said with approval.
“I expect he would,” I said, trying to swallow the thought that his very
specific description left little doubt that he’d actually 
seen
 someone being
burned alive. For that matter, so had I …. I swallowed harder.
“As for the saint of this pool … in the Scottish Highlands, a pool like this
would … er … belong to the local saint. Here, I think it’s only that people
sometimes come to pray, because it reminds them of places like this in
Scotland. But I suppose they might pray here to whoever they thought might
help them.”
“And do you think the dead concern themselves with the living?”
I hesitated for a moment, but while I was in total ignorance of the
mechanics, I didn’t doubt the fact.
“Yes, I do. So do most Highlanders. They have a very intimate relationship
with their dead.” Out of curiosity, I asked, “Do you? Think that the dead
concern themselves with the living?”
“Some of them do.” Rising, he beckoned me to follow him. The fungus in
question was growing a short distance away, in a crevice in a dead beech log.
There was a large cluster, the individual mushrooms balanced on long,delicate stems, both crimped caps and stems a noticeable shade of purplish
crimson.
“I’ve seen these before,” I said, gathering up my skirt in order to squat
beside him in front of the log. “People call them bleeding fairy helmets, or
sometimes just blood-spots.” They were, in fact, just about the shade of
venous blood, and if you cut the stems, a very convincing bloodlike liquid
oozed out of them.
“I don’t know if they’re poisonous, but I wouldn’t feed them to anyone.”
Assuming any of the Highlanders on the Ridge would try one. Having grown
up in a food-deprived habitat where oatmeal was not just for breakfast, most
of the older people were deeply suspicious of anything strange-looking or
unfamiliar—particularly things of a vegetable nature.
“No,” the Sachem said thoughtfully. “Their blood is sticky—like real
blood, you know—and I’ve seen that used to help seal small wounds, but I’ve
never seen animals eat them. Not even pigs.”
“So you 
are
 familiar with them?”
“Oh, yes. It’s 
that,
 that I have never seen before.” Crouching beside me, he
extended a long, knobbly finger toward an isolated patch of the mushroom.
The caps had opened fully, like tiny umbrellas, but each one sported a tangled
headdress of thin, slightly iridescent pale spikes, as though the cap had
suddenly grown a crop of tiny needles.
I didn’t touch them, but took out my spectacles for a closer look.
The Sachem smiled at me. “You know the big owls?” he said, sticking his
forefingers up beside his ears. “The ones who call 
Hoo-hoo,
 and then another
answers 
Hoo
? You hear them most in the early days of winter, when they
breed.”
“Hoo,”
 I said gravely, and bent closer. Seeing in better focus, I could just
make out tiny ball-shaped sporangia at the ends of the tiny spikes.
“I don’t know what it’s called, but it looks like a parasite—you know what
a parasite is?”
He nodded gravely.
“I can see little … fruiting things … on the ends here. It might be a
different kind of fungus that feeds off the larger ones.”
“Fungus,” he said, and repeated it happily. “Fungus. What a pleasant
word.”
I smiled.“Well, it is rather better than ‘saprophyte.’ That means a … they’re not
quite plants … but growing things that live on dead things.”
He blinked and looked speculatively from the blood-spots to me.
“Do not all living things live on the dead?”
That made 
me
 blink.
“Well … I suppose they do,” I said slowly, and he nodded, pleased.
“Even if you were to swallow oysters—which are often alive when you eat
them—they die in your stomach very quickly.”
“What a very disagreeable notion,” I said, and he laughed.
“What does it mean to be dead?” he asked.
I’d risen to my feet and crossed my arms, feeling just slightly unsettled.
“Why are you asking 
me
?”
He’d stood up, too, but was quite relaxed. At the same time, something
new had entered his eyes. They were still lively, and undoubtedly friendly—
but there was something else behind them now, and my hands felt suddenly
cold.
“Wolf’s Brother said to Thayendanegea that his uncle’s wife was a
Wata’ènnaras.
 But he also said that you have walked through time and that
you have walked with a Mohawk ghost. Wolf’s Brother does not lie, no more
than his Quaker wife nor his virtuous mother, so I believe that he thinks this
is a true thing that you have done.”
Under the circumstances, I wasn’t sure whether his belief was a good thing
or not, but I managed a small nod.
“It’s true.”
He nodded back, unsurprised but still interested. “Thayendanegea told
Wolf’s Brother to tell this to me, and he did. That’s why I said I would come
with him when he returned here. To hear this from your own lips, and to
know whatever else you can tell me.”
“Rather a tall order,” I said. I felt cold and breathless, and my inner ears
rang with the aftermath of thunder. “Let’s … walk while I tell you. If you
don’t mind.”
He nodded at once and offered me his arm, calico-shirted and ringed with
silver bracelets, with as much style as Lord John or Hal might have done it,
and I laughed, despite my unease.
“A story for a story. I’ll tell you what happened, and you tell me why you
went to London.”“Oh, that’s simple enough.” He handed me carefully over one of the small
gravelly rivulets that ran down this part of the mountain. “I went because
Thayendanegea went. He would need a friend to talk with in a strange place,
someone who could counsel him, judge men for him, guard him in case of
danger, and … perhaps offer another view of the things we saw and heard.”
“And why did 
he
 go?”
“The King invited him,” the Sachem said. “When a King invites you to go
somewhere, it’s not usually a good idea to refuse, unless you already know
you will make war against him. And that is not something we knew.”
“Sound judgment,” I said. It had been, on the King’s part, as well as
Brant’s. The King—or at least the government—wanted to keep the Indians
on their side, as help in suppressing an incipient rebellion. And Brant,
naturally, would like to be on the winning side of that rebellion, and at the
moment of going to press, the British undeniably looked like the best bet.
We had reached level footing, and I led the way onto a trail that wound
gently down toward the small lake where we fished for trout.
“So,” I said, and took a deep breath. “It was a dark and stormy night. Isn’t
that how ghost stories usually begin?”
“Do your people often tell such stories?” He sounded quite startled, and I
looked over my shoulder. The trail had narrowed at this point, and he was
walking behind me.
“Ghost stories? Yes, don’t yours?”
“Yes, but they don’t usually start that way. Tell me what happened next.”
I did. I told him all of it, from my being trapped in a storm at night on the
mountain, to coming face-to-face with Otter-Tooth; what I had said to him,
and he to me. And with some hesitation, I told him about finding Otter-
Tooth’s skull, and with it, the large opal that he had kept as his ticket back—
his token of safe return through the stones.
And then, of course, I had to tell him 
about
 the stones. It isn’t, in the nature
of things, possible for a person possessing epicanthic folds to actually grow
round-eyed, but he made a good attempt.
“And the reason why I knew that the ghost—I didn’t know his name until
much later—why he was from … er … my time, was that his teeth had silver
fillings: metal that’s put in the tooth to strengthen it after you remove a
pocket of decay. That’s not done now; it won’t be done commonly until … I
forget, but more than … say, two or three generations from now. But look
…”I opened my mouth and leaned toward him, hooking my cheek away with a
finger so he could see my molars. He leaned down and peered into my
mouth.
“Your breath is sweet,” he said politely, and straightened up. “How did
you learn his name? Did he come back and tell you?”
“No. He left behind a journal that he had written, while living with the
Mohawks near Snaketown. He wrote down who he was—his English name
was Robert Springer, but he had taken the name ‘Ta’wineonawira.’ Do you
read Latin?”
He laughed, which relieved the tension a little. “Do I look like a priest?”
That surprised me somewhat. “Aren’t you one? Or something like that? A
—a healer?” I had vague memories of Ian telling me about the False Face
Society, healers who would gather to offer prayers and songs over a sick
person.
“Well, no.” He rubbed a knuckle lightly over his upper lip, and I thought
he was—for once—trying 
not
 to laugh at me. But no; he’d only been making
up his mind what to say.
“Do you not know what the word ‘sachem’ means?”
“Rather obviously not,” I said, a little miffed. “What’s it mean, then?”
He straightened up, half consciously. “A sachem is an elder of the people.
A sachem might advise and lead a great number of his people. I did.”
Well, that accounted for his self-confidence.
“Why aren’t you a sachem anymore?”
“I died,” he said simply.
“Oh.” I looked around us. We had come to the trout lake, which was
glimmering with a cold bronze light; the sun was coming down, and the
forest surrounding us was mostly pine and birch trees, dark against the sky.
There was no sign of any human habitation. I took a deep breath of the wind
and the coming dark. I’d taken his arm coming down the hill; his flesh had
been warm and solid; I’d felt the hardness of his bones.
“You’re not a ghost, are you?” I said, and thought, oddly, that I would
have believed either answer.
He looked at me for several moments before answering.
“I don’t know,” he said.
We found a fallen log and sat down. At the far end of the lake, a family of
beavers had built a lodge that dammed the small creek leading out of it. Icould see a beaver on top of the lodge, its stocky form silhouetted against the
light, head raised to the breeze.
“Jamie says they mostly come out at night,” I said, nodding toward it. “But
we see them often in the daytime, too.”
“They feel safe, I suppose. I have not heard many wolves. Other than small
Hunter; he howls very well but is not big enough to hunt beaver yet. And his
parents don’t let him out at night.”
“Haha,” I said politely. “How did you come to die? An accident?”
He grinned at me, showing teeth that were visibly worn but mostly present.
“Few people do it on purpose. A snake bit me.” He pushed back his left
sleeve and showed me the scar on the underside of his arm: a deep, irregular
hollow in his flesh, about two inches long. I took his hand and turned it for a
better look. He was very lean, and well hydrated; the larger blood vessels
were clearly visible, firm under the skin.
“Good Lord, it looks as though it bit you right in the radial artery. What
sort of snake was it?”
“You would call it a rattlesnake.” He didn’t remove my hand, but put his
other hand over it. “I knew at once that it had killed me; there was great pain
in my arm, and an instant later, I felt the poison strike my heart like an arrow.
I grew hot and then so cold that my teeth chattered, though the day was
warm. My eyes went dark, and I curled up like a worm, hoping that it
wouldn’t last too long.”
It had lasted three days and three nights.
“This was not pleasant,” he assured me. “The False Face Society came,
they put poultices upon the wound and danced … I still see their feet,
sometimes, when I dream—moccasins shuffling past my face, one after
another, on and on … and the masks bending over me, a small drum beating;
I can hear that, too, sometimes, and my own heartbeat unsteady, stopping and
starting and the drum still beating …”
He stopped for a moment, and I put my free hand over his. After a
moment, he took a deep breath and looked at me.
“And I died,” he said. “It was in the deep part of the third night. I must
have been asleep when it happened, for I found myself standing by the door
of the hut, looking out into the forest and seeing the stars—stars as I have
never seen them before or since,” he added softly. “It was so peaceful, so
beautiful.”“I know,” I said, just as softly. We sat for a few moments together,
remembering.
The beaver slid down the side of the lodge and swam off, making an arrow
of dark water in the shining lake, and the Sachem sighed and let go of my
hands.
“I walked—I suppose you would call it walking, though I didn’t seem to
have feet—but I went into the woods and walked away from … everything. I
was going somewhere, but I didn’t know where. And then I met my second
wife.” He paused, an expression of warmth and longing lighting his face.
“She told me she was glad to see me, and would see me again, but not
now. I wasn’t meant to come yet; there were things that I needed to do; I had
to go back. I didn’t want to,” he said, glancing at me. “I wanted to go with
her, toward …” He broke off, shrugging.
“But I did go back. I woke up and I was in the medicine hut and my arm
hurt a lot, but I was alive. They told me I had been dead for hours, and they
were shocked. I was … resigned.”
“But you weren’t exactly the same person you were before,” I said.
“No. I told them I was not the Sachem anymore; I could see that my
nephew was able to lead men in battle and I would be his adviser, but that it
was to him that they must look now.”
“And … now you see ghosts?” Jenny had told me what he’d said about 
Ian
the Elder and his leg. 
Raised every hair on my body,
 she’d said, and my own
nape was prickling.
“Now I see ghosts,” he said, quite matter-of-factly.
“All the time?”
“No, and I am thankful that I don’t. But now and then, there they are.
Mostly they have no business with me, nor I with them, and they pass by like
a flash of light. But then again …”
He was looking at me in a thoughtful way that raised a few more hairs.
“Do I … have ghosts?” I said, hoping that it wasn’t like having fleas.
He tilted his head to one side, as though inspecting me.
“You lay your hands on many people, to try to heal them. Some of them
die, of course, and some of those, I think, follow you for a short time. But
they find their way and leave you. You have a small child sometimes near
you, but she is very faint. The only other one I have seen with you more than
once is a man. He wears spectacles.” He made circles of his thumbs and
middle fingers and held them up to his eyes, miming glasses. “And a peculiarhat, with a short brim. I think he must be from your place across the stones,
for I have never seen anything like that.”
I honestly thought I was having a heart attack. There was an immense
pressure in my chest, and I couldn’t breathe. The Sachem touched my arm,
though, and the pressure eased.
“You shouldn’t worry,” he assured me. “He is a man who loved you; he
means you no harm.”
“Oh. Good.” I’d broken out in a cold sweat and groped for a handkerchief.
I was wiping my face and neck with it when the Sachem got to his feet and
offered me a hand.
“What is strange,” he said as I rose, “is that this man often follows your
husband, too.”
WHEN I GOT back to the house, I went straight to Jamie’s study. Jamie
wasn’t in it; he’d gone to check operations at the still, as he did twice weekly.
I didn’t hear anyone in the house, but found myself walking as softly as a cat
burglar, and wondered exactly whom I was sneaking up on. The answer to
that was obvious, and I resumed my normal firm step, letting the echoes fall
where they might.
The book was still behind the ledgers. I turned it over with the distinct
feeling that it might explode, or the photograph leap from the cover and
accost me. Nothing happened, though, and the photograph remained … just a
photograph. It was certainly an image of Frank, much as I remembered him,
but I didn’t feel Frank’s presence. As soon as the thought occurred to me, I
glanced over my shoulder. Nothing there.
Would you know, if there was?
 That thought raised goose bumps on my
forearms, but I shook it off.
“I would,” I said firmly, aloud, and took the book to the window, so the
sun shone on it. Frank was wearing his normal black-rimmed glasses in the
photo—but he wasn’t wearing a hat.
“Well, assuming he’s right,” I said accusingly to the photo, “what the hell
are you doing, following either me 
or
 Jamie around?”
Getting no answer to this, I sat down in Jamie’s chair.
The Sachem had said Frank—always assuming it 
was
 Frank he saw,
though I was becoming sure of this—was “a man who loved you.” 
Loved,
past tense. That gave me a small double pang: one of loss, the other ofreassurance. Presumably there was no question of postmortem jealousy, then?
But if not …
But you don’t even know that Jamie’s
 right 
about this damned book!
I opened the book, read a page without taking in a word of its meaning,
and closed it again. It didn’t bloody matter. Whether by Frank’s intent—
malign or not—or only a figment of Jamie’s imagination, stimulated by the
pressure of current events or the stirrings of a mistaken sense of guilt …
Jamie thought what he thought, and nothing short of Divine Revelation was
likely to change that.
I closed my eyes and sat still. We didn’t yet own a clock, and yet I could
hear the seconds tick past. My body kept its own time, between my heartbeat
and the pulsing of my blood, the ebb and flow of sleep and wakefulness. If
time was eternal, why wasn’t I? Or perhaps we only become eternal when we
stop keeping time.
I’d nearly died three times: when I lost Faith, when I caught a great fever,
and—only a year ago!—when I was shot at Monmouth. It wasn’t that I didn’t
remember, but I remembered only small, vivid flashes of each experience. I
felt very calm, thinking of death. It wasn’t something I was afraid of; I just
didn’t want to go while there were people who needed me.
Jamie had come to the verge of death more frequently—and a lot more
violently—than I had, and I didn’t think he was afraid of it, either.
But you still have people who need
 you, 
dammit!
The thought made me angry—at both Frank and Jamie—and I got up and
shoved the book back behind the ledgers. Even without a clock, I knew it was
nearly suppertime. I had a sort of chowder going, made with potatoes and
onions and a little dried corn, but it wasn’t very good … Bacon! Yes,
definitely bacon.
I was coming out of the smoke shed with several rashers on a plate when a
bit more of what I was determinedly not thinking about bubbled up. Bree had
told me—and Jamie—about the letter Frank had left for her. An extremely
disturbing letter, on multiple levels. But what was echoing in the back of my
mind just now was the last paragraph of that letter:
And … there’s him. Your mother said that Fraser sent her back to
me, knowing that I would protect her—and you. She thought that he
died immediately afterward. He did not. I looked for him, and I foundhim. And, like him, perhaps I send you back, knowing—as he knew of
me—that he will protect you with his life.
For the first time, it occurred to me that even if Jamie was right, and Frank
was
 making an attempt to tell him something—it might be a warning, rather
than a threat.118
The Viscountess
Savannah
WILLIAM DIDN’T GO DIRECTLY to Lord John’s house when he arrived
in Savannah. Instead, he stopped at a barber on Bay Street and had a much-
needed shave and his hair trimmed and properly bound. That was as much as
he could do for the moment, bar digging a halfway-clean shirt out of his
saddlebag and changing into it in the shop. Face raw and stinging with razor
burn and bay rum, and deeply aware of his own residual stink beneath it, he
left his horse at the livery, walked to Oglethorpe Street, and after a moment’s
thought circled his father’s house and walked into the cookhouse out back.
Lord John was out with his brother. Gone to the camp, the startled cook
informed him. And the viscountess? In the parlor, doing needlework.
“Thank you,” he said, and went into the house, pausing briefly to kick his
boots against the step, in order to knock off some of the dry mud.
He made no attempt to quiet his footsteps; they hit the painted floorcloth in
the hallway with the regular thump of a muffled drum. When he reached the
parlor door, she was sitting bolt-upright and wide-eyed, a large piece of half-
embroidered white silk spilling over her lap and a needle threaded with
scarlet floss motionless in her hand.
“William,” she said, and cocked her head to one side. She didn’t smile;
neither did he. He leaned against the jamb and crossed his arms, looking
steadily at her.
“I found him.”
She looked at him for a long moment, then shook her head violently, as
though attacked by gnats.
“Where?” she asked, her voice a little husky, and he saw that her free hand
had closed on the silk, crushing it.“A place called Morristown. It’s in New Jersey.”
“His grave? That was in New Jersey, but you said he wasn’t in it …”
“He’s definitely not in his grave,” he assured her, not trying to keep the
cynical tone out of his voice.
“You mean … he’s … alive, then?” She kept her face under control, but
her cheeks were pink, not white, and he could see the thoughts darting like
minnows at the back of her changeable eyes.
“Oh, yes. But you knew that.” He considered her for a moment, then
added, “He’s a general now. General Raphael Bleeker. Did you know 
that
?”
She took a long, slow breath, holding his eyes with hers.
“No,” she said at last. “But I’m not surprised.” Her lips compressed
briefly. 
“He’s with Washington, then,” she said. “Father Pardloe said the
rebels had gone to winter quarters in New Jersey.”
She’d dropped the silk; it slithered to the ground, unregarded. She stood up
abruptly, fists closed at her sides, and turned her back on him.
“He said it was your idea,” William said mildly. “That he should pretend to
be dead.”
“I couldn’t stop him.” She spoke to the yellow toile de Jouy wallpaper,
through her teeth by the sound of it. “I begged him not to do it. 
Begged
 him.”
She turned around then and glared at him. “But you know what they’re like,
these Greys of yours. Nothing matters to them when they’ve made up their
minds—nothing. And nobody.”
“I wouldn’t say that,” William said. His heart had slowed down a bit after
his first sight of her, but it was speeding up again. “It’s true that you can’t
change their minds—but they do care, sometimes. Ben cared.” He cleared his
throat. “For you.” He had the bruises to prove it.
And still does.
 He didn’t say it out loud, but he saw from her face that he
didn’t need to.
“Not enough,” she said shortly, though there was a quiver in her voice.
“Not 
nearly
 enough. It was only my telling him what it would do to Trevor—
having a traitor for a father—that finally made him agree to disappear quietly,
instead of having a blazing row with his father and stamping off to glory with
his precious rebels. That’s what he would have liked,” she added, with a
twitch of the mouth that might have been either bitterness or reluctant
amusement.
There was a moment’s silence in the room. William could hear footsteps
somewhere upstairs, and muffled yelling that was undoubtedly Trevor.Amaranthus’s eyes flicked upward, but she didn’t move. A moment later, the
footsteps evidently reached the little boy, because the yelling stopped
abruptly. Amaranthus’s shoulders relaxed a little and he noticed for the first
time that she wore dark blue and wore no fichu, so the curve of her full
breasts showed white above the cloth.
She saw him notice and gave him a direct look.
“I 
wanted
 a coward, you know,” she said. “A man who’d stay away from
danger and blood and all those things.”
“And you thought I might be one?” He was curious, rather than offended.
She made a small puffing noise and shook her head.
“At first. Uncle John said you’d resigned your commission, and I could see
that he and Father Pardloe were bothered that you did.”
“I expect they were,” he said, careful to let nothing show in his voice.
“But it didn’t take long to see what you were. What you still are.” Her fists
had gradually relaxed, and one hand absently gathered her skirt into folds.
He wanted to ask just what she thought he 
was,
 but that could wait.
“Ben,” he said firmly. “I have to tell Uncle Hal. But I—I mean, he has to
know that Ben’s alive and where—and what—he is. But perhaps he needn’t
know that … you knew about it.”
He hadn’t thought for a moment of concealing her knowledge from Uncle
Hal until he heard the words coming out of his mouth.
Her face changed like a drop of quicksilver, and she turned round again
and stood stiff as a tailor’s dummy. He thought he could see her heart
beating, the tight blue bodice quivering ever so slightly across her back.
He realized suddenly that now 
he
 was standing there with his hands fisted,
and made himself relax. A drop of sweat ran down the back of his neck—
there was a fire and the room was warm. The ghost of bay rum lingered
among the scents of burning wood and candle wax.
She made a tiny sound, perhaps a muffled sob, and crossed her arms,
hugging herself convulsively.
He took a step toward her, uncertain, and stopped. What might Uncle Hal
do, if he learned of her duplicity? He supposed that his uncle might be able to
take Trevor away from her and send her away …
“They’ll hang him,” she whispered, so softly that for a moment he heard
only the anguish in it, and that anguish made him go to her and put his hands
on her shoulders. A deep shiver went over her as though she were dissolving
inside, and his arms went round her.“They won’t,” he whispered into her hair, but she shook her head and the
shiver didn’t stop.
“Yes, they will. I’ve heard them talk—the officers, the politicals, the—the
nitwits
 at parties—gloating at the th-thought of Washington and his generals
hanging on a g-gibbet.” She took a deep, tearing breath. “Like rotten fruit.
That’s what they always say—like rotten fruit.”
His stomach tightened and so did his arms.
“So you still love him,” he said quietly, after what seemed a long while.
Her head fitted neatly under his chin, and he could feel the heat of it and
smell her hair; she was wearing his father’s Italian cologne. He closed his
eyes and took one breath at a time, imagining cedar groves and olive orchards
and sun on ancient stone.
And dripping water in a garden and a toad’s gleaming black eyes …
And a moment later, the door opened.
“Oh, William,” Lord John said mildly. “You’re back, then.”
WILLIAM STOOD STILL a moment longer, his arms round Amaranthus.
He wasn’t guilty in this—well, not quite—and he declined to act as though he
was. He stepped back and gave her arms a comforting squeeze before turning
round to face his father.
Lord John was standing there in full day uniform, his hat in one hand. He
looked calm and pleasant, but his eyes were clearly drawing conclusions, and
probably the wrong ones.
“I found Ben,” William said, and his father’s eyes sharpened at once.
“He’s alive, and he’s joined the Americans. Under an assumed name,” he
added.
“Thank God for small mercies,” Lord John said, half under his breath, then
tossed his hat onto one of the gilt chairs and went to Amaranthus, who was
still facing the wall, her head bowed. Her shoulders were shaking.
“You should sit down, my dear.” Lord John took her firmly by one forearm
and turned her round. “Go and tell cook we want some tea, please, William—
and something to eat. You’ll feel better with something in your stomach,” he
told Amaranthus, guiding her toward the settee. She’d gone the 
color of egg
custard and had her lashes lowered—to hide her telltale eyes, William
thought cynically. She wasn’t crying; there were no tears on her cheeks. He’d
never seen her cry, and wondered briefly if she could.“Where’s Uncle Hal?” he asked, pausing on the threshold. “Shall I go and
fetch him?”
Amaranthus gasped as though he’d punched her in the stomach, and
looked up, wide-eyed. His father reacted in much the same way, though in a
more stoic and soldierly fashion.
“God,” William said softly. He stood quite still for a moment, thinking,
then shook himself back into order.
“He’s on his way to Charles Town,” Lord John said, and blew out a long
breath. “Going to have a look at the fortifications. He’ll be back in a week or
two.”
William and Lord John exchanged a brief look, glanced together at
Amaranthus, then back at each other.
“I—don’t suppose it’s news that will spoil with keeping,” William said
awkwardly. “I’ll … just go and tell Cook about the tea.”
“Wait.” Amaranthus’s voice stopped him at the door, and he turned. She
was still pale and curdled, and her hands were knotted just under her breasts,
as though to keep her heart from escaping. She had regained her self-
possession, though, and her voice trembled only a little as she focused her
gaze on Lord John.
“I have to tell you something, Uncle John.”
“No,” William said quickly. “You don’t need to say anything right now,
cousin. Just—just rest a bit. You’ve had a shock. So have we all.”
“No,” she said, and shook her head slightly, dislodging a few blond
strands. “I do.” She made an effort to smile at William, though the effect was
rather ghastly. His own heart felt like a stone in his chest, but he did his best
to smile back.
Lord John rubbed a hand down over his face, then went to the sideboard,
where he took down a bottle and shook it experimentally. It sloshed
reassuringly.
“Sit down, Willie,” he said. “Tea can wait. Brandy can’t.”
WILLIAM WONDERED VAGUELY just how much brandy his father and
uncle got through in a year. Beyond its social functions, brandy was the usual
first resort of either man, faced with any crisis of either a physical, political,
or emotional nature. And given their mutual profession, such crises were
bound to occur regularly. William’s own first memory of having been givenbrandy dated from the age of five or so, when he had climbed up the stable
ladder in order to get on the back of Lord John’s horse in its stall—something
he was firmly forbidden to do—and had been promptly tossed off by the
startled horse, smacking into the wall at the back of the stall and sinking,
dazed, into the hay between the horse’s back hooves.
The horse had trampled about, trying—he later realized—to avoid stepping
on him, but he still remembered the huge black hooves coming down so near
his head that he could see the nails in the shoes, and one of them had 
scraped
his cheek. Once he’d got enough breath to scream with, there’d been a great
fuss, his father and Mac the groom rushing down the stable aisle in a clatter
of boots and calling out.
Mac had crawled into the stall, speaking calmly to the horse in his own
strange tongue, and pulled William out by the feet. Whereupon Lord John
had quickly checked him for blood and broken bones, and finding none,
smacked him a good one on the seat of his breeches, then pulled out a small
flask and made him take a gulp of brandy for the shock. The brandy itself
was nearly as big a shock, but after he’d got done wheeking and coughing, he
had felt better.
He was actually feeling slightly better now, finishing his second glass.
Papa saw that his glass was nearly empty and, without asking, picked up the
bottle and refilled it, then did the same for himself.
Amaranthus had barely sipped hers and was sitting with both hands
wrapped about the small goblet. She was still pale, but she’d stopped shaking,
William saw, and seemed to have regained some of her usual self-possession.
Papa was also watching her, William saw, and while a small tingle of
apprehension went down his spine, he realized that his sense of restored calm
had as much to do with Lord John’s presence as with his brandy. Whatever
was about to happen, Papa would help deal with it, and that was a great relief.
Amaranthus seemed to think so, too, for she put down her goblet with a
small 
clink
 and, straightening her back, looked Lord John in the eye.
“It’s true,” she said. “I told William that I knew about Ben—I mean, I told
him just now; he didn’t know before. That really is what happened to Ben.”
She took a visible gulp of air, but finding no further words to expel with it,
breathed audibly through her nose and took another minuscule sip of brandy.
“I see,” Lord John said slowly. He rolled his own cup to and fro between
his palms, thinking. “And I suppose that you were afraid to tell us—to tell
Hal, rather—because you thought he mightn’t believe you?”Amaranthus shook her head.
“No,” she said. “I was afraid to tell him for fear he 
would
 believe me.” The
dark indigo of her gown had turned her eyes to a pure, pale blue. 
The picture
of sincerity,
 William thought. Still, that didn’t mean she was lying. Not
necessarily.
“Ben had told me a lot about the family,” she said. “After we met. About
his mother, and his … his brothers, and you. And about the duke.” She
swallowed. “When Ben made up his mind—to—to do what he did, he sent
for me. I came to meet him in Philadelphia; Adam was with Sir Henry there,
and Ben meant to tell him—Adam, I mean, not Sir Henry—as well.”
“Did he, indeed.” It wasn’t a question. Lord John’s gaze was fixed on
Amaranthus’s face. It was a perfectly pleasant expression, but William
recognized it as his father’s chess-playing face, rapidly envisioning
possibilities and just as rapidly discarding them.
“Ben and Adam … fought.” She looked down and William saw her hands
clench briefly, as though she would as soon have joined in that fight. 
Likely
she would,
 he thought, aware of a mild amusement, in spite of everything.
“With their fists, I mean. I wasn’t there,” she added, raising her head and
looking apologetic, “or I would have stopped them. But when Ben came to
me afterward, he looked as though he’d gone a few rounds with a
professional boxer.” The corner of her mouth twitched.
“You’ve seen a professional boxing match?” Lord John asked, diverted.
She looked surprised, but nodded.
“Yes. Once. A boxing barn in Connecticut.”
“Well, I hadn’t thought you to be squeamish,” Papa said, breaking into a
smile.
“No,” she said, with a small, rueful smile of her own. “Benjamin said I was
tough as shoe leather—though he didn’t mean it as a compliment.” She
noticed the half-full glass at this point, picked it up, and drank deeply.
“Anyway,” she said hoarsely, putting the glass down, “he’d told me about
his father, and after the fight with Adam, he said a lot of things about his
father, and how it would serve the old man right when Washington wiped his
eye in battle, and how wild he’d be—the duke, I mean—especially when he
realized that his own bloody heir had … I’m sorry,” she added apologetically.
“I’m quoting Ben, you see.”
“So I assumed,” Lord John said. “But when you said you were afraid that
Hal 
would
 believe you if you told him about Ben …?”“What do you think he’d do?” she asked simply. “Or rather, what do you
think he 
will
 do, if I—if I go ahead and tell him?” She’d started looking pale
again, and William leaned forward to snag the bottle and top up her glass.
Without asking, he refilled his father’s glass, as well, and then poured the
dregs of the bottle into his.
Lord John sighed deeply, picked up his fresh glass, and drained it.
“To be honest, I don’t quite know what he’d 
do.
 But I do know how he’d
feel.”
There was a brief silence. William broke it, feeling that someone had to
say something.
“You mean you thought that if you’d told him the truth about Ben, he
might become so distressed—well, insanely angry—that he might just toss
you and Trevor out on your … um … ears. Tell you to go to the devil with
Ben, I mean. I suppose he might disown Ben, for that matter; he has other
sons.”
Amaranthus nodded, her lips pressed tight.
“Whereas,” William went on, not without sympathy, “if you were Ben’s
widow, he’d be more likely to receive you with open arms.”
“And an open purse,” Lord John murmured, looking into the depths of his
brandy.
Amaranthus turned her head sharply toward him, eyes gone suddenly dark.
“Have you gone hungry a day in your life, 
my lord
?” she snapped.
“Because I have, and I would happily become a whore to keep that from
happening to my son.”
She rose, turned on her heel, and hurled her glass very accurately into the
hearth. Then she stamped out, leaving blue flames behind her.119
Encaustic
Savannah
DONE. BRIANNA STOOD IN the quiet light of a late afternoon, slowly
cleaning her brushes and taking leave of her work. It was an odd process,
letting go of something that had lived in her for months, gradually pulling
free of the growing tentacles that had gripped her brain, her heart, her fingers.
People—people who didn’t usually do such things—likened it to
childbirth. Writing a book, painting a picture, building a house—or a
cathedral, she supposed, smiling a little. There were for sure metaphorical
parallels, especially the mingled sense of relief and exultation at the
conclusion. But to her, having painted pictures, built things, 
and
 given birth,
the difference was pretty noticeable. When you’d finished a work of art or
substance … it 
was
 finished, while children never were.
“Right 
there,
” she said, with a deep sense of satisfaction, pointing the
handle of a damp brush at the four portraits lined up against the wall before
her. “You’re all right there. You’re done. You’re not going anywhere.” She
heard the echo of her father’s voice, and laughed.
Meanwhile, her more mobile creations were yelling in the back garden and
would shortly be clattering in with demands to be fed, cleaned, re-dressed,
soothed, listened to, fed again, read books, undressed, and finally crammed
into beds, where she could only hope they would stay for a good long time.
Thought of Roger, though, lifted her heart. He’d come back from the battle
grimy and exhausted—and changed. It wasn’t a drastic change. More the
solidifying of a change he’d begun a long time ago. He was quiet, but he’d
told her why he’d felt he had to stay, and what had happened, and she could
tell that while he’d been shocked (
who wouldn’t be?
 she thought), it was ashock that had left him more visibly determined. And with an odd, quiet sort
of light about him, that sometimes she imagined she could almost see.
“Encaustic,” she said aloud, and stood still, squinting at the portraits but
not seeing them. Her fingers had twitched the brush she was cleaning into
position, wanting to paint.
“Not 
now,
” she said to them, and put the brush into her box. She could feel
the painting she wanted to do of Roger. An encaustic painting; one done with
pigments mixed into hot beeswax. It gave you a vivid image, but one with a
peculiar sense of softness and depth. She’d never done it herself, but she was
seized by the conviction that this would be the right medium in which to
catch Roger’s light.
Any further thoughts were interrupted by the distant sound of the front
door, a murmur of male voices, and then the clumping of Henrike’s wooden-
heeled shoes on the pineapple floorcloth and the louder clump of heavy
boots, following.
“Ist deine Bruder,”
 Henrike announced, throwing open the door. “
Und
 his
Indian.”
“THE INDIAN” BOWED to her and came up grinning, though she was
sufficiently familiar with his face by now to recognize bravado covering
anxiety. She smiled back and impulsively took his hand, squeezing slightly in
reassurance—about the situation, if not the painting.
He blinked in shock, then fumblingly raised her hand, evidently thinking
she meant him to kiss it. He couldn’t quite bring himself to do that, though,
and merely breathed on her knuckles in confusion. Brianna glanced up and
met her brother’s eye. He was keeping a British officer’s straight face, but let
a trace of humor show in his eyes.
“Thank you, Mr. Cinnamon,” she said, gently detaching her hand. She
spread her skirts and curtsied to him, which made him blush like a very large
plum and made William look hastily away.
William could wait, though; she had a sitter who had come to see his
finished portrait.
“Come see,” she said simply, and beckoned Cinnamon—he wouldn’t let
her call him by his first name, nor would he call her Brianna, evidently
thinking that was improper. William must have been giving him etiquette
lessons—or maybe that was Lord John.She’d hung a thin muslin cloth over the portrait to keep off gnats and
mosquitoes, which had a fatal attraction for linseed oil and drying paint, and
now stepped to one side and pulled it deftly away.
“Oh,” he said. His face was completely blank. Her heart had sped up when
the young men had come in, and more when the moment of revelation
approached; she wasn’t as keyed up as John Cinnamon was but undeniably
felt an echo of his nervous excitement.
He stood staring at the portrait, mouth slightly open and eyes wide. A little
worried, she glanced at William, whose gaze was also fixed on the portrait
but wearing an expression of surprised pleasure. She took a breath and
relaxed, smiling.
“You did it,” William said, turning to her. “You really did.” He laughed, a
soft rumble of delight as he turned back to the painting. “That is amazing!”
“It—” Cinnamon started, then stopped, still staring at the portrait of
himself. He shook his head slightly and turned to William. “Do I—really
look like that?”
“You do,” William assured him. “Though not as clean. Don’t you ever
look at yourself when you’re shaving?”
“
Oui,
 but …” The blankness was fading into fascination, and he drew
cautiously nearer to the portrait. 
“Mon Dieu,”
 he whispered.
She’d painted him in his gray suit—he owned only one—with a snowy-
white shirt and a neckcloth with a lacy fall over the manly chest. William had
contributed a small gold stickpin in the shape of a flower whose heart was a
faceted pink topaz, surrounded by green-foil petals.
She’d persuaded him not to wear a wig and to abandon the bear-grease
pomade with which he sometimes attempted to plaster down his curls, and
had painted him with his distinctive red-brown hair left loose to riot over the
lovely broad curve of his skull and the faint reflection of it in the skin of jaw
and cheekbones. He’d done his best to keep a stoic, reserved expression on
his face, but she’d spent enough time talking to him while she sketched that
she’d been able to catch the light that danced in his eyes when he was
amused. And it danced in his portrait, in a tiny fleck of white touched with
lemon.
“That …” Cinnamon shook his head and blinked hard; she could see the
tears he was keeping back and felt a wrench of sympathetic feeling for him,
though her joy at his response overwhelmed almost everything else.His own feeling overwhelmed him to such an extent that he turned
suddenly to her and seized her in a crushing embrace.
“Thank you!” he whispered into her hair. “Oh, thank you!”
HENRIKE, SUMMONED ANEW, fetched a bottle of wine and three glasses,
and they drank the health of John Cinnamon and his portrait.
“Can you drink the health of a portrait?” Brianna asked, doing it
regardless.
“Healthiest portrait I’ve ever seen,” William said, closing one eye and
squinting at the painting through his glass of red wine. He turned and raised
the glass to Brianna. “We can drink to the artist, though, if you’d rather?”
“Huzzah!” Cinnamon said, raised his glass to Brianna, and drank it off at a
gulp. His eyes were bright, his hair standing on end, and he couldn’t stop
beaming, stealing looks at his portrait every few seconds as though to ensure
that it hadn’t gone away or suddenly started looking like someone else.
“It should dry for a few more days,” she said, smiling and lifting her own
glass in salute. “Do you still mean to send it to—to London?” To his father,
she meant. “I’ll pack it for you, if you like. So it won’t be damaged on the
ship.”
John Cinnamon stared at her for a moment, looked at the portrait for a long
minute, then turned back to her and nodded.
“I do,” he said softly.
“Papa would arrange for it to go home with a diplomatic friend, I’m sure,”
William said. “Would you like me to ask him?”
Cinnamon paused for a moment, considering, but then shook his head. The
glow hadn’t left his face, but it had retreated a little way.
“I’ll ask him,” he said, and stood up abruptly. “I’ll go now. I can’t sit still,”
he explained apologetically to Brianna. “I’m 
so
 happy!” The glow returned,
lighting his face like a flare, and he bowed hastily to her and took his leave,
clapping William on the back as he went with a friendly blow that nearly
knocked him over.
She’d expected William to take his own leave, and he did take up his hat,
but then he stood for a moment, kneading it absently.
“What are the other portraits?” he said abruptly, and nodded at the three
portraits still veiled in muslin. “If you don’t mind me seeing them, I mean,”
he said, apologetic.“Of course not. I’d love to have your opinion, since you know what all the
subjects really look like.” She lifted the cloth from the largest piece—the
portrait of Angelina Brumby—but kept her eyes on her brother’s face, to see
his initial reaction.
He looked briefly at first, as though not really caring, but then blinked,
focused, walked closer—and broke into a wide grin.
“Got her, didn’t I?” Brianna said, laughing. That was the expression on the
face of every man who met Angelina in the flesh.
“You did,” William said, still smiling. “She’s … how did you make her
look like she’s … shiny? Sparkly, I think,” he corrected. “Yes, that’s it—she
sparkles.”
“
Thank
 you!” she said, and would have hugged him if they had known
each other just a little longer than they had. “You don’t really want to know
the techniques, but it’s basically color. Tiny dabs of white, with an even tinier
bit of reflected color from the surface behind the sparkle.”
“I’ll take your word for it,” William said, still smiling. He turned back to
the row of portraits. “You said I know all the subjects—is one of those the
American general? The cavalryman?”
She nodded, and without words, turned back the veil covering Casimir
Pulaski.
William’s face was instantly sober, but he moved toward this painting, too,
and stood before it for a long time, not speaking. Brianna was still watching
his face and could see on it the memory of the long hours he and Cinnamon
had shared with her, standing behind her, protecting her through the dark and
the sorrow of that night.
She had struggled with this portrait. Her memories of the dark tent and the
endless procession of somber men, many of them wearing the blood and
powder stains of the lost battle, had hung about her while she worked,
pervasive as the smell of gangrene and unwashed bodies, the occasional gust
of wind off the marshes the only relief.
“I couldn’t find my way in at first,” she said quietly, coming to stand
beside him. “There was too much—” She waved a hand vaguely, but he’d
been there, too; he knew just what too much was. He nodded, and without
looking at her, took her hand.
“But you found it, finally.” He didn’t say it as a question, but his hand
tightened on hers, warm and big. “What was 
‘it,’
 though?”
She laughed, even as her eyes were full of tears.“Lieutenant Hanson.” She swallowed, but knew her voice would shake.
She spoke anyway. “When he—when he stopped. Afterward, when the rain
started and we were all coming away from the tent? He said—I can’t say it, it
was Polish …”
“Pozegnanie,”
 William said quietly. “Farewell.”
She nodded, and took a big breath.
“That. It was the only thing—just a glimpse—of who he 
was.
” She
blinked, 
then knuckled away the tears that had oozed out. She cleared her
throat and looked at the painting.
“When I had that,” she said, able to breathe again, “it—he—wasn’t just a
dead body. Or a hero—I could have done 
that
—painted him on his horse,
charging or whatever—and maybe the army would rather have had one like
that, probably they 
would,
 but …”
“The army has much more feeling than you’d think,” he said, with a half
smile. “It’s not usually a delicate sort of feeling, but it 
is
 feeling. And we
understand death. This is perfect.”
She squeezed his hand and let it go, feeling the tightness in her chest let go
as well. She nodded at the final painting, still veiled.
“You’ve already seen that one, though it wasn’t finished then. Do you
want to see it?”
“Jane,” he said, and she turned to look at him, hearing things in his voice.
But his jaw tightened and he shook his head.
“No,” he said. “Not just now.” He took a deep breath and blew it out with a
whoosh.
“I daresay you’ve spent some time at Papa’s house whilst you’ve been in
the city?”
“Yes,” she said, diverted. “Why?”
“Then you’ve met Amaranthus.”
“I have.”
“I want to talk to you about her.”120
In Which William Spills His Guts, Mostly
IN THE END, HE told her almost everything. No mention of cold gardens,
warm thighs, and black-eyed toads. But everything else: Dottie and the baby,
Denzell, General Raphael Fucking Bastard Bleeker, and Amaranthus’s
account of her husband.
His sister said very little but sat hunched forward on her tall painter’s stool,
feet tucked back behind the rungs, watching him. She had a face that matched
her height: boldly handsome, and with eyes that would brook no insult but
that still seemed warm.
“I told Papa—Lord John—everything I’d found out.” His father had
listened, pale and intent, sifting the account as William told it. Very clearly
envisioning the necessity for relaying it to his brother, his knuckles growing
whiter as the brutal tale went on.
“That can’t have been easy,” his sister said softly. He shook his head.
“No. But easier than it should have been—for me. I was a coward. I
couldn’t … I 
couldn’t
 make myself tell Uncle Hal. So I told Papa instead and
… left the dirty work to him.”
She considered that for a moment, head on one side. She wore no cap and
her hair was unpinned; it fell over her shoulder in a shimmering wave,
disregarded. Then she shook her head and thrust the wave back behind her
ear, leaving a streak of overlooked white paint from her fingers.
“You’re not a coward,” she said. “Lord John knows his brother better than
anybody else in the world—probably including His Grace’s wife,” she added,
frowning a little. “There isn’t a 
good
 way to tell a man something like this, I
don’t suppose …”
“There isn’t.”
“But I’ve heard your, um, father talk about his brother. He’ll know what
your uncle feels, and he’s tough—Lord John, I mean, though probably Hal is,too. He can stand up to it, if Hal goes nuts—er, gets really upset,” she
amended, seeing the look on William’s face. “You could tell him, all right—
and you’ll probably have to, eventually,” she added with sympathy. “He’ll
want to hear the gory details from you. But you wouldn’t be able to give him
what he maybe needs after hearing it—whether that’s a stiff drink—”
“I’m sure that will be the 
second
 thing he needs,” William muttered. “The
first being someone to hit.”
Brianna’s mouth twitched at that, and for a shocked moment, he thought
she was about to laugh, but she shook her head instead and the paint-streaked
lock of hair fell down along her cheek.
“So,” she said, straightening up with a sigh, “Amaranthus is still in love
with her husband, and he’s still in love with her. And you …?”
“Did I say I had any feelings for her?” he demanded irritably.
“No, you didn’t.” 
You didn’t need to, you poor fool,
 her face said.
“I don’t suppose it matters,” she said mildly. “Now that you know she’s
not a widow. I mean … you wouldn’t consider …” She left that thought
where it was, thank God, and he ignored it. She cleared her throat.
“What 
about
 Amaranthus, though?” she asked. “What will she do now, do
you think?”
William could think of a lot of things she 
might
 do, but he’d already
learned that his own imagination was not equal to that particular lady’s.
You might … just possibly enjoy it.
“I don’t know,” he said gruffly. “Probably nothing. Uncle Hal won’t throw
her into the street, I don’t suppose. 
She
 didn’t betray him, the King, the
country, the army, and everything else—and she 
is
 Trevor’s mother, and
Trevor is Uncle Hal’s heir.” He shrugged. “What else could she do, after all?”
He heard the echo of his uncle’s voice above the sounds of marram grass
and water: 
“If you consider treason and the betrayal of your King, your
country, and your family a suitable means of solving your personal
difficulties, William, then perhaps John hasn’t taught you as well as I
supposed.”
“Divorce?” his sister suggested. “That seems … cleaner. And she could
marry again.”
“Mmphm.” William was envisioning just what might have happened if he
had
 acceded to Amaranthus’s suggestion—and then discovered Benjamin’s
continued existence, possibly after having fathered …
“No,” he said abruptly, and was startled when she laughed.“You think this situation is 
funny
?” he said, suddenly furious.
She shook her head and waved a hand in apology.
“No. No, I’m sorry. It wasn’t the situation—it was the noise you made.”
He stared at her, affronted.
“What do you mean, noise?”
“Mmphm.”
“What?”
“That noise you made in your throat—mmphm. You probably don’t want
to hear this,” she added, with grossly belated tact, “but Da makes that sort of
noise all the time, and you sounded … just like him.”
He breathed through his teeth, biting back a number of remarks, none of
them gentlemanly. Evidently his face spoke for him, though, for her face
changed, losing its look of amusement, and she slid off her stool, came to
him, and embraced him.
He wanted to push her away, but didn’t. She was tall enough that her chin
rested on his shoulder, and he felt the cool touch of her paint-streaked hair
against his heated cheek. She was muscular, solid as a tree trunk, and his
arms went round her of their own volition. There were people in the house;
he could hear voices at a distance, footsteps, thumps, and clanking—tea
being served? he thought vaguely. It didn’t matter.
“I 
am
 sorry,” she said softly. “For everything.”
“I know,” he said, just as softly. “Thank you.”
He let go of her and they parted gently.
“Divorce isn’t a simple matter,” he said, clearing his throat. “Especially
when one of the parties is a viscount and the heir to a dukedom. The House of
Lords would have to vote and give consent on the matter—after hearing a full
account of everything—and I do mean 
everything.
 All of which would be
meat for the newspapers and broadsheets, to say nothing of gossip in
coffeehouses, taverns, and all the 
salons
 in London.
“Though I suppose,” he went on, reaching for his hat, “that a divorce might
well be granted. Having your husband convicted of treason seems like
sufficient grounds. The results might not be worth it, though.” He punched
the crown of his hat back into shape and put it on.
“Thank you,” he said again, and bowed.
“You’re welcome,” she said. “Anytime.” She smiled at him, but it was a
tremulous smile, and he felt regret at having worried her with his troubles. Ashe turned to go he caught sight once again of the row of portraits, one still
shrouded.
She saw him glance at it and made a small, interrupted gesture.
“What is it?” he asked.
“It’s nothing. I don’t want to keep you—”
“I have very few demands upon my time at the moment,” he said, smiling.
“What is it?”
She looked dubious, but then smiled, too.
“The painting of Fanny’s sister. I wondered whether you knew if the
original drawing was made during the day or at night. I painted it as though it
was daylight, but it occurred to me that …”
“That given her occupation and the fact that a client of the establishment
drew her, it might well have been the evening,” he finished. “You’re right, it
almost certainly was.” He nodded at Jane, invisible behind her veil of muslin.
“It would have been at night. There was a fire in the parlor—well, the one
time I was in it, at least. And the walls were red, so there was a bit of that in
the air. But I only saw her by candlelight. A candle with a brass reflector, a
little behind and above her, so the light glowed on the top of her head and ran
down the side of her face.”
Her brows—thick for a woman—rose.
“You recall her very well,” she said, with no tone of judgment. “Have you
ever drawn, or painted, yourself?”
“No,” he said, startled. “I mean—I had a drawing master when I was a
child. Why?”
She smiled a little, as though harboring a secret.
“Our grandmother was a painter. I was thinking you might have …
inherited something from her. Like I did.”
The thought made his hands curl, with a slight shock that went through the
muscles of his forearms. 
Our grandmother …
“Jesus,” he said.
“She looked a lot like me,” Brianna said casually, and reached to open the
door for him. “And you. That’s where we got the nose.”121
The Quality of Mercy
Fraser’s Ridge
I WAS IN THE surgery, sorting seeds and enjoying the satisfaction of
successful hoarding, when I heard a tentative knock at the front door. The
door itself was open, to let fresh air flow through the house, and normally
whoever was at the door would have called out. I heard faint whisperings and
the shuffle of feet outside, but no one called, and I poked my head out to see
who the visitors might be.
To my surprise, there was quite a crowd on the porch; a number of women
and children, who all stirred with alarm at seeing me. One woman seemed to
be the leader; she plucked up her courage and stepped forward and I saw that
it was Mrs. MacIlhenny. Mother Harriet, she was called by everyone: white-
haired, widowed three times, and mother to thirteen children and untold
quantities of grandchildren.
“By your leave, 
a bhana-mhaighister,
” she said, her voice hesitant, “might
we speak with Himself?”
“Er …” I said, disconcerted. “I— Yes of course. I’ll just … tell him you’re
here. Ah … won’t you … come in?”
I sounded nearly as hesitant as she did, and for the same reason. There
were five women besides Mother Harriet: Doris Hallam, Molly Adair, Fiona
Leslie, Annie MacFarland, and Gracie MacNeil. All of them were wives or
mothers of tenants Jamie had excommunicated, and it was reasonably clear
why they’d come. They’d brought nearly twenty children with them, from
ten-year-old girls with their hair neatly braided to skirt-clinging toddlers and
babes in arms, all scrubbed within an inch of their lives; the smell of lye soap
rose off them in an almost-visible cloud.Jamie was sitting at his desk with a quill in his hand when I came in,
closing the door of the study behind me. He glanced toward the door; the
whispering and shushing was clearly audible.
“Is that who I think it is?”
“Yes,” I said. “Five of them. With their children. They want to speak with
you.”
He said something under his breath in Gaelic, rubbed his hands hard over
his face, and sat up straight in his chair, squaring his shoulders.
“Aye. Let them come in, then.”
Harriet MacIlhenny came in with her head up, jaw clenched, and chin
trembling. She stopped abruptly before Jamie’s table and collapsed onto her
knees with a thud, followed by the other wives and half the children, spilling
out into the hallway, all looking bewildered but obedient.
“We have come to beg thy mercy, Laird,” she said, bowing so low that she
spoke to the floor. “Not for ourselves, but for our bairns.”
“Did your husbands put ye up to this?” Jamie demanded. “Get yourselves
up, for God’s sake.”
“No, Laird,” Harriet said. She rose, slowly, but her hands were pressed so
hard together that the knuckles and nails showed white. “Our husbands
forbade us to come to ye; said they would beat us should we stir a foot out of
doors. The gomerels would sacrifice us and the bairns for the sake of their
pride—but … we came anyway.”
Jamie made a Scottish noise of disgust.
“Your husbands are fools and cowards, and they’ll pay the price of their
foolishness. They kent what they were risking when they chose to cast their
lots wi’ Cunningham.”
“Does a gambler ever think he’ll lose, Laird?”
Jamie had opened his mouth to say something further, but shut it at this
shrewd stab. Harriet MacIlhenny had lived on the Ridge almost from its
founding and knew very well who was the biggest gambler in this neck of the
woods.
“Mmphm,” he said, eyeing her. “Aye. Well. Be that as it may, I’ve said
what I’ve said and I willna go back. I put these men out for good cause, and
that cause hasna vanished, nor is it likely to.”
“No,” Harriet agreed, real regret in her voice. She bowed her capped 
head.
“But my six grown sons are loyal to ye, Laird, and to the cause of liberty—
and my four brothers as well. Many of these good women can say thesame”—she gestured to the serried ranks still kneeling on the floor behind
her—“and do.” A murmur of agreement came from the crowd behind her,
and one wee girl poked her head out from behind Harriet’s apron and said
brightly, “My brother helped bring ye back from the landslide, sir!”
Harriet moved her skirts to obscure the child and coughed, the interruption
giving Jamie enough time to look over the women and calculate exactly how
many sons, brothers, uncles, grandsons, and brothers-in-law they possessed
among them—and how many of 
those
 were men he either included in his
gang or would like to. I saw the color rising up his neck, but I also saw the
slight slump of his shoulders.
So did Harriet, but was wise enough to pretend not to notice. She folded
her hands in front of her and humbly laid the rest of her cards on the table.
“We ken weel why ye banished the men, sir. And we ken even better the
kindness that ye’ve always shown to us and our families. So we’ll swear ye
an oath, Laird—a most terrible oath, in the names of Saint Bride and Saint
Michael—that our husbands shall never again raise hand or voice against ye,
in any matter.”
“Mmphm.” Jamie knew he was beaten, but he wasn’t surrendering just yet.
“And how d’ye mean to guarantee their good behavior, 
a bhana-
mhaighister
?”
An inaudible but clear vibration that might have been amusement ran
through the older ladies, though it vanished in an instant when Harriet turned
her head to look over her shoulder at them. When she turned back, her eyes
were fixed on me, not Jamie, which gave me a start.
“I’d suppose your wife could answer that for ye, Laird,” she said
circumspectly, and let the corner of her mouth tuck in for a moment. Her gaze
dropped to Jamie again. “None of the men can cook. But if ye dinna trust
what a wife might do to a husband who’s taken the house from over her head
and the food out of her bairns’ mouths … perhaps ye can imagine what the
brothers and sons of those wives might do to him. If ye’d like me to have my
lads come and swear that same oath to ye …”
“No,” he said, very dryly. “I’m no a man to discount an honest woman’s
word.” He looked over the crowd, slowly, and sighed, putting his hands flat
on the desk.
“Aye. Well, then. This is what I’ll do. I will revoke the letter of
banishment—for 
your
 husbands—but the contracts I made with them astenants remain void. And you’ll send your husbands to me, to swear their
fealty. I willna have men on my land that may plot against me.
“But I shall write new contracts, between myself and each of you ladies,
for the tenancy of the land and buildings ye live in, in witness of the
faithfulness of … ehm … of your faithful husbandry of the same.” A definite
titter ran through the room, and I smiled, despite the seriousness of the
situation.
Jamie didn’t laugh, but leaned forward, fixing each woman in turn with his
eyes.
“Mind, this means that each of ye—each one, I say—is responsible for the
rents and other terms of her contract. If ye want to accept your husbands’
advice and help, that’s well and good—but the land is yours, not his, and if
he should prove false, either to you or to me, he’ll answer for it to me, even
unto death.”
Harriet nodded gravely.
“We agree, my laird. We’re most grateful for your kind forbearance—and
even more grateful to God that He’s let us save ye from the guilt of putting
women and children out to starve.” She dropped him a deep curtsy, then
turned and went out, leaving her followers to curtsy to him, each in turn, and
murmur their thanks to their speechless, red-eared landlord.
THEY LEFT, MURMURING to one another in excitement and leaving the
door open, as they’d found it. A cool breeze came down the hallway, carrying
the ghost of lye soap.
I put my hands on Jamie’s shoulders. Hard as rocks, and so were the
columns of his neck, under my thumbs.
“You did the right thing,” I said quietly, and began to massage the tight
muscles, searching out knots. He sighed deeply, and his shoulders dropped a
little.
“I hope so,” he said. “I’m likely nourishing a wee brood o’ vipers in my
bosom—but it does lighten the weight on my heart.” After a moment he
added, still looking down at his desk, “I did think o’ the other men,
Sassenach. The brothers and sons, I mean. But what I thought was that they’d
take care for the women and children—feed them, take them in if their
husbands couldna find a place. I never thought … Christ, it was like havin’
my own guns taken and pointed at me!”“You did the right thing,” I said again, and kissed the top of his head. “And
you know that now all those women and children will be watching out like
hawks, in case of any rannygazoo on the western side of the Ridge.” He
turned his head and gave me an eye.
“I dinna ken what rannygazoo is, Sassenach, but God forbid I should have
it without my knowing. Is it catching?”
“Very. Blessed are the merciful, for mercy shall be shown them.”
“I’m glad to find you so filled with mercy, Colonel,” said a dry voice from
the doorway. “I only hope you may not have exhausted your store for the
day.” Elspeth Cunningham stood on the other side of the threshold, tall and
straight and dressed in black, a stark white fichu throwing her gaunt features
into stern relief.
The muscles under my hands went momentarily as hard as concrete. I let
go, and then Jamie was on his feet, bowing.
“Your servant, madam,” he said. “Come in.”
She stepped over the threshold, but stood for a moment, hesitant, a pinch
of skirt caught between her fingers.
“Dinna think for a moment of kneeling to me,” Jamie said, matching the
tone in which she’d spoken a moment before. “Sit down on your hurdies and
tell me what it is ye want.”
I went round the desk and pulled up the visitor’s chair for her, and she sank
into it, her deep-set eyes still fixed on Jamie.
“I want Agnes,” she said, without preamble.
Jamie blinked, sat down, blinked again, and leaned back, relaxing a little.
“What d’ye want her for?” he asked warily.
“Perhaps I should have said I’ve come to speir for her,” she said, with a
trace of a smile. “If that’s the correct term?”
“Only if ye want to marry her,” Jamie said. “Which I suppose is what ye
mean. Which one o’ the lieutenants did ye have in mind, and what does
Agnes have to say about it?”
Elspeth sighed and unfolded her hands to accept the cup of whisky I
offered her.
“At the moment, it’s six of one and half a dozen of the other,” she
admitted. “The silly creature can’t make up her mind between them, and as
I’ve told her that there’s no way of knowing which of them fathered her
child, neither has more of a factual claim upon her affections than the other.”“I suppose you could wait ’til the child’s born and see who it looks like,” I
suggested. I could—within fairly broad limits—discern blood types. That
might
 help, but I thought I wouldn’t suggest it right this moment.
Just as well, since both of them ignored me.
“That’s why I said 
I
 want Agnes,” she said. “I’ve decided that I must
accept your offer to provide transport for my son and his household. When he
heard of your banishing the men who … followed him … he declared that he
could no longer remain here, without supporters and at your … mercy.”
“My mercy,” Jamie muttered, drumming his fingers briefly on the table.
“Hmmphm. Evidently I’ve an endless store o’ that. So?”
“Gilbert and Oliver will of course accompany us,” she went on, ignoring
this. “They naturally do not wish to abandon Agnes …”
“Agnes has a home,” Jamie broke in impatiently. “Here. Abandon her,
forbye!”
“Surely you will admit that they have a responsibility to the girl,” Elspeth
said, lowering her strong gray brows at him in a way that made her look like
a very stern owl.
“I will,” he said. “But I’ll not see her taken from her home unless she
wants to go 
and
 I’m assured of her future welfare. I can find her a good
husband here, ken?”
“I am offering you exactly such an assurance,” she snapped. “Do you dare
to imply that I would see her abused in any way?”
“Ye’re an auld woman,” Jamie pointed out, rather brusquely. “What if ye
die on the way to wherever ye’re takin’ your son?”
“Er … where 
are
 you taking him?” I interjected, more in hopes of stopping
the conversation going straight off the rails than because I wanted to know.
“Would 
you
 die, if you knew someone was completely dependent upon
you?” she shot back, ignoring me.
He paused for a moment and took a breath before replying evenly.
“Ye havena always got a choice about it, Elspeth.”
Elspeth’s nostrils flared as she inhaled, but she replied calmly.
“Yes,” she said, “you do. Barring being shot through the heart or struck by
lightning,” she added, as one obliged to honesty. “But one of the few
advantages to being an old woman is that no one shoots them. As for the
lightning, I shall leave that to God, but my trust in Him is considerable.
“As to our destination,” she said, turning to me as though Jamie had ceased
to exist, “Charles Town. There are navy warships there, and a large numberof smaller frigates and army transports. Charles has written to Sir Henry
Clinton, asking the favor of transport back to England aboard one of these.
Sir Henry has known our family for many years and will certainly grant us
the courtesy. Now, as to Agnes—” She switched her focus back to Jamie. “I
will admit that my desire to take her with us is not solely for her benefit;
plainly, I need her.”
There was a long moment of silence, with that simple declaration hanging
in the air.
She did. The two young lieutenants would manage the physical difficulties
of travel and provide protection for her and Charles. But she would need
help, in caring both for her son’s demanding physical needs and for her own.
Granted, she could easily engage a maidservant, but given Agnes’s delicate
situation …
No one had mentioned the other aspect of that situation aloud, but Elspeth
was more than perceptive enough to have grasped the fact that—everything
else quite aside—she was an answer to prayer for Jamie.
I estimated the pregnancy at roughly three months, and it was a matter of
weeks, if not days, before Agnes’s situation was known all over the Ridge.
And it was, naturally, Jamie’s responsibility as her employer to resolve the
situation in some publicly satisfactory manner. Finding the young man
responsible and obliging him to marry Agnes would be the usual thing, but
under the circumstances … To have your unmarried maidservant growing
visibly pregnant in your house—or hastily married off to someone who was
patently 
not
 the father—was to invite speculation that you had had something
to do with her condition. And we’d both been there before …. I shivered, the
echo of Malva’s denunciation, 
“It was him!”
 ringing in my ears.
“Speaking as Agnes’s … er, other 
loco parentis
 …” I said. Jamie and
Elspeth both smiled, involuntarily, but I ignored them and pushed on. “
I
 have
a small condition to suggest. I’ll help you to persuade Agnes, because I think
it’s really the best way of handling her predicament. But 
if
 she decides to go
with you, I want an assurance that you’ll provide her with an education …”
“Agnes?” Both of them had spoken together, and while Jamie’s intonation
indicated doubt and Elspeth’s, amusement, their unanimity did give me a
moment’s pause.
“Education to do what, Sassenach?” Jamie asked. “Fanny’s taught her to
read, and she can write her name and count to a hundred. What else d’ye
think she’d find useful?”“Well …” It was true that while Agnes was pretty, amiable, kind, and
willing, and had a certain shrewd perception born of experience, she wasn’t a
natural student. Still, there was no telling what might happen to her, and I
wanted her to be … safe.
“She should know enough arithmetic to be able to handle money,” I said,
finally. “And she should have a little money to handle. Of her own.”
“Done,” Elspeth said quietly. “My son will settle a modest amount on her,
independent of her husband—whoever that turns out to be,” she added, a
little bleakly. “And I’ll see to her education myself.”
No one spoke for a moment, and I began to hear the normal sounds of the
house, the clumps and squeaks and rattling and barking, and the sound of
distant conversation that the tension of our discussion had blocked out.
Footsteps crossed the ceiling over our heads, quick and light, and I caught
a murmur and the giggle of young girls, amused. I relaxed a little. Fanny
would miss Agnes cruelly, but at least she would have the Hardman girls for
company.
“I’ll go and talk to Agnes now,” I said.122
The Militia Rides Out
JAMIE KNELT AND SLICED the stitching of the burlap bag, folded back
the top, and breathed deep. Huffed all his air out and breathed deeper, then
sniffed thoughtfully. A rich, nourishing smell, nutty and sweet. No scent of
mold, at least not at the top. Down at the bottom, though, where the damp
settled …
He rose and pushed back one set of the big sliding doors that Bree had
built for both sides of the malting shed, so they could open it up in fine
weather. And it was a fine day, one fit for birdsong, rambling the woods, and
maybe fishing a bit near sunset. A morning fit for small, peaceful jobs like
replacing a board in the malting floor that had caught fire and was blackened
enough that it might taint the flavor of the roasting grain. Fit for judging the
quality of the barley on hand. He’d harvested two hundredweight of grain
from his own fields in the autumn, and bought another hundredweight from
the trading post, but they’d had time to malt, brew, and distill only half of it,
what with an early winter, bad weather, and the disturbance at the Lodge in
February. He scratched his chest; the scar was well healed, but he could still
feel it pull when he stretched his arms wide.
He dragged the bag near the open doorway for light and dumped it
carefully over the floor, kneeling and spreading it with his hands, looking for
sprouting, damp, mold, bugs, or any of the other things you might not want in
your whisky. And as a last check, chewed a few grains, then spat them out
into the grass.
“Tha e math,”
 he murmured, and got to his feet. He fetched the square
malting shovel down from its pegs and shoveled the fresh grain aside, making
room for the next bag.
A warm breeze brushed his cheek as he opened the sliding door. It was a
beautiful day. He’d maybe stop by Ian’s and take Lizard to the lake with himtonight.
These pleasant thoughts were interrupted by a sudden flapping and crying
out of a flock of doves nearby, disturbed by something coming. Wary, he
took hold of the shovel and keeked out—but it was only a man, coming down
the path alone. Hiram Crombie. They hadn’t spoken since the stramash at
Lodge.
“Hiram,” he said, as the man grew near and lifted his chin in greeting.
Crombie’s pinched face lightened a little at Jamie’s use of his Christian
name. He nodded slightly and came closer, still with a wary look, in case
Jamie had it in mind to bat him over the head with the shovel, Jamie
supposed. He stood the shovel in the mound of grain and straightened up,
wiping his sleeve across his face.
“I’ve come to say …” Crombie started, but then stopped, unsure.
“Aye?” He kent well enough what Crombie had come to say, but he wasn’t
above making him say it out loud. The auld curmudgeon was already stiff as
a dried stick, but his arms seemed stuck to his sides. His fists curled, slowly.
“I—we—I regret … what happened. At the Lodge.”
“Aye.”
Silence, broken only by the wittering of birds in the nearby pines, waiting
for Jamie to go away so they could flock down and poach the spilled grains.
Crombie drew in air through his long, hairy nose; it whistled slightly, but
Jamie didn’t laugh.
“I wish ye to ken that it wasna the doing of myself nor my brother or my
cousins. We …” He stopped and swallowed, muttering, “… sorry for it,”
under his breath.
“Well, I kent that much, Hiram,” Jamie said, stretching his back. The scar
across his chest was burning from the shoveling. “Whatever ye think of the
King, I dinna suppose ye’d try to kill me on his account.”
Hiram’s shoulders began to lower, but before he could get comfortable,
Jamie added, “But I suppose ye kent what Cunningham was about, and ye
didna warn me.”
“No.” After a moment, apparently feeling that this wasn’t an adequate
explanation, Hiram blew out his breath and shook his head. “No, I didna. But
I kent that Duff and McHugh had a whiff of it—I saw them watching
Cunningham when he came out of kirk, like twa foxes watchin’ a wolf go
past. And they’re your men. I thought they’d warn ye something was up. ButGeordie Wilson—my wife’s brother, ken—he’s one of Cunningham’s. I
couldna speak to ye without him gettin’ wind of it, and then …”
“Aye,” Jamie said, after a moment’s pause. “No man wants trouble in his
family, and it can be helped.”
Hiram’s shoulders slumped in relief. He nodded to himself for a bit, and
then spoke again.
“A wee time past, I said I wished to speak wi’ ye about a matter.”
Jamie remembered. In fact, Crombie had approached him on the way to
Lodge that night. Which made him feel more kindly toward the man; he
couldn’t have had a hand in what was afoot, if he’d wanted a favor from
Jamie at that point.
“Ye did. About 
a’ Chraobh Ard,
 I think ye said?”
“Aye. I wanted to ask if ye’d maybe take him as a member of your
militia.”
Well, that was a surprise. He’d been expecting a request that Jamie let
Cyrus court Frances officially, and he would have said no to that. But this …
“Why?” he asked bluntly.
“He’s sixteen,” Hiram said, shrugging as though this was a complete
answer. And it was. A boy that age needed badly to start being a man. And if
he hadn’t got a man’s proper work to do …
The other side of the matter was plain, too. Hiram Crombie was anxious
that his family should now be seen to stand solidly with Jamie, and Cyrus
was his offered hostage. 
That’s reassuring,
 Jamie thought wryly. 
He thinks
we might win.
Jamie spat in his palm and offered it.
“Done,” he said. “Send him to me tomorrow, just afore dawn. I’ll have a
horse for him.”
SILVIA HAD VOLUNTEERED to rise early—very early—and make the
gallons of brose and porridge to feed the militia. The warm, creamy smell
crept up the stairs and eased me into wakefulness like a soft hand on my
cheek. I stretched luxuriously in the warm bed and rolled over, enjoying the
picture of Jamie, long-legged as a stork and stark naked, bent over the
washstand to peer into the looking glass as he shaved by candlelight. Dawn
was no more yet than a fading of the stars outside the dark window.“Getting all spruced up for the gang?” I asked. “Are you doing something
formal with them this morning?”
He drew the razor over his pulled-down upper lip, then flicked the foam to
the side of the basin.
“Aye, horse drills. It’ll just be the mounted men today. With the Tall Tree,
we’ll have twenty-one.” He grinned at me in the mirror, his teeth as white as
the shaving soap. “Enough for a decent cattle raid.”
“Can Cyrus ride?” I was surprised at that; the Crombies, Wilsons,
MacReadys, and Geohagens were all fisher-folk who had come to us—by
God knew what circuitous and difficult means—from Thurso. They were, for
the most part, openly afraid of horses, and almost none of them could ride.
Jamie drew the blade up his neck, craned his head to evaluate the results,
and shrugged.
“We’ll find out.”
He rinsed the razor, dried it on the worn linen towel, then used the towel to
wipe his face.
“If I mean them to take it seriously, Sassenach, they’d best think I do.”
THE SKY WAS lightening, but it was still dark on the ground and only a few
of the men had gathered when Cyrus Crombie came down out of the 
trees
above New House. The men glanced at him in surprise, but when Jamie
greeted him, they all nodded and muttered, 
“Madainn mhath,”
 or grunted in
acknowledgment.
“Here, lad,” Jamie said, thrusting a wooden cup of hot brose into the Tall
Tree’s hand. “Warm your belly, and come meet Miranda. She belongs to
Frances, but the lass says she’s willing to lend ye the mare until we can find
ye a horse of your own.”
“Frances? Oh. I-I thank her.” The Tall Tree glowed a bit and glanced shyly
at the house, and then at the horse. Miranda was a big mare, stout and broad-
backed, and with a gentle, accommodating manner.
Young Ian had come down now, in buckskins and jacket, his hair plaited
and hanging down his back, Tòtis following him. He glanced round the group
of men, nodding, then kissed Tòtis’s forehead and lifted his chin toward the
porch. Then Ian came for his own brose, lifting a brow in the direction of
Cyrus.“
A’ Chraobh Ard
 will be joining us, 
a bhalaich,
” Jamie said casually.
“Will ye show him the way of it, to saddle and bridle Miranda, while I tell the
men what we’re about?”
“Aye,” Ian said, swallowing hot barley broth and exhaling a cloud of white
steam. “And what 
are
 we about?”
“Cavalry drills.” That made Ian raise both brows and glance over his
shoulder at the group of men, who looked like what they were—farmers.
They all owned horses, and could ride from the Ridge to Salem without
falling off, but beyond that …
“Simple cavalry drills,” Jamie clarified. “Riding slowly.”
Young Ian looked thoughtfully at Cyrus, standing at eager attention.
“Aye,” he said, and crossed himself.
WHEN I WENT upstairs to tie up my hair before starting the soap making, I
found Silvia and all four of the girls in my bedroom with Frances, Patience,
and Prudence more or less hanging over the sill to watch the militia ride out.
They barely noticed me, but Silvia stepped back a little, abashed, and began
to apologize.
“Don’t worry at all,” I said, and stepped up behind Patience to peer out.
“There’s something about a group of men on horses …”
“With rifles and muskets,” she said, rather dryly. “Yes, there is.”
I thought the girls hadn’t quite grasped the fact that the militia group was
drilling and training for the express purpose of killing people, but their
mother assuredly had and watched the men forming up, with the usual calling
out and crude jokes, with a certain grimness that deepened the lines
bracketing her mouth. I touched her arm gently and she turned her head,
startled.
“I know that you and your daughters would prefer to die, rather than have
other people killed so that you don’t … but you know … you’re our guests.
Jamie’s a Highlander, and his laws of hospitality forbid him to let anyone kill
his guests. So I’ll have to ask you to stretch your principles a bit and let him
protect you.”
Her lips twitched and her eyes met mine with a gleam of humor.
“As a matter of good manners?”
“Exactly,” I said, smiling back.A squeal from the girls drew us back to the window. Jamie was mounted,
passing slowly up and down the line of his men, inspecting their tack and
their weapons, pausing to ask questions and make jokes. Steam rose from
horses and men, their breaths white in the cold dawn air. Cyrus was at the end
of the line, and Young Ian was instructing him on the finer points of
mounting a horse, starting with which foot to begin with.
“Oh, doesn’t he look fine?” Prudence said, admiring. I wasn’t sure whether
she meant Jamie, Young Ian, or Cyrus, as they were all more or less in the
same place, but I made sounds of approval.
It seemed to take a long time for the men to organize themselves, but
suddenly they all shuffled and jostled into place in a double column. Jamie
took his place at the head of it and lifted his rifle above his head. A sort of
jingling rumble reached us, and the militia moved out, with a visible sense of
purpose that 
was
 quite stirring to watch.
Cyrus, upright as a stalk of uncooked asparagus, rode beside Young Ian,
the last pair in line. I crossed myself, then turned to my own troops.
“Well, ladies … it’s a fine day for making soap. Fall in!”
JAMIE AND THE Lindsay brothers, with some help from Tom McHugh and
his middle son, Angus, had cut down the trees and brush along one side of the
wagon road where the land was flat, so that there was no bank between road
and forest. They had left eight big trees standing, spaced about thirty feet
apart.
“So,” Jamie said to his gathered troops, and nodded at the trees. “We’re
going to weave through those trees—going to one side of the first, then the
other side of the next, and so on. And we’re going to do it slowly, one man
following the next after a slow count of ten.”
“Why?” said Joe McDonald, squinting at the trees suspiciously.
“Well, first, because I say so, 
a charaid,
” Jamie said, smiling. “Ye always
do what your colonel says, because we’ll fight better if we’re all goin’ in the
same direction—and for that to happen, somebody has to decide which
direction to go … and that’s me, aye?” A ripple of laughter ran through the
men.
“Oh. Aye,” McDonald said, uncertainly. Joe was young, only eighteen, and
had never fought in a battle, bar fists behind somebody’s barn to settle a
grudge.“But as for why I’m tellin’ ye to do 
this
—” He gestured toward the trees.
“This is for the horses. We’re a mounted militia—though we’ll have foot
soldiers, too—and the horses must be nimble and you able to guide them
through strange ground. Cavalrymen do this sort of drill; it’s called a
serpentine—because ye weave like a snake, aye?” Without pausing for
further question, he looked at Ian and jerked his head sideways.
Ian nudged his horse and turned slowly out of the group, reined around to
face the trees, then leaned forward and with a bloodcurdling scream that
made all the other horses snort and stamp, dug in his heels and shot for the
first tree as though he and the horse had been fired from a gun. In the instant
before collision, they dodged aside and shot toward the next, whipping in and
out of the line of trees so fast you could scarcely count the trees as they
passed. At the end of the line, they turned on a sixpence and shot back even
faster, arriving with a high-pitched Indian yip to shouted applause.
Jamie glanced at Cyrus, who looked at once terrified and excited, the reins
clutched up to his chest.
“So now we’ll do it slow,” Jamie said. “Ye want to go first, Joe?”
AT THE END of an hour, both horses and men were warm, limber, and in
high spirits, having—for the most part—avoided collision with each other or
trees. The sun was well above the horizon now; they’d best head back, so the
men could get breakfast and go on to their daily chores. He was about to
dismiss them when Ian stood in his stirrups and called over the men’s heads.
“Uncle! Race ye to the bend and back!” There was a general rumble of
enthusiasm at this proposal, and Jamie reined round without hesitation,
drawing up beside Ian.
“Go!” shouted Kenny Lindsay, and go they did, thundering down the dirt
road in a churn of dust and encouraging Highland shrieks from behind. Ian’s
horse was a shrewd wee mare named Lucille, who didn’t like being beaten—
but neither did Phineas, and it was hell-for-leather all the way and the forest a
green blur beside them.
They hit the big bend in the road and shot round it to make the turn. Lucille
swerved suddenly, shouldering Phineas with a thump that nearly unseated
Jamie, and he caught a glimpse of a wagon in the middle of the road, but no
time to look, occupied as he was in staying in the saddle and getting Phin
back under control.There were shouts behind them, thundering hooves and two or three
gunshots—the whole militia had let exuberance boil over and joined the race,
God damn them. Phin was curvetting and jerking, and while it took no more
than seconds to bring him in mind of his duty, the whole boiling of men and
horses was down upon them, shouting and laughing. He stood in his stirrups
to call out, furious—and then saw the wagon that had startled Lucille, its
mules twitching and stamping in their traces, but not so spooked that they
meant to run.
The rampage had come to a swirling, mud-churning halt round the wagon,
and there was a moment’s silence in the shouting. Bree was holding the
mules and doing a fine job of it, he saw. Beside her, Roger raised both hands
high.
“Don’t shoot,” he said gravely. “We surrender.”
JAMIE POURED THE last of the JF Special whisky into Roger’s cup, picked
up his own, and raised it to the company round the dinner table—and
scattered over the kitchen, to boot—this including Young Ian’s family as well
as his own, Silvia and her lassies, plus Cyrus Crombie, Murdo Lindsay, and
Bobby Higgins, the unwed and widowed men who’d come back with him
after the militia’s drilling.
“Thanks to God for the safe return of our travelers,” he said. “And”—
bowing to Roger Mac—“for the guidance and blessing of our new Minister
of Word and Sacrament. 
Slàinte mhath!
”
Roger Mac didn’t blush easily, but the warmth he felt showed in his face as
well as his eyes. He opened his mouth—probably to say modestly that he
wouldn’t be truly ordained ’til the summer, when the elder ministers could
come from the coast—but Bree put a hand on his knee and squeezed to stop
him, so the lad just smiled and lifted his cup in response.
“To family,” he said, “and good friends!”
Jamie sat down amid the resultant shouts and poundings on the table that
made the dishes dance, smiling too, and warm with it, forbye. The whole
room flickered with firelight and the changing faces, lively with talk and food
and drink.
He wished that Fergus and Marsali and their bairns were here, too, but
Roger had said they’d left Charles Town with the MacKenzies, but thenturned north, meaning to have a look at Richmond as a possible place to
resume their printing. He said a brief, silent prayer for their safety.
Claire was sat beside him on the bench, wee Mandy sound asleep on her
lap, half draped over her arm like a sack of grain and just as heavy. He
reached over and lifted the bairn, croodling her against his chest, and Claire
bent toward him and rested her head on his shoulder for a moment, in
gratitude. He saw her hair and Mandy’s for a moment, their mad curls swirled
together, and felt such love that he kent if he died just then, it would be fine.
Claire straightened and he looked up then to see Roger Mac, with
something of the same look on his own face. Their eyes met with a perfect
understanding. And both of them looked down at the tabletop, smiling amid
the scattered crusts and bones.123
And the Beat Goes on …
THE SOJOURNERS—THE ADULT sojourners—slept rather late in the
morning. The children, naturally, popped out of their beds at dawn and ran
down to infest the kitchen. Children being what they are, Jem and Mandy had
made instant friends with Agnes and the Hardman girls. Mandy was
enchanted with Chastity, and insisted upon feeding her breakfast in tiny bites,
cheeping at her in a motherly tone, as though Chastity were a baby bird,
which made Chastity giggle and snort milk through her nose.
Going out to get a fresh pail of milk from the springhouse, I met Brianna
drifting downstairs, dressed but obviously not completely awake yet.
“How are you, sweetheart?” I looked her over carefully; she was paler and
thinner than she had been when they’d left for Savannah, but a wagon trip of
three hundred miles, through God knew what conditions of weather, warfare,
and unpredictable food supplies, managing two horses, a husband, and two
children whilst sitting on a load of contraband guns disguised as bat guano,
would naturally take it out of one. She looked happy, though.
“I can’t believe the house! It’s …” She flung out a hand and looked round,
then laughed. “But Da still hasn’t put a door on your surgery.”
“He’ll get around to it.” I glanced at the kitchen, but the buzzing and
giggling was peaceful, and I took her arm, towing her toward the doorless
surgery. “Let me listen to your heart. Hop up on the table and lie down.”
She looked as though she wanted to roll her eyes, but hopped, nonetheless,
athletic as a grasshopper, and eased herself down, closing her eyes and
sighing with pleasure at the feel of the newly padded surface.
“Oh, God. I haven’t had a bed this soft since we left Savannah. Certainly
not this clean.” She stretched luxuriously, and I could hear the soft pop of her
vertebrae. “Lord John sends his love, by the way.”
“Is that what he said?” I said, smiling as I reached for my Pinard.“No, he said something much more elegant, but that’s what he meant.” She
opened one eye, regarding me shrewdly. “And His Grace the Duke of Pardloe
begs me to convey his deepest regards. He wrote sort of a note for you.”
“Sort of?” I’d seen one or two missives from Hal, in the course of my brief
marriage to John—and I’d heard a lot more about them from John. “Did he
sign it with his whole name?”
“Yes, but he was pretty upset. But you know, stiff upper lip and all that.”
I stared at her.
“Upset? Hal? About what? Undo your laces.”
“That,” she said, squinting down her long nose at her fingers on the laces,
“is kind of a long story.” She flicked a glance at me. “I take it Da knew that
William was in Savannah when he suggested I go?”
“Lord John mentioned that, yes—in the letter he wrote inviting you to
come and paint that society woman’s portrait. How did that work out, by the
way?”
She laughed.
“I’ll tell you all about Angelina Brumby and her husband later,” she said.
She closed one eye, fixing me with the other. “Don’t try and change the
subject. William.”
“You met him?” I couldn’t keep the hope out of my voice, and she opened
both eyes.
“I did,” she said, and looked down while she pulled the last lace from its
loop. “It was … really good,” she said softly. “He came to the Brumbys’
house—Lord John just sent him to see ‘the Lady Painter’; he hadn’t told him
about me, either. What 
is
 it with those two?” she demanded suddenly,
looking up. “Da and Lord John. Why would they 
do
 that? Not tell us about
each other being in Savannah, I mean.”
“Shyness,” I said, and smiled a little ruefully. “And they both have a sort
of delicacy—though you might not think it. They didn’t want to put any
burden 
of expectation on either you or William.” And Jamie, at least, had
been very much afraid that his children might not like each other, and his
wish that they 
would
 was too important to speak of, even to me.
“They meant well,” I said comfortably. “How 
is
 William?”
The underlying delight in her face at being home didn’t ebb, but she shook
her head with a small frown of sympathy.
“Poor William. He’s 
such
 a good guy, but my God! How does anyone that
young manage to have such a complicated life?”“Your life wasn’t that simple in your early twenties, as I recall …” I untied
the ribbon of her shift and placed the flat bell of the Pinard against her chest.
“Poor choice of parents, I expect. Deep breath, darling, and hold it.”
She obliged, and I listened. Listened again, moved the Pinard, listened …
Lub-DUB, lub-DUB, lub-DUB …
 Regular as a metronome and a good, strong
sound. I put a hand on her solar plexus, feeling the abdominal pulse, just in
case, but that was just as strong, the firm flesh of her belly bouncing a little
under my fingers with each beat.
“Everything sounds good,” I said, looking up—and thinking as I saw her
face how very beautiful she was in this instant. Home. Safe. 
Alive.
“Are you all right, Mama?” she said, looking at me suspiciously, because
my eyes had gone slightly moist.
“Certainly,” I said, and cleared my throat. “Have you had much trouble
with the fibrillation?”
“No,” she said, sounding a little surprised. “It happened two or three times
on the way to Charleston, and once or twice while we were there. Only twice
in Savannah, at least bad enough that I noticed. But I don’t think it’s
happened at all—or if it has, only for a few seconds—on the trip back.
“I kept taking the willow bark,” she assured me. “Only after a while, I
started grinding the leaves up and making pills out of them with cheese,
because the tea made me pee 
all
 the time, and I couldn’t stop painting every
fifteen minutes to go find a chamber pot. I don’t 
think
 cheese would
neutralize the willow bark, do you?”
“No,” I said, laughing. “Congratulations—you’ve invented the world’s
first cheese-flavored aspirin. They didn’t upset your stomach?”
She shook her head and pulled up the neck of her shift.
“No, but I figured that the cheese might buffer the acid—don’t they tell
people with ulcers to drink milk?”
“Yes, that or an antacid. Honey actually works quite well for—” I stopped
abruptly.
She’d just tied the ribbon of her shift and I’d reached for the laces to hand
them to her, but my left hand was still resting on her abdomen, a little lower
down. And I was still feeling the heartbeat.
A faint, fast heartbeat. Tiny and busy and very strong.
LubdubLubdubLubdub …
“Mama? What’s wrong?” Bree had sat up, alarmed. All I could do was
shake my head at her.“Welcome home,” I managed to say to the newest resident of the Ridge.
And then I burst into tears.
AMID 
THE UPROAR of general rejoicing over the news of Brianna’s
pregnancy and the bustle of reassorting the population of the house—the
Hardmans took over the half-finished third floor, tacking canvas over the
windows to keep out the rain, and Roger and Brianna moved into their usual
room; Fanny and Agnes, being now Women, were given their own part of the
attic for privacy, but continued to sleep in carefree heaps with the younger
children, as did the Hardman girls—it was some time before I remembered
the note Brianna had given me.
I’d tucked it in the pocket of the apron I’d been wearing at the time and
found the note several days later, when I decided that the apron was really too
filthy to be sanitary and had to be washed.
The note emerged—a small, neat block of intricately folded paper, with a
swan flying across a full moon stamped into the wax that sealed it. It was
addressed on the outside to 
Mrs. James Fraser, Fraser’s Ridge, North
Carolina,
 but true to John’s description of Hal’s correspondence habits, had
no salutation and a message consisting of slightly fewer words than were
strictly necessary. He 
had
 signed it, though.
I don’t know what you and my brother did to each other, but
evidently you’re a bit more than friends. If I don’t come back from
what I’m about to do, please look after him.
PostScriptum: Can you recommend to me some herbal preparation of
a lethal nature? For poisoning rats.
Harold, Duke of Pardloe
There was a large H under this, presumably in case I didn’t recognize him
by his title. I set the paper gingerly on top of the pie safe, where I could stare
at it while kneading bread.
I wanted to laugh, and did smile—but it was a nervous smile. 
For
poisoning rats,
 forsooth … From what I knew of Hal’s personality, he mightbe planning murder, suicide—or the actual extirpation of rodents in his cellar.
As for what he was about to do …
“The mind boggles,” I said, under my breath, and slapped the elastic dough
onto the floury worktable, folding and punching it into a fresh ball. I put this
back into the bowl and covered it with a damp cloth, then stood there like a
stupefied chicken, blinking at it and wondering what on 
earth
 the brothers
Grey were up to. I shook my head, put the bowl on the small shelf near the
chimney, and left the bread to rise while I walked down the hall to Jamie’s
study.
“Have you got a sheet of paper, and a decent quill?” I asked.
“Aye, here.” He’d been leaning back in his chair, brow furrowed in
thought, but leaned forward to pluck a quill out of the jar on his desk and
handed me a sheet of Bree’s plain rag paper.
I took these with a nod of thanks and, standing by his desk, wrote:
To Harold, Duke of Pardloe
Colonel, 46th Regiment of Foot
Savannah, Georgia
Dear Hal—
Yes.
Foxglove leaves. Mash them and make a strong tea, or just put
them in the salad and invite the rats to dinner.
Your erstwhile sister-in-law,
C.
PostScriptum: It’s not a good way to die, even for a rat. Shooting is
much more efficient.
Jamie had been watching me write, reading the message upside down
without difficulty, and looked up with raised brows as I finished and waved
the note in the air to dry it. I put it down and laid Hal’s note beside it, in front
of him.
The eyebrows didn’t go down as he read. He looked up at me.
“It’s meant to be a joke,” I said. “The bit about the foxgloves, I mean.”
He made a restrained Scottish noise and pushed the notes back toward me.“Maybe you’re jokin’, Sassenach—but he isn’t. 
Whatever
 he said to ye.”124
The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face
Savannah
May 5, 1780
From Captain M. A. Stubbs, His Majesty’s Army, Ret.
To Mr. John Cinnamon
My dear Mr. Cinnamon,
I cannot tell you with what Emotion I beheld your Portrait. Indeed,
my Bosom is so animated with Feeling that I think my Heart must
burst, between the Pressures of Guilt and Joy—yet I thank you from
the Bottom of that squalid Heart for your gallant Action and the
Courage which must lie behind it.
Let me first beg your Forgiveness, though I do not deserve it. I was
badly wounded at Quebec and unable to attend to my own Affairs for
some Months, by which Time I had been sent back to England. I
should have made Inquiries after your Mother, and made some
Provision for you both. I did not. I should prefer to think that it was
solely Shock and Disability that kept me from this Duty, but the Truth
is that I chose to forget, from Selfishness and Sloth. I am not a good
Man. I am sorry for it.
And let me next—assuming that your Forgiveness be granted—beg
that you will come to me. I am astonished by the Strength of Feeling
caused me by the Sight of your Face, captured in Paint and Canvas,
and even more by the Need that has grown in me to see your Face
truly before me. I can but hope that you would also like to see mine.
If you will so far forgive me as to come, I have sent Instructions to
Lord John Grey, who will arrange your Passage to London andprovide Funds for your Travel.
I am, sir, your most Humble and Obedient Servant—
and your Father,
Malcolm Armistead Stubbs, Esq.
PostScriptum: Your name is Michel. Your mother had a Medallion,
given her by her French Grandmother, with the image upon it of
Michael, Archangel, and she wished you to have his Protection.
May 10, 1780
Savannah
IT WAS A STORMY day, and cold on the quay, with a strong wind
whipping up whitecaps on the river and bent on whipping off their hats, as
well. The tender had almost finished loading—its last load, bound for the
cargo holds of the army transport 
Hermione,
 waiting at anchor.
“Have you ever been on a ship?” William asked suddenly.
“No. Just canoes.” Cinnamon was twitching like a nervous horse, ready to
bolt. “What’s it like?”
“Exciting, sometimes,” William said, in what he hoped was a tone of
reassurance. “Mostly boring, though. Here, I brought you a going-away
present.” He reached into the pocket of his coat and drew out a small jar of
murky liquid and a smaller vial with a dropper.
“Just in case,” he told Cinnamon, handing these over. “Dilled cucumber
pickles and ether. In case of seasickness.”
Cinnamon eyed the gifts dubiously, but nodded.
“You suck a pickle if you feel queasy,” William explained. “If that doesn’t
work, take six drops of the ether. You can put it in beer if you like,” he added
helpfully.
“Thank you.” The wind had restored Cinnamon’s usual ruddy glow.
“Thank you,” he said again, and seized William’s hand in a grasp of crushing
earnestness. “And tell your sister—how much … how much …” The tide of
rising emotion choked him, and he shook his head and wrung William’s hand
harder.
“You told her,” William said, easing the hand free and repressing an urge
to count his fingers. “She was happy to do it. She’s happy for you. So am I,”
he added, patting Cinnamon affectionately on the forearm, as much to avoidbeing seized again as from the very real affection he felt. “I’ll miss you, you
know,” he added diffidently.
He would, and the realization struck him like a blow behind the ear. He felt
suddenly hollow, but couldn’t think of anything else to say.
“Moi, aussi,”
 Cinnamon said, and looked down at his new boots, clearing
his throat.
“All aboard!” The naval lieutenant captaining the tender was glaring down
at them. “
Now,
 gentlemen!”
William picked up the new portmanteau—a gift from Lord John—and
thrust it into Cinnamon’s hand.
“Go,” he said, smiling as hard as he could. “Write to me from London!”
Cinnamon nodded, speechless, then, at another irate shout from the tender,
turned and lumbered blindly aboard. The tender’s sails dropped and filled at
once, and within a minute, they were in the middle of the river, flying toward
the unknown future. William watched the little ship out of sight, then turned
back toward Bay Street with a sigh, his sense of loss tinged by envy.
“Au revoir, Michel,”
 he said, under his breath. “Now who am I going to
talk to?”125
A Woman of the Second Type
Savannah
ONCE CINNAMON HAD GONE, William moved from the small house
they had shared back into Lord John’s house, at his father’s invitation.
Amaranthus, Lord John said firmly, needed company.
“She doesn’t accept invitations,” he’d told William, “and only goes out
now and then to the shops—”
“She 
must
 be in low spirits,” William said. He’d meant it jokingly, but the
way in which his father glared at him made him feel ashamed. “Surely
you’ve told her that no one knows?”
“Of course I have,” Lord John said impatiently. “So has Hal, with a
surprising 
amount of delicacy. She just hangs her head and says she can’t
bear to be seen. ‘On display’ was the rather odd way she put it.”
“Oh,” said William, somewhat enlightened. “Well, that does make more
sense.”
“It does?”
“Well,” William said, a little awkwardly, “as a young widow, and the
mother of the heir to Uncle Hal’s title … she’d attract—I mean, she 
did
attract a good deal of … interest? At parties and dinners and that sort of
thing, I mean.”
“And enjoyed such interest very much, so far as I could see,” his father
observed cynically, giving him a sidelong look.
“Quite.” William turned aside, picking up and pretending to examine a
Meissen plate from the sideboard. “But now she’s been … er … exposed, so
to speak … even if only among us …” He coughed. “I think perhaps she feels
she can’t act the part of a beautiful young widow, and, um …”“She’d feel somewhat conscious, flirting with fatheaded young men,
knowing that even if neither Hal nor I was present, we’d likely hear about it.
Hmm.” Lord John appeared to find this dubious, but plausible. Then he made
the next—inevitable, William supposed—deduction.
“After all, what would she do if one of the bright young sparks she touched
caught fire and asked for her hand?” Lord John frowned, the next thing
having occurred to him. He looked hastily over his shoulder, then moved
closer to William and lowered his voice.
“What would she have done if that happened and we 
didn’t
 know the
truth?”
William shrugged and spread his hands in an affectation of complete
ignorance.
“God knows,” he said, with complete truth. “But it didn’t.”
Lord John looked as though he wanted to say something else, but instead
merely shook his head and moved the plate two inches, back into its exact
position.
“Perhaps she could go to luncheons, or tea parties, or—or quilting routs?”
William hazarded. “Things with just women, I mean.”
His father laughed shortly. “There are two kinds of women in the world,”
he said. “Those who enjoy the company of women and those who prefer the
company of men. For one reason or another,” he added fairly, “it’s not
always to do with lust or marriage.”
“And you imply that Amaranthus is not one of the first type.”
“William, it’s sufficiently obvious that even 
you
 will have noticed it, and I
assure you the other women have. Women of the first type dislike women of
the second type, particularly if the woman of the second type is young,
beautiful, and possessed of either charm or money.” He ran a hand through
his hair, still thick and blond, though showing traces of white near his face. “I
suppose I could beg Mrs. Holmes or Lady Prévost to ask Amaranthus to a
hen party of some sort, but I very much doubt that she’d go.”
“And even knowing what you do,” William said, quite gently, “you like
her and worry that she’s lonely. After all, the situation’s not her fault.”
His father sighed heavily. He was looking rather disheveled, and a faint
smell of spoilt milk hung about him, likely connected to the imperfectly
cleaned whitish stain on his charcoal-colored sleeve. Trevor had been weaned
but had not yet mastered the mysteries of drinking from a cup.
“You need a nursemaid,” William said.“Yes, I do,” his father said promptly. “You.”
HE COULDN’T SAY he was sorry to be back in Oglethorpe Street. Bachelor
living with John Cinnamon had been pleasant enough, and it was good to
have a friend always at hand, to share whatever came along. But he was
happy—if a little anxious—for Cinnamon. The small house they’d shared on
the edge of the marsh seemed damp and desolate, and his spirits sank when
the sun went down, leaving him alone in the shadows with the smell of mud
and dead fish. It was good now, to wake in the morning to sunlight and the
noises of people in the house below.
And then there was the food. Whatever Moira’s intransigence with regard
to grilled tomatoes, the woman was a phoenix with fish, shellfish, and roasted
alligator with apricot sauce. She had even—with a little persuasion and the
gift of a bottle of good brandy—allowed Lord John to teach her how to make
Potatoes Dauphinoise.
And then there was Amaranthus.
He saw at once what Lord John had meant: she was subdued, picking away
at her needlework with eyes downcast, only speaking when someone spoke to
her. Polite, always—but always distant, as though her thoughts were
elsewhere.
Probably in New Jersey,
 he thought, and was surprised to feel a sort of
sympathy for her. It truly wasn’t her fault.
William set himself to bring her back into cordial society and, in the
process, found that some parts of his own character that he had set aside over
the last year were not in fact dead. He was beginning to dream at night—
about England.
They played games in the evening. Chess, draughts, backgammon,
dominoes … if Hal or someone else was there for supper, they played whist
or brag, and all three men smiled to see Amaranthus light up in the fire of
competition; she was a cutthroat cardplayer and played chess like a cat, her
changeable eyes fixed on the board as though the chessmen were mice, an
imaginary tail gently waving to and fro behind her shoulder, until she
pounced and showed her white teeth.
Still, the sense of merely passing time was slightly oppressive. The whole
city was pervaded by a similar atmosphere, though the sense of suspended
activity had a deep and urgent reason. With the French ships gone andLincoln and the Americans retreated to Charles Town, Savannah had gone
about picking up the pieces: houses broken by cannon had been repaired as
quickly as possible, but with the spring had come fresh paint, and the bright
pinks, yellows, and blues of the city bloomed anew.
The abatis and redoubts outside the city remained, though the winter
storms and high tides had eroded the farthest defenses. The remnants of the
American camp had all but disappeared by now, salvaged by slaves and
apprentices.
But if the thought of Benjamin in New Jersey lay under Amaranthus’s
outward composure, the thought of Charles Town was openly and constantly
in the minds of the Savannah garrison.
Dispatches came frequently, with news from New York and Rhode Island,
where Sir Henry Clinton was staging his troops for a voyage. Hal being who
he was, and John being not only his brother but also his lieutenant colonel,
the household was well aware of General Clinton’s intent to attack Charles
Town as soon as the weather allowed of such an adventure.
All through April, dispatches had arrived by ship and by rider, in an
increasing flurry of excitement and intensity. As the siege progressed Uncle
Hal strode to and fro outside his house, unable to bear confinement but not
wanting to leave lest any news arrive in his momentary absence.
“It’s highly unlikely that we’ll need to move more men to Charles Town,”
Lord John had told William, who had just likened his uncle to a pregnant cat
on the verge of delivering kittens. “Clinton’s got plenty of men and artillery,
he’s got Cornwallis, and whatever its other faults, the British army does
know how to conduct a siege. Still, if—or rather when—the city falls, we
might
 be summoned, and if so, it will be in an almighty hurry. But chances
are, we’ll just be left here cooling our heels,” he added warningly, seeing the
eager look on William’s face. He paused thoughtfully, though, looking at his
son.
“Would you think of taking up a commission, should that happen?” he
asked.
William’s first impulse was to say yes, of course, and it was clear that his
father saw that, for while Lord John had done his best to avoid saying
anything to William regarding his future, the mention of a commission had
brought a faint gleam of hope into his father’s face.
William took a deep breath, though, and shook his head.
“I don’t know,” he said. “I’ll think about it.”SAVANNAH WAS IN bloom, the squares and gracious streets covered with
magnolia petals and fallen azalea blooms, gardenias, jasmine, and wisteria
perfuming the air and charming the eye. Lord John’s house, cozy and warm
through the winter, seemed suddenly confined and unbearably stuffy.
William persuaded Amaranthus to come out with him for a walk, to enjoy
the morning air and the cooling breeze from the sea. And she did seem to
enjoy it; her head rose proudly and she went so far as to nod pleasantly to
ladies that she knew—most of whom bowed or nodded graciously back.
William smiled and bowed, too, though he saw the speculative looks on the
faces under the broad straw hats and lacy bonnets. A couple of pursed lips
and sidelong glances, too.
“They’re disappointed,” Amaranthus remarked, sounding mildly amused.
“They think I have ensnared you.”
“Let them,” William replied, briefly patting the hand she’d placed in the
crook of his arm. “Though if you disdain to exhibit your capture in public, we
could walk down to the beach.”
They paused at the head of the stone steps that led down to the water at the
end of Bay Street and took off their shoes and stockings; the stone was wet
and slippery, but felt wonderful on the soles of William’s bare feet. The sand
felt even better, and releasing Amaranthus’s hand, he shucked his coat and
ran away, far down the beach, the unbuckled knees of his breeches flapping
and seabirds calling overhead.
He came back blown and happy, to find that she had taken off her hat and
cap, unpinned her hair, and was dancing on the sand, curtsying to an unseen
lover, whirling away and back again, hand outstretched.
He laughed and, coming to her from behind, took the hand, turned her
toward him, bowed, and kissed her knuckles. She laughed, too, and they
sauntered slowly down the beach, the damp sand rising up between their toes.
They hadn’t spoken since they’d reached the beach, and there seemed no
need. There were a few people on the beach, fishermen, women netting
shrimp in the shallows or digging for clams, and idlers like themselves. No
one gave them more than a casual glance. By unspoken consent, they turned
and headed away from the town, out through the grass and up the river,
passing a half-buried remnant of canvas, once an army tent, now left flapping
in the wind.At last they stopped, knowing they had come far enough, and stood for
some time, watching fishing boats and barges coming down the river and
rowboats and dories crossing to the other side, where a few warehouses
awaited the goods they bore.
Amaranthus sighed, and William thought there was something wistful in
her face, as though she wished she, too, could sail free upon the water.
“You could get a divorce, you know,” he blurted.
She turned her head sharply, body tensed, and looked him up and down, as
though to determine whether this was an ill-timed attempt at wit. Concluding
that it wasn’t, she let her shoulders relax and merely said, “No, I couldn’t,” in
the patient tone one might use to tell a child why he oughtn’t to put his hand
into the fire.
“Certainly—well, almost certainly,” he corrected himself, “you could. I—
have been thinking that I must go back to England, soon. To deal with things.
You could travel with me, under my protection. Ben’s not a duke yet, but
he’s still a peer. That means a divorce would have to be granted by the House
of Lords—and they’d do it in a flash, once they heard about General Bleeker.
Mere infidelity is one thing; treason’s quite another kettle of fish.”
Her nostrils whitened, but she kept her temper.
“That is 
exactly
 what I mean, William. Do you think I haven’t thought of
divorce? How brainless do you think I am?”
There wasn’t any sort of good answer to that question, and he wisely didn’t
try.
“What do you mean by ‘exactly,’ then?” he asked instead.
“I mean treason,” she said, exasperated. “What else could I mean? As you
say, if I were to petition the House of Lords for a divorce on the basis that
Ben has abandoned me, not for a trollop but for General Washington, they’d
grant it in a heartbeat, if I could prove it—and I do think you’d come and
testify to it, if need be, William.” She gave him half of a rueful smile before
returning to her argument.
“And the newspapers and broadsheets and every 
salon
 in London would be
buzzing for weeks—no, months!—about it. What would that do to your
uncle? To his wife? His brother? To Ben’s brothers and his sister? How could
I possibly do that to them?” She made a passionate gesture, flinging out her
arms in frustration.
“The regiment? Even if the King didn’t disband it outright, he’d never trust
Father Pardloe again. Neither would the army.”“I see,” he said stiffly, after a moment’s silence. He took a breath, and then
took her hand, carefully. She didn’t jerk it away or slap him, though she
didn’t respond to his touch, either.
“I only want to say that I didn’t suggest divorce from any motive of self-
interest,” he said quietly. “I thought you might suppose …”
She’d been fixedly looking out at the water, but turned at that and met his
eyes, her look straight and serious, eyes gray as the overcast sky.
“I might have,” she said softly. She was close enough that her skirts,
stirring in the breeze, wrapped round his naked calves, and kissing his
knuckles lightly she let go his hand.
“We should—” she began, but then stopped dead, staring. “What’s that?”
He turned to look and saw a naval cutter, ensign flying in the wind, tearing
down the river toward them. As it passed, he caught a flash of army uniforms
aboard.
“News,” he said. “From Charles Town. Let’s go!”
THEY SAW THE cutter at the quay as they hurried back, then a small group
of army and naval officers laboriously climbing the slippery stone stairway to
Bay Street.
William inflated his lungs and bellowed, “Has Charles Town fallen?”
Most of the officers ignored him, but a young ensign trailing at the end of
the group turned and shouted, “Yes!” with a beaming countenance. The
young man was hastily grabbed by the arm and dragged along, but the group
was plainly in too much hurry to waste time on official rebuke.
“Oh, dear God.” Amaranthus was panting, pressing the heel of her hand
into her corset. William had quite forgotten her, in the excitement, but at once
took the shoes and stockings from her other hand and urged her to sit down
and let him help re-shoe her.
She did, and laughed, in small breathless spurts.
“Really. William. What do you think me? A … mare?”
“No, no. Certainly not. A filly, maybe.” He grinned at her, and pulled her
last stocking up to her knee. He had to leave her shoe buttons undone, having
no buttonhook and no clue how to use one if he had, but he tied her garters
briskly and she could at least walk.
“They’ll have gone to Prévost’s headquarters,” he told her, as they reached
Oglethorpe Street. “I’ll see you to Papa’s house, then I’ll go find out thedetails.”
“Come back as soon as you can,” she said. She was windblown and
panting, with red splotches on her cheeks from trotting over the cobblestones.
“Please, William.”
He nodded and, handing her in at the gate, strode off in the direction of
General Prévost’s headquarters.
By the time he returned, it was well after teatime, but Moira and
Amaranthus and Lord John’s new housekeeper, a tall, irritable woman aptly
named Miss Crabb, had kept some cake for him and were all waiting
impatiently to hear the news.
“Partly it was the slaves,” William explained, licking a crumb from the
corner of his mouth. “Sir Henry had already put out a proclamation, offering
freedom to any slave of a rebel American who might choose to fight for the
British army—and when this was reiterated to the countryside around Charles
Town, there was quite an outpouring of men from both countryside 
and
 the
city. And as these were men with a strong knowledge of the terrain, as you
might say …”
Moira refilled his teacup, eyes gleaming over the squat gray teapot.
“Ye mean to say as how ’twas black men that turned upon their masters,
and that’s how the city fell? Good on ’em!”
“Mrs. O’Meara!” Miss Crabb exclaimed. “You cannot mean that!”
“The divil I don’t,” Moira replied stoutly, plunking the pot back on the
table with such force that tea sputtered across the cloth. “And ye’d mean the
same, if ye’d ever been a ’denture, like I was. Death to the masters, says I!”
Amaranthus uttered a shocked laugh and tried to turn it into a coughing fit
by burying her face in a handkerchief.
“Well, I do gather that Lord Cornwallis and his regulars had some hand in
the surrender,” William said, keeping his countenance with some difficulty.
“He led his troops onto the mainland, while Sir Henry was capturing the
offshore islands, and besieged the city with cannon and trenches.
“And whilst all this was going on, in mid-April, Sir Henry sent two of his
officers to take a place called Monck’s Corner. Banastre Tarleton—I know
him, very vigorous officer—and Patrick Ferguson. They—”
“You know Ban Tarleton?” Amaranthus said, surprised. “I know him, too.
How funny! I—trust he escaped injury?”
“So far as I know, yes,” William said, surprised, too. He was reasonably
sure that nothing short of a cannonball at close range would have made a dentin Tarleton; he’d had a brief passage with the man—over Jane, and the
thought conjured up a host of feelings he didn’t want to deal with. He
swallowed tea and coughed a little. “I’ve not heard of Ferguson—do you
know him?”
He supposed it wasn’t odd that she should. Prior to turning his coat, Ben
had been a major in the British army, and his battalion was—so far as
William knew—still with Clinton.
She shrugged a little. “I met Major Ferguson once. A small, pale Scottish
creature with a crippled arm. Very intense, though, with those sort of pale
gooseberry eyes.”
“I suppose he is. Intense, I mean. Sir Henry sent him out to collect
Loyalists for a provincial militia, and I understand he’s done quite well. His
Loyalists fought with Major Tarleton’s troops to take Monck’s Corner—and
that cut off the main line of retreat for the Americans. So then—”
Before he had told them all he’d heard, the table was a wreck of empty
plates, spilled saucers, and lines of sugar, pepper, and salt, illustrating the
movements of Clinton’s army.
“And so Charles Town fell, day before yesterday,” William ended, slightly
hoarse from talking. “Lincoln had offered to give up the city three weeks
before, if his men were allowed to walk out unharmed. Clinton knew he had
the stronger hand, though, and kept up the bombardment, until Lincoln
finally surrendered unconditionally. Five thousand men, they said, all taken
prisoner. A whole army. Is there more tea, please, Moira?”
“There is,” she said, getting ponderously to her feet. “But if it was my
choice to make, son, I’d be gettin’ out the fine brandy. Seems as though such
a victory’s deservin’ of it.”
This notion passed by general acclamation, and by the time Lord John
arrived home, well past midnight, there were no more clean glasses and only
an inch of brandy left in the last bottle.
Lord John eyed the shambles of his sitting room, shrugged, sat down, and,
picking up the bottle, drained it.
“How are you, Papa?” William had stayed up, leaving the women to make
their separate ways to bed, and had sat by the fire, thinking. Sharing the
general glow of the victory, to be sure—but envious, too, of the men who had
won it.
He missed the camaraderie of the army, but more than that, he missed the
sense of shared purpose, the knowledge that he had a part to play, people whodepended upon him. The army had its strictures, and not inconsiderable ones,
either—but by contrast, his present life was shapeless and lacking …
something. Everything.
“I’m fine, Willie,” his father said affectionately. Lord John was plainly
exhausted, held up mostly by his uniform, but clearly in good spirits. “I’ll tell
you everything tomorrow.”
“Yes, of course.” William got up, and, seeing his father put his feet under
him but then hesitate as though uncertain what came next, smiled and bent to
hoick Lord John out of his chair. He held on to his father’s arm for a moment,
to make sure he was steady, and felt the solid warmth of his body, got the
smell of a man, a soldier, sweat and steel, red wool and leather.
“You asked whether I might consider buying a commission,” William said
abruptly, surprising himself.
“I did.” Lord John was swaying a little on his feet—clearly the inch of
brandy just consumed was only the icing on his evening’s cake—but his eyes
were clear, if bloodshot, and met William’s with a quizzical approval. “You
should be certain, though.”
“I know,” William said. “I’m only thinking.”
“It’s not a bad time to rejoin,” his father said judiciously. “You want to get
in before the fun’s over, I mean. Cornwallis says the Americans won’t last
another winter. Bear that in mind.”
“I will,” said William, smiling. His own level of intoxication wasn’t much
below his father’s and he felt a warm benevolence for the army, England, and
even my lord Cornwallis, though he normally considered that gentleman to
be a tiresome nit. “Good night, Papa.”
“Good night, Willie.”
THE BEGINNING OF a battle is usually much better defined than its ending,
and even though Charles Town concluded with a formal and unconditional
surrender, the aftermath was, as usual, long, drawn out, complicated, and
messy.
The flood of dispatches did not abate, though the ratio of excitement to
tedium dropped considerably. More parts of the Savannah garrison were
indeed carved off and sent north—but to guard prisoners and escort them to
prison hulks or other insalubrious quarters, rather than to join in glorious
battle.“At least at the end of 
our
 siege, Lincoln took his army off with him,”
William remarked to his father and uncle. “Less to tidy up, I mean.”
“Took them off north so Cornwallis could bag them all, you mean.” Uncle
Hal was inclined to be snappish, but William had been around soldiers for the
majority of his life and recognized the poisonous slow sapping nature of
tension that could not be discharged in a good fight, resulting in prickliness
and disgruntlement.
“At least Ben wasn’t there,” Uncle Hal added, in a tone that made Papa
look sharply at him. “Save me having to shoot him myself to keep him from
being hanged.” One corner of his mouth jerked up, in an apparent attempt to
make this sound like a joke. Neither his brother nor his nephew was fooled.
A muffled gasp from the door made all three men glance round, to see
Amaranthus in her calico jacket and straw hat, she having evidently been out.
She had a hand pressed over her mouth, either to keep from saying whatever
she was thinking—or perhaps to keep from vomiting, William thought. She
was white as one of Lord John’s porcelain figurines, and William moved to
take her arm, in case she was about to faint.
She took her hand away from her mouth and let him lead her to a chair,
giving Uncle Hal a horrified look as she went. He went a dull red and cleared
his throat with a strong 
harumph.
“I didn’t mean it,” he said, unconvincingly.
Amaranthus breathed for a few moments, her bosom stirring the folds of
her pale-blue fichu. She shook her head slightly, as though rejecting the
advice of an angel on her shoulder, and clenched her gloved hands upon her
knee.
“Do you truly mean you would prefer him to be dead?” she said, in a voice
like cut glass. “Is his being a traitor more important than his being your son?”
Hal closed his eyes, his face going blank. Lord John and William
exchanged uneasy glances, not knowing what to do.
Hal grimaced slightly and opened his eyes, pale blue and cold as winter.
“He made his choice,” he said, speaking directly to Amaranthus. “I can’t
change that. And I would rather have him killed cleanly than captured and
executed as a traitor. A good death might be the only thing I still could give
him.”
He turned and left the room quietly, leaving no sound but the hissing of the
candles burning behind him.
WILLIAM WAS DRESSING to go down for breakfast the next morning
when a frenzied pounding on his door interrupted him. He opened it to see
Miss Crabb in her wrapper and curling papers, holding Trevor, who was in a
red-faced passion.
“She’s gone off!” the housekeeper said, and shoved the howling child into
his arms. “He’s been bellowing for nearly an hour, and I couldn’t stand it, I
really couldn’t, so I went down and found 
this
!” He hadn’t a hand to spare,
but she waved a folded note at him in accusation, then stuffed it between his
chest and Trevor, unwilling to suffer its touch any longer.
“Er … you’ve read it?” he asked, as politely as possible, shifting Trev to
one arm in order to pluck the note out of his shirtfront.
The housekeeper puffed up like an angry, if scrawny, hen.
“Are you accusing me of impertinence, sir?” she demanded, above the
noise of Trevor’s wail of “Mamamamamamamamama!” Then she looked
down and noticed that William, who had not assumed his breeches yet, was
standing there unshaved and barefoot, in nothing but his shirt. She gasped,
turned, and fled.
William was beginning to wonder whether perhaps he hadn’t awakened at
all and was in the midst of a nightmare, but Trevor put paid to that notion by
biting his arm. He hoicked Trevor onto his shoulder, patted his back in a
business-like manner, and carried him downstairs—still shrieking—in search
of assistance.
He felt oddly calm, in the way that one sometimes is during nightmares,
merely watching as terrible things transpire.
She’s gone.
 He hadn’t the slightest doubt that Miss Crabb was right. He
couldn’t get beyond the simple fact of Amaranthus’s disappearance, though.
She’s gone.
 The part of his mind capable of asking questions and making
speculations was either still asleep or shocked into paralysis.
He pushed the door to the dining room open and went in. Lord John was
sitting at the table in his purple-striped banyan, dipping toast into the yolk of
a soft-boiled egg, but at sight of William and his burden, he dropped the toast
and shoved back his chair.
“What the devil’s happened?” he asked sharply, coming to William at
once. He reached for Trevor. “Where’s Amaranthus?”
“She’s gone,” William said, and the speaking of the words aloud opened a
sudden hollow inside his chest, as though someone had scooped out his heart.He carefully unclenched his hand and dropped the crumpled note on the
table. “She left this.”
“Read it,” Lord John said shortly. He had thrust an eggy toast soldier into
Trevor’s mouth, magically silencing him, and now sat down, balancing the
child on his knee.
Dear Uncle John,
 William read, conscious of his heartbeat thumping in his
ears.
It distresses me beyond Measure to leave you in this Way, but I
cannot bear to remain longer. I thought of saying that I was going off
to drown myself in the Marshes, but I should not like Trevor to believe
his Mother a Suicide—though I should not mind his Grace suffering
the Pangs of Conscience in believing he had driven me to such an
Expedient.
I have made Arrangement to return to my Father’s House in
Philadelphia. I leave my Darling in your Care, knowing that he will
be safe with you. It tears my Heart to leave him, but the Journey is not
safe. Beyond that, Trevor is the Heir to his Grace’s Estates and Title;
he should be brought up with the Knowledge of his Heritage and the
Responsibilities that go with it. I trust his Grace to provide that—I
trust you to provide the constant Love and Security that a Child
requires.
Please believe that I am Grateful, beyond my Ability to say, for all
your Kindness and Care of me and my Son. I will write as soon as I
have reached my Destination.
I will miss you.
I feel as though I write this farewell with my own Heart’s
Blood,
but I remain
Your Niece Amaranthus, Viscountess Grey126
When I Go to Sleep at Night, I Die
Fraser’s Ridge
June 18, 1780
THE MACKENZIES’ ROOM WAS quiet; the house had gone to bed, and
even Adso, who had wandered in and curled up on Brianna’s lap an hour ago,
was snoring in a sort of syncopated purr interrupted by small 
mirp!
 noises as
he spotted dream-mice. The noise had roused Roger from his doze; he lay on
his side, watching his wife through a pleasant haze of the sleep that had left
him, but not gone far.
As with all redheads, the color of her hair depended on the light in which
one saw her: brown in shadow, blazing in sunlight, and by the light of a low-
burning fire, a fall of changing color, sparked with threads of gold. She was
writing, slowly, lifting her quill now and then to frown at the page in search
of a word, a thought. Adso stirred, yawned, and began to knead her thighs
and belly, claws prickling through her shift and wrapper. She hissed through
her teeth and pushed back from the table.
“You leave something to be desired as a muse,” she whispered to the cat,
putting down her quill and carefully detaching his claws. She scooped him
up, rose, and took him to the bed where Roger lay, curled up in the
bedclothes, eyes almost closed. She set Adso down at the foot of the bed and
stood back to watch. The cat stretched luxuriously, then—without opening
his own eyes—oozed slowly up the bed and curled into the spot between
Roger’s face and shoulder, purring loudly.
Roger slid a hand under Adso, picked him up, and dropped him
unceremoniously onto the floor.
“Are ye coming to bed soon?” he asked sleepily, brushing cat hairs away
from his mouth.“Right now,” she assured him. She shrugged out of her wrapper and tossed
it on the floor, where Adso, who had been blinking grouchily, promptly took
possession of the nice warm nest thus provided and settled down on it, eyes
going back to blissful slits. Brianna blew the candle out; Roger heard the tiny
spatter of wax droplets on the tabletop.
“That cat sounds like a motorboat. Why is he in here, anyway? Oughtn’t he
to be out in the barn hunting vermin?” Roger lifted the quilts and squirmed
back, welcoming her in. It had rained earlier and the night chill of her was
delicious. She settled solidly into his arms with a shudder of relaxation, and
his hand settled contentedly on her lovely, blooming belly.
“Mama says cats are attracted to people working, so they can get in the
way. I guess I’m the only person in the house who was doing anything at this
hour.”
“Mmm.” He breathed near her ear. “Ye smell like ink, so ye must have
been writing, not drawing. Letters?”
“Nooo … just, you know, thoughts. Maybe something for the kids’ book,
maybe not.” She was trying to sound casual, but mention of the 
Practical
Guide for Time Travelers
 brought him to full wakefulness.
“Oh?” he said, cautious. “Do I want to know?”
“Probably not,” she said frankly, “but I’d like to tell you about it. It could
wait until morning, though …”
“As if something like coherent conversation happens in the morning
around here,” he said, and rolled onto his back, yawning. “All right, tell me.”
“Well … you remember I was thinking about the problem of mass.”
“Dimly, yes. I don’t recall what you decided, though.”
“I didn’t,” she said frankly. “I just don’t know enough—and there are a lot
of problems with the hypothesis that I don’t have a way to resolve. But it
made me think about what mass 
is.
”
“Mmh.” His eyes were closed, but his hand slid down her back and cupped
her behind, warm and substantial. He jiggled it, gently. “There’s some. I’m
pretty sure that’s mass.”
“Yes. So’s that.” She slid a hand down between them and cupped his
testicles. Lightly, but it made him open his eyes.
“Point taken,” he said, and moved his hand to the small of her back. “So?”
“What do you think happens to us when we die?”
That woke him completely, though it took a moment to assemble words.“When we die,” he said slowly. “If you mean in terms of our souls, the
basic truth is that we don’t know, but we do have faith that we’ll go on
existing, and we have a pretty good reason for having said faith. But that’s
not what you mean, is it?”
“No. I mean bodies. Physically.”
He changed metaphysical gears, not without a small sense of clashing and
grinding.
“You mean something other than just … er … decay?”
“Well, no, that 
is
 what I mean—but kind of … beyond rotting.”
He rolled onto his side and she followed, nestling under his chin, much like
Adso, but with better-smelling hair.
“Beyond rotting … this is the kind of thing that keeps you up at night?
God, what kind of dreams do you have? You’re the scientist here, but so far
as 
I
 know, the process just goes on … what, dissolving?”
“Dissolution. Yes, exactly.”
“You know, normal people talk about sex in bed, don’t they?”
“Most of them probably talk about what horrible thing their child did
during the day, the price of tobacco, or what to do about the sick cow. If they
can stay awake. Anyway—I only had the required physics classes in college,
so this is pretty basic and it may be completely wrong, and—”
“And nobody will ever be able to prove it one way or the other, so let’s not
trouble about that part,” he suggested.
“Good thought. And speaking of smelling …” She turned her head and
snuffled gently at his neck. “You smell like gunpowder. You haven’t been
hunting, have you?” Her voice held a certain amount of incredulity. Not
without reason, but he was slightly nettled.
“I have not. Your da asked me to show 
a’ chraobh àrd
 how to load his new
musket and fire it without knocking his teeth out.”
“Cyrus Crombie?” she said. “Why? Da isn’t conscripting him into his
gang, is he?”
“I believe ‘partisan band’ is the proper term,” Roger said primly. “And no.
Hiram asked Jamie to take the boy on and teach him to fight—with a gun and
dirk, that is. He said if it was a matter of fists, any fisherman could lay a
landsman out like a flatfish without half trying—and he’s probably right—
but none of the Thurso folk had ever even held a gun before coming here, and
most of them still haven’t. They fish, and snare, and trade for meat.”
“Mm. Do you think Hiram made him, or was it Cyrus’s own idea?”“The latter. He’s courting Frances—in his own inimitable way—but he
knows he hasn’t a chance unless your da thinks he’ll make her a good
husband. So he means to prove his mettle.”
“How old is he?” Brianna asked, a note of concern in her voice.
“Sixteen, I think,” Roger said. “Old enough to fight, so far as that goes.”
“So far as that goes,” she muttered, huffing a little under her breath, and he
knew why.
“Jemmy won’t be old enough to ride with them before the war’s over,” he
assured her. “No matter how good he is with a gun.”
“Great. So he can stay and guard the ramparts here with me, Rachel, and
Aunt Jenny and the Sachem, while the partisan band—and Mama, because
she won’t let Da go alone—and probably 
you
—go roaming the countryside,
getting their asses shot off.”
“As you were saying about your physics class …?”
“Oh.” She paused to regather her thoughts, a small soft frown between her
brows. “Well. You know all about atoms and electrons and that sort of
thing?”
“Vaguely.”
“Well, there are smaller things than that—subatomic particles—but
nobody knows how many or exactly how they work. But while we were
hearing about that in class, the instructor said something about how
everything—everything in the universe and probably even if there’s more
than one universe—everything is made of stardust. People, plants, planets …
and stars, I suppose.
“‘Stardust’ not being a scientific term,” she added, just in case he’d
thought it was. “Just that everything is composed of the same infinitesimal
bits of matter.”
“Yes?”
“So what I’m thinking is … maybe that’s what happens when someone
steps through a time place. I’m almost sure that it’s an electromagnetic
phenomenon of 
some
 kind, because of the ley lines.”
“Ley lines?” He was surprised. “I wouldn’t think you’d be running into
those in a physics class.”
She rolled a little, in order to look up at him. Her breath tickled the hairs
on his chest and warmed his neck as she talked. She’d grown warm with
talking; he could feel the vibration of words through her back as she spoke. It
was curiously arousing.“‘Ley line’ is kind of an informal term, but … you know that the earth’s
crust is magnetic, right?”
“I can’t say I did, but I’m willing to take your word for it.”
“You may. And you do know that magnets are directional? Did you play
with them as a kid?”
“You mean, positive end, negative end, and if you put the positive ends of
two magnets together, they bounce apart? Yes, but what’s that got to do with
ley lines?”
“That’s what a ley line 
is,
” she said patiently. “The electromagnetism in
the earth runs in parallel bands, and the bands alternate in the direction of
their magnetic current. Though it’s not totally neat and tidy, of course. They
diverge and overlap and like that. Haven’t I told you this stuff before?”
“Possibly.” He abandoned his half-formed amorous intentions, with a
sense of regret. “But the ley lines 
I
 know about are … I don’t know what
you’d call them, in terms of classification. Folklore, ancient builder stuff? At
least in the British Isles, if you go looking at ancient hill forts and churches
that are probably built on much older sites of worship and … well, things like
standing stones, you often find that you can draw a straight—very straight, in
most cases, as though it had been surveyed—line through two or three or four
such sites. Archaeologists call those ley lines—though some folk call them
spirit walks, because the dead are thought to … Oh, my God.”
A brief, uncontrollable shudder ran through him.
“Goose walking on your grave?” she asked, sympathy slightly marred by a
look of satisfaction.
“Not everybody makes it,” he said, ignoring both sympathy and smugness.
He pushed back the covers and sat up. “Through the stones. That’s what you
mean? That the people who 
don’t
 go through, or don’t go through properly,
turn up dead on these ley lines, leading to the not-unreasonable supposition
that there’s something supernatural going on.”
“I hadn’t heard of spirit walks,” she admitted. “So I can’t say that’s what I
mean—but it makes sense, doesn’t it?” She didn’t wait for him to admit it,
but went on with her own line of thought.
“So … I’m thinking that the … time places … are maybe spots where
different ley lines converge. If so, what happens to the electromagnetism in
that spot would be really interesting, and it 
might
 be what … makes time be
accessible? I mean, Einstein’s Unified Field Theory—”
“Let’s leave Albert out of it,” he said hastily. “At least for now.”“All right,” she said agreeably. “Einstein never got it to work, anyway. All
I’m saying is, maybe when you walk into one of those places—if you have
the right genetics for it—you, um, die. Physically. You dissolve into stardust,
if you want to call it that—and your particles can pass through stone, because
they’re smaller than the atoms that make up the stones.”
Roger felt a distinct lurch in his insides at the memory of what it felt like.
Being dead wasn’t putting it too strongly, but …
“But we come out again,” he pointed out. “If we die, we don’t stay dead.”
“Well, some of us don’t.” She’d sat up, too, arms curled around her knees.
“If we believe Otter-Tooth’s journal and that skunk Wendigo Donner, some
of their companions made it through the stones but came out dead. And there
are all those incidents in Geillis Duncan’s journal—strange people, often in
odd clothes—turning up dead near stone circles.”
“Aye,” he said, with the faint internal squirm that affected him when his
green-eyed five-time-great-grandmother was mentioned. “So … you think
you have a notion why that doesn’t happen to everybody.”
“I’m not sure it amounts to 
that
 much,” she admitted. “But it kind of goes
along with what you were saying about what Christians believe—that we go
on living after death. If you think about what it feels like”—she swallowed
—“in there. You feel like you’re coming apart but you’re trying as hard as
you can not to; to keep your—your sense of your body, I guess.”
“Yes,” he said.
“So maybe what we are in—there—is the immortal part of us; souls, if you
like.”
“As a Christian minister, I like it fine,” he said, trying for some semblance
of normality in this conversation. Like it or not, he 
was
 remembering that
spectral cold, and the skin down his arms and legs prickled with gooseflesh.
“So …?”
“Well, see, I think that’s maybe where the gemstones come in,” she
explained. She moved closer to him, putting a warm hand on his bare and
prickling leg. “You know what it feels like when they burn up—when the
chemical bonds between their molecules, or maybe their atoms or subatomic
particles, are breaking. And when you break a chemical bond, it releases a lot
of energy. Since it’s releasing that energy inside our—our clouds of
dissolving stuff, maybe …?”
“Maybe that’s what keeps the bits of our bodies together, you’re saying?”“Mm-hm. And—this just occurred to me …” She turned to him, eyes
widening. “Maybe you can lose a few bits in transit, but still make it out—
just with a little damage. Like an irregular heartbeat.”
Neither of them spoke for a bit, contemplating.
“You 
are
 hiding that book, right?” he asked. This discussion was
disquieting enough; thought of having the same discussion with Jemmy made
his stomach turn over.
“Yes,” she assured him. “I was hiding it in the bottom of my sketchbox,
but even Mandy knows how to open that now.”
“Maybe they wouldn’t be interested. I mean, it’s not got a title or pictures
…”
She shot him a sharp glance.
“Don’t you believe it. Kids snoop. I mean, maybe 
you
 didn’t, being a
goody-good preacher’s lad …” She was laughing at him, but dead serious
underneath. “But I went through my parents’ stuff all the time. I mean, I
knew what size my mother’s brassieres and panties were.”
“Well, that would have been well worth knowing … No, I did, too,” he
admitted. “Not about the Reverend’s underpants—he wore long johns, with
buttons, year-round—but I learned a lot of really interesting things I wasn’t
supposed to know, mostly about the Reverend’s congregation. He gave me
my dad’s letters from the War when I was about thirteen—but I’d read them
two or three years before, from his desk.”
“Really?” she said, diverted. “Did you wear long johns with buttons, too?”
“Me and every other young lad in Inverness in the 1940s. You 
know
 how
cold it gets up there in winter—but actually, when I was about thirteen, I
found a trunk of my dad’s old RAF uniform stuff that they’d sent home when
he—disappeared.” He swallowed, stabbed by the unexpected memory of the
last time—and it 
was
 the last, he was sure—he’d seen his father. “There were
a few pairs of underpants amongst the other things; the Reverend told me the
fliers called them ‘shreddies,’ God knows why—but they looked like what
you’d call boxer shorts. I took to wearing those, in the summers.”
“Shreddies,” she said, tasting the word with pleasure. “I’m not sure
whether I’d rather see you in those or in the button-front long johns. Anyway,
I’ve been hiding it in Da’s study. Everybody’s afraid to mess around in there
—except Mama, and I suppose I ought to show this to her, anyway. When
I’ve thought it out a little further.”“To be honest, I think seeing whatever you’re writing would give your da
the absolute whim-whams.”
“Like the whole thing doesn’t anyway.”
And he’s not the only one,
 Roger thought. A cool draft of rain-scented air
from the window touched his back.
“Ye told me that when a scientist makes a hypothesis, the next thing to do
is test it, right?”
“Yes.”
“If ye think of a way to test this one … don’t tell me, aye?”127
Imetay Ravelerstay Anualmay,
Onservationcay Ofway Assmay N Nrg
THE NEXT DAY, ROGER came down from the malting floor in search of
beer for Jamie and Ian, and found Brianna in Jamie’s office, writing.
She looked up at him, frowning, pencil in hand.
“How old is Pig Latin, do you know?”
“No idea. Why?” He looked over her shoulder at the page.
IMETAY RAVELERSTAY ANUALMAY: ONSERVATIONCAY
OFWAY ASSMAY N NRG
“Time Traveler’s Manual?”
 he asked, looking at her sideways. She was
flushed and had a deep line showing between her brows, neither of which
detracted from her appeal.
She nodded, still frowning at the page.
“What we were talking about last night—it gave me a thought and I
wanted to put it down before I lost it, but—”
“You don’t want to risk anybody stumbling over it and reading it,” he
finished for her.
“Yep. But it still needs to be something the kids—or Jemmy, at least—can
read, if necessary.”
“So tell me your valuable thought,” he suggested, and sat down, very
slowly. He’d been working at the still with Jamie for the last three days,
hauling bags of barley, then carrying the cases of rifles—Jamie had got
another twenty, through the good offices of Scotchee Cameron—from their
hiding place under the malting floor down to the stable-cave and finally
unpacking and cleaning said rifles. He ached from neck to knees.“So you don’t know anything about Pig Latin,” she said, eyeing him
skeptically. “Do you remember what I told you about the principle of the
conservation of mass?”
He closed his eyes and mimed writing on a blackboard.
“Matter is neither created nor destroyed,” he said, and opened his eyes.
“That it?”
“Well done.” She patted his hand, then noticed its state: grimy and curled
into a half fist, his fingers stiff from gripping the rough burlap bags. She
pulled his hand into her lap, unfolded the fingers, and began to massage
them.
“The whole formal thing says, 
‘The law of conservation of mass states that
for any system closed to all transfers of matter and energy, the mass of the
system must remain constant over time, as the system’s mass cannot change,
so quantity can neither be added nor removed.’
”
Roger’s eyes were half closed in a mingling of tiredness and ecstasy.
“God, that feels good.”
“Good. So what I’m thinking is this: time travelers definitely have mass,
right? So if they’re moving from one time to another, does that mean the
system is momentarily unbalanced in terms of mass? I mean, does 1780 have
four hundred twenty-five more pounds of mass in it than it ought to have—
and conversely, 1982 has four hundred twenty-five pounds too little?”
“Is that how much we weigh, all together?” Roger opened his eyes. “I’ve
often thought the kids each weighed that much, all by themselves.”
“I’m sure they do,” she said, smiling, but unwilling to lose her train of
thought. “And of course I’m making the assumption that the dimension of
time is part of the definition of ‘system.’ Here, give me the other one.”
“It’s filthy, too.” It was, but she merely pulled a handkerchief from her
bosom and wiped the mixture of grease and dirt from his fingers. “Why are
your fingers so greasy?”
“If you’re sending something like a rifle across an ocean, you pack it in
grease to keep the salt air and water from eroding it. Or guano dust getting
into the mechanism.”
“Blessed Michael defend us,” she said, and despite the fact that she
obviously meant it, he laughed at her Bostonian Gaelic accent.
“It’s all right,” he assured her, swallowing a yawn. “The rifles are safe. Go
on with the conservation of mass; I’m fascinated.”“Sure you are.” Her long, strong fingers probed and rubbed, pulling his
joints and avoiding—for the most part—his blisters. “So—you remember
Geillis’s grimoire, right? And the record she kept of bodies that were found
in or near stone circles?”
That woke him up.
“I do.”
“Well. If you move a chunk of mass into a different time period, do you
maybe have to balance that by removing a different chunk?”
He stared at her, and she looked back, still holding his hand, but no longer
massaging it. Her eyes were steady, expectant.
“You’re saying that if someone comes through a—a portal—someone else
from that time has to die, to keep the balance right?”
“Not exactly.” She resumed her massage, slower now. “Because even if
they die, their mass is still there. I’m sort of thinking that maybe that’s what
keeps them from passing through, though; they’re headed for a time that …
that doesn’t have room for them, in terms of mass?”
“And … they can’t go through and that kills them?” There seemed
something illogical in this, but his brain was in no condition to say what.
“Not that, exactly, either.” Brianna lifted her head, listening, but whatever
she’d heard, the sound wasn’t repeated, and she went on, bending her head to
peer into his palm. “Man, you have 
huge
 blisters. I hope they heal up by the
ordination—everybody will be shaking your hand afterward. But think about
it: most of the bodies in Geillis’s news clippings were unidentified, and
mostly wearing odd clothes.”
He stared at her for a moment, then took his hand from hers and flexed it
gingerly.
“So you think they came from somewhere—sometime—else, and got
through the stones—but then died?”
“Or,” she said delicately, “they came from this time, but they knew where
they were going. Or where they 
thought
 they were going, because plainly
they didn’t make it there. So, you know …”
“How did they find out that they maybe 
could
 go?” he finished for her. He
glanced down at her notebook. “Maybe more people read Pig Latin than you
think.”128
Surrender
Fraser’s Ridge
June 21, 1780
ROGER WAS SEATED IN the family privy, not from bodily necessity but
from an urgent need for five minutes of solitude. He could, he supposed, have
gone into the woods or taken momentary refuge in the root cellar or the
springhouse, but the house and all its surroundings were boiling with
humanity, and he needed just these few minutes to be by himself. Not—not
by any means—alone, but not with people.
Davy Caldwell had arrived last night, with the Reverends Peterson (from
Savannah) and Thomas (from Charles Town). The house was as prepared as
half a dozen determined women could make it; the church had been cleaned
and aired and filled with so many flowers that half of Claire’s bees were
zooming in and out of the windows like tiny crop dusters. The scents of
barbecued pork, vinegar and mustard slaw, and fried onions drifted through
the cracks in the walls, making his stomach twitch in anticipation. He closed
his eyes and listened.
To the sounds of the festivities gearing up, the distant rumble of people
talking, the fiddles and drums tuning up by Claire’s garden—even the loud
nasal drone of a bagpipe in the distance. That was Auld Charlie Wallace, who
would pipe the ministers into church—and pipe them out again, their number
augmented by one.
He’d been uncertain about the piping, given the Reverend Thomas’s
opinions regarding music in church, but Jamie—of all people—had said that
he didn’t think the sound of the pipes should really be called music.
“People dance to it,” Bree had said, amused.“Aye, well, folk will dance to anything, if ye give them enough liquor,” her
father replied. “The British government says the pipes are a weapon of war,
though, and I’ll no just say they’re wrong. Put it this way, lass—ye ken I
dinna hear music, but I hear what the pipes are sayin’ fine.”
Roger smiled, hearing this in memory. Jamie wasn’t wrong, and neither
had been the British government.
Fitting,
 he thought, and closed his eyes. He was under no illusions that
what he was about to do wasn’t one—and an important one—of innumerable
steps on the road to a great battle.
Yes,
 he thought in reply to a silent question he’d answered before, would
answer again, however often it came—and he knew it would. 
Yes, I’m
scared. And yes, I will.
 And in the stillness of his beating heart, all sounds
faded into a great, encompassing peace.
JAMIE HAD SEEN an ordination once, in Paris, in the great cathedral. He
had gone with Annalise de Marillac, whose brother Jacques was one of the
ordinands, and consequently had had a place with her family, from which he
could see everything. He remembered it vividly—though in honesty, his
memories of the early parts of the ceremony were mostly of Annalise’s
bosom and her perfumed, excited warmth throbbing beside him. He was sure
that getting a cockstand in a cathedral must be some sort of sin, but as he’d
been too embarrassed to explain it in Confession, he had let it pass under the
guise of “impure thoughts.” He cleared his throat, glanced at Claire, and
straightened up.
This ceremony was quite different, of course—and yet at the heart of it, it
was strikingly the same.
The words were in English, not Latin—but they said similar things.
Grace to you and peace
from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Sisters and brothers in Christ, we come together with thanksgiving as
congregation and
Presbytery to praise the Lord who has brought us to this day of the
ordination
Of Roger Jeremiah MacKenzie as Minister of this congregation and
parish.Notre Dame de Paris had a mighty organ and many choristers; he
remembered how the sound had shaken the air and seemed to quiver in his
bones. Here, there was no music but the calls of birds that came through the
open windows, no incense save the smell of pine boards and the pleasant tang
of soap and sweat among the people. Brianna, on his left, smelled of flour
and apples, and Claire on his right carried her usual varying scent of green
things 
and flowers. From the corner of his eye, he caught a wee movement; a
bee had landed on her head, just above her ear.
She lifted a hand absently to brush at the ticklish feeling, but he caught the
hand and held it for a few seconds, ’til the bee flew away. She glanced at
him, surprised, but smiled and looked back at what was going on in front of
them.
The elder ministers spoke, one at a time, and they laid their hands on
Roger Mac, touching his head, his shoulders, his hands. Just so, the bishop
had laid his hands on the young priests, and he felt the same sense of awe,
recognizing what was happening. This was the keeping of a Word that had
been kept for centuries; the passing on of a solemn trust, that the man to
whom it was given would keep it, too—forever.
He felt tears come to his eyes, and bit his lip to hold them back.
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ!
In His great mercy by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
He gave us new birth into a living hope.
Lord our God, we praise You for Christ the Lord.
We praise You for the fellowship of the Church;
we praise You for the faith handed down
as one generation to another tells of Your mighty acts;
we praise You for the worship offered throughout the world,
we praise You for the witness and service of the saints through the
ages.
Lord our God—Father, Son and Holy Spirit, we praise You.
Amen.
In Paris, the young men—there had been twenty, he’d counted them—
prostrated themselves in their clean white garments, lying facedown on the
stone floor, hands raised above their heads, submitting themselves.
Surrendering.God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
You call us in Your mercy;
You sustain us by Your power.
Through every generation, Your wisdom supplies our need.
You sent Your only Son, Jesus Christ,
to be the apostle and high priest of our faith
and the shepherd of our souls.
By His death and resurrection He has overcome death
and, having ascended into heaven,
has poured out His Spirit,
making some apostles,
some prophets, some evangelists,
some pastors and teachers,
to equip all for the work of ministry
and to build up His body, the Church.
We pray You now to
POUR OUT YOUR HOLY SPIRIT UPON THIS YOUR SERVANT,
Roger Jeremiah, WHOM WE NOW, IN YOUR NAME AND IN
OBEDIENCE TO YOUR WILL, BY THE LAYING ON OF HANDS,
ORDAIN AND APPOINT TO THE OFFICE OF THE HOLY
MINISTRY WITHIN THE ONE, HOLY, CATHOLIC, AND
APOSTOLIC CHURCH, COMMITTING TO HIM AUTHORITY TO
MINISTER YOUR WORD AND SACRAMENTS.
These were Presbyterians and not given to spectacle. Roger Mac drew a
deep breath and closed his eyes, and Jamie trembled as he felt the witness of
surrender cleave his heart.
Warm drops struck his hands, folded in his lap, but he didn’t care. A
murmur of awe and joy rose up from the church, and Roger Mac stood up, his
own face wet with tears and shining like the sun.
IT WAS NEARLY midnight before we reached our bed. I could still hear the
celebrations going on in the distance, though by now the random gunfire had
ceased and it was just singing—of a very non-religious nature—with a single
fiddle dodging in and out among the voices.I was nearly dead with fatigue and the aftermath of strong emotion; I
couldn’t imagine how Brianna, let alone Roger, was still on her feet, but I’d
seen them on my way back to the house, wrapped in each other’s arms and
kissing in the shadow of a big black walnut. I wondered vaguely whether the
profound emotion of ordination normally turned into sexual desire, if the
legitimate object of it was at hand … and what young, new Catholic priests
might do to express their own elation?
I shed my clothes and pulled a clean night rail over my head, sighing in
quiet ecstasy at having nothing but air on my corset-constricted body. My
head popped out and I saw Jamie, lying on the bed in his own shirt. His head
was cocked toward the window and he looked rather wistful; I wondered
whether he’d rather be down there dancing—but I couldn’t imagine why he
wouldn’t be there, if that was the case.
“What are you thinking?”
He looked up and smiled at me. He’d undone his formal queue and his hair
lay over his shoulders, sparking in the candlelight.
“Och … I was just wondering whether I shall ever hear Mass said again.”
“Oh.” I tried to think. “When was the last time? At Jocasta’s wedding?”
“Aye, I think so.”
Catholicism was prohibited in most of the colonies, bar Maryland, which
had been founded specifically 
as
 a Catholic colony. Even there, the Anglican
Church was the official Church, and Catholic priests were few and far
between in the southern colonies.
“It won’t always be like this,” I said, and began to massage his shoulders,
slowly. “Brianna’s told you about the Constitution, hasn’t she? It will
guarantee freedom of religion—among other things.”
“She recited the beginning of it to me.” He sighed and bent his head,
inviting 
me to rub the long, tight muscles of his neck. “
‘We, the people …’
Brawly written. I hope to meet Mr. Jefferson someday, though I think he
might have stolen the odd phrase here and there, and some of his ideas have a
familiar ring to them.”
“Montesquieu might have had some minor influence,” I said, amused.
“And I believe I’ve heard John Locke spoken of as well.”
He glanced over his shoulder at me, one brow raised.
“Aye, that’s it. I shouldna have thought ye’d read either one, Sassenach.”
“Well, I haven’t,” I admitted. “But I didn’t go to school in America; only
medical school, and they don’t teach you history there, bar the history ofmedicine, where they point out horrible examples of benighted thinking and
horrific practices—virtually all of which I’ve actually used now and then, bar
blowing tobacco smoke up someone’s bottom. Can’t think how I’ve missed
that one …” I coughed. “But Bree learned all about American history in the
fifth and sixth grades, and more in high school. She’s the one who told me
about Mr. Jefferson’s light-fingered ways with words.
“But then, there’s Benjamin Franklin—I think at least some of his quotes
were original. I remember, ‘You have a republic … if you can keep it.’ That’s
what he said—will say—at the end of the war. But they—we—
did
 keep it. At
least for the next two hundred years. Maybe longer.”
“Something like that is worth fighting for, aye,” he said, and squeezed my
hand.
I put out the candle and slid into bed beside him, every muscle in my body
dissolving in the ecstasy of simply lying down.
Jamie turned onto his side and gathered me against him and we lay
comfortably entwined, listening to the sounds of celebration outside. Quieter
now, as people began to stagger home or to find a peaceful tree or bush to
sleep under, but the music of a single fiddle still sang to the stars.129
The Pursuit of Happiness
IT TOOK WILLIAM ROUGHLY three seconds to conclude that he meant to
go after Amaranthus, and the rest of the day was a search for the means of her
departure. He didn’t know how long she’d been planning her disappearance
—
probably since I came back from Morristown,
 he thought grimly—but
she’d done a good job of it.
He came home in the evening, having concocted a plan—if you could call
it that—and proceeded to convince a very dubious uncle and father of its
virtue over supper.
“Whether she went by horse, carriage, or ship, I think she must be heading
for Charles Town.” He hesitated, but there was no reason not to tell them.
“When I mentioned Banastre Tarleton—when Charles Town fell—she
remarked that she knew him. Which I suppose means that he also knew—or
knows—Ben.”
“He did—does,” Hal said, surprised. “Quite well, in fact. For a short time,
they were in the same company—Ban and Ben, people called them. You
know, for a joke.”
“Well, then,” William said with satisfaction. “Amaranthus knows that Ban
is in Charles Town with Clinton. If she thought she needed help or protection
on her way … would she not go to him?”
“It’s a thought,” said his father, though he looked dubious. “Clearly, she
didn’t take much time to prepare.”
“I don’t know that she didn’t,” William said dryly. “She may have been
planning it even before I came back. Or thinking about it, at least. Regardless
of how she went, though, she can’t have got that far yet. I may be able to
overtake her on the road, and if by chance I don’t, Ban may well have seen
her—or contrived the next part of her passage. I don’t imagine 
he
 knows yet.About Ben, I mean. If not, and if she told him she meant to go to Ben—
without saying exactly where he is—Ban would certainly help her.”
A brief stab of pain showed on Uncle Hal’s face, but was brutally
suppressed in the next moment.
“And what do you propose doing, if you find her?” he said, his voice
rasping. “Carry her back here by force?”
William lifted one shoulder, impatient.
“I’ll find out what the devil she actually means to do, for one thing,” he
said. “She may 
be
 going to her father’s house in Philadelphia, and if she is—
I’ll see that she gets there safely. If it’s Ben …” He paused, briefly recalling
his harrowing escape from Morristown. “I’ll take her to Adam,” he
concluded. “He’ll see that she’s safe, and if she 
does
 mean to go to Ben …”
“Jesus. Does Adam know?” Hal’s voice cracked and he coughed. William
saw his father glance sharply at Hal and move toward the bell to summon a
servant.
Hal frowned at him and made a sharp gesture to stop him.
“I’m fine,” he said shortly, but the last word had to be forced out, and his
breathing was suddenly stertorous.
“The devil you are,” Papa said, and grabbed Uncle Hal by the elbow,
hauling him to the sofa and pushing him down upon it. “Willie, go and tell
Moira to boil coffee—very strong and lots of it—and 
now.
”
“I’m—” Hal began, but broke off, coughing. He’d pressed his fist into his
chest and was turning a nasty color that alarmed William.
“Is he—” he began. His father turned on him like a tiger.
“Now!”
 he shouted, and as William hurtled from the room, he heard his
father call after him, “Get my saddlebags!”
The next few hours passed in a blur of activity, with people running to and
fro and fetching things and making anxious, stupid suggestions, while Hal sat
on the sofa holding Papa’s hand as though it were a rope thrown to a
drowning swimmer, alternating between blowing air, gasping, and drinking
black coffee with some sort of herb crumbled into it that Papa had dug out of
his saddlebags.
William, not knowing how to help, but unwilling to just go to bed, had
lurked in the kitchen, carrying more hot coffee as needed, but mostly
listening to Moira and Miss Crabb, from whom he learned that the duke
suffered from something called asthma and that (lowered voices, with a
cautious glance over the shoulder) Lord John’s wife-but-she-wasn’t-really-and-the-things-folk-
said
-of-her was a famous healer and had given Lord John
the little dry sticks to put in the coffee.
“And what His Grace will do if he has another o’ them fits on the boat,”
Moira said, shaking her head, “I 
don’t
 know!”
“Boat?” asked William, looking up from his third piece of apple pie. “Is he
meaning to go somewhere?”
“Oh, yes,” Miss Crabb said, nodding wisely. “To England.”
“For to speak to the House o’ Lords,” Moira added.
“About the war,” Miss Crabb said quickly, before Moira could steal any
more of her thunder. William hid a smile in his napkin, but was curious. He
wondered whether Uncle Hal really had opinions on the conduct of the war
that he felt obliged to share with the House of Lords or whether he had
sought a good excuse to go home to England—and Aunt Minnie.
He 
did
 know—from his father—that Hal hadn’t been able to bring himself
to write to his wife about Ben.
“When does he mean to go?” he asked.
“In a month,” Miss Crabb said, and pursed her lips.
“Does Lord John mean to go as well?” William half-hoped the answer was
no. While he didn’t want Uncle Hal to choke to death alone on a ship, he
much preferred to have Papa here, holding things together while he, William,
pursued Amaranthus.
The two women shook their heads, both looking grave. They might have
said more, but at that moment Papa’s quick footsteps came down the hall, and
a moment later his disheveled fair head poked through the door.
“He’s better,” he said at once, catching William’s eye. “Come and help
me; he wants to go up to his bed.”
THE DUKE SPENT much of the next day in bed, but when William went up
to check on his state of health, he was sitting upright, a writing desk on his
knees, scribbling away. He looked up at William’s advent and forestalled any
queries by saying, “So, you still mean to go after her.”
It wasn’t posed as a question, and William merely nodded. So did Hal, and
took a clean sheet of paper from the quire on his bedside table.
“Tomorrow, then,” he said.
AT DAWN OF the next day, William fastened his stock, buttoned his buff
waistcoat, pulled on the red coat he’d thought he’d never wear again, and
went downstairs, his step firm in his freshly polished boots.
His father and uncle were already at breakfast, and despite his impatience
to be off, the smell of buttered corn bread, fried eggs, fresh ham, peach jam,
crab fritters, and grilled sea trout was enough to make him sit down without
argument. Both Papa and Uncle Hal viewed him with exactly the same look
of mixed approval and veiled anxiety, making him want to laugh, but he
didn’t, instead inclining his head briefly—neither one was talkative in the
mornings, but apparently today was an exception.
“Here.” Uncle Hal pushed two folded documents with wax seals across the
table to him. “The red one’s your commission and the other’s your orders—
such as they are. I’ve given you the rank of captain, and your orders say
you’re to be given free passage essentially anywhere you want to go, without
let or hindrance, and you may call upon the assistance of His Majesty’s
officers and troops as needed and available.”
“You think I might need a column of infantry to help drag Amaranthus
back?” William asked, biting into a warm slice of fresh buttered corn bread,
thick with peach jam.
“You think you won’t?” his father said, arching an eyebrow. Lord John got
up and, coming behind William, undid his hasty plait and rebraided it, tight
and neat, before doubling it into a queue and binding it with his own black
ribbon. The touch of his father’s hands on his neck, warm and light, moved
him.
Everything this morning had a freshness about it and a sense of moment
that made him feel he would recall every object seen or touched, every word
spoken, for as long as he lived.
He’d barely slept, his mind pulsing with energy, the stultification and
petrifaction of the last month gone as though it had never existed. His
statement that he was going after the girl had met with no opposition; Papa
and Uncle Hal had exchanged a long glance and then set to making plans.
“She said she’d made arrangements,” Papa was saying, frowning over a
forkful of sea trout. “What sort of arrangements, do you suppose?”
“So far as any of the servants can tell,” Hal replied, “she made a raid on the
pantry and absconded with enough food for three or four days, took her
plainest clothes—and most of her jewelry. She—”
“Did she take her wedding ring?” William interrupted.“Yes,” Lord John said, and William shrugged.
“Then she’s heading for Ben. She’d have left it if she was done with him.”
Uncle Hal gave him the sort of look he would have given a performing flea
who’d just turned a somersault, but Papa hid a smile behind his napkin.
“We wouldn’t let her go alone, even if we were positive that she 
is
 headed
for her father’s house,” he said. “A young woman alone on the road—and we
do 
think
 she’s alone,” he added, more slowly. “Though I suppose it’s possible
that …”
“More than possible,” Uncle Hal said grimly. “That young woman—”
“Is your daughter-in-law,” Lord John interrupted. “And the mother of your
heir. As such, we have every obligation to ensure her safety.”
“Mmphm.” William heard the grunt of agreement he’d made and stopped
dead for an instant, a forkful of egg suspended, dripping yolk over his plate.
“You probably don’t want to hear this … but Da makes that sort of noise all
the time.”
 He glanced swiftly from his father to his uncle, but neither of them
seemed to have noticed anything odd in his response, and the party relapsed
into a silent, steady engulfment of breakfast.
William’s new mare, Birdie, was happy to see him and nosed him in search
of apples—which he’d brought—and crunched them with evident pleasure,
slobbering juice down his sleeve as he pulled the bridle over her ears. She
sensed his own excitement and pricked her ears and snorted a little, bobbing
her head as he tightened the girth. He wondered just how Amaranthus had
managed her vanishing act; none of the horses belonging to the household
were missing, not even the elderly mare Amaranthus was accustomed to ride.
Either she’d taken a public coach—unlikely; he thought Uncle Hal had
probably sent directly to the coaching inn to have inquiries made, and she
would have known he’d do that—or she’d hired a private carriage or a livery
horse. Or she’d had help in absquatulating and her bloody assistant had
provided her transportation. He was running moodily through a list of local
gallants that she might have seduced to her purposes but was interrupted by
the appearance of Lord John, with a purse in one hand and a small
portmanteau in the other.
“A plain suit, stockings, and a fresh shirt,” he said briefly, handing over the
latter. “And money. There’s a letter of credit in there as well—you might put
that away in your pocket, just in case.”
“In case I’m obliged to ransom her from a band of highwaymen?” William
asked, taking the purse. It was pleasantly heavy. He tucked it into hisgreatcoat, and, taking one of the pistols from his saddlebag, tucked that into
his belt.
“Haha,” said his father, politely. “William—if she 
is
 going to Ben, and she
gets to him … don’t—I repeat, 
don’t
 make any effort to take her away from
him. Next time—if there is a next time—he probably will kill you.” There
was enough blunt finality in that opinion that decided William not to argue
with it, though his pride thought strongly otherwise.
“I won’t,” he said briefly, and patted his father’s shoulder, smiling. “Don’t
worry about a thing.”130
Herr Weber
A MONTH PAST THE fall of Charles Town, and the place still looked like
an anthill that someone had kicked over. All the citizens of the place
appeared to be outside, carrying stones and lumber and baskets of dirt and
buckets of paint, and those not occupied with cleaning and repair were
shouting and selling: meat and fruit, vegetables and poultry and hams,
cockles and mussels, shrimps and oysters, and every other damned thing you
could pull out of the sea and eat. The thought of eating, coinciding with the
drifting smell of broiled fish, made William’s mouth water.
The seller of the savory fish was unfortunately surrounded by a company
of soldiers, all pushing for attention as the woman and her daughter shuffled
small, sizzling fish off hot bricks and into scraps of old newspaper as though
they were dealing cards, while a small boy squatted beside them over a
dented pot, taking coins from the soldiers and firing each one into the pot to
make it ring.
Not willing to draw attention to himself by using his captain’s uniform to
push his way into the mob, he turned toward the docks, where he’d certainly
find food, and doubtless drink as well, at one of the numerous taverns.
What he found, though, was Denys Randall, walking idly up and down a
narrow quay, apparently waiting for someone.
“Ellesmere!” Randall exclaimed, spotting him.
“Ransom,” William corrected. Denys waved a hand, indicating that it was
all one.
“Where have you sprung from?” he asked, taking in William’s uniform at a
glance. “And why?”
“I’m looking for Ban Tarleton. Seen him recently?”
Denys shook his head, frowning. “No. I suppose I could ask around,
though. Where are you staying?”“Nowhere, at the moment. Are there any decent places?” He glanced round
at a line of shirtless men, gleaming with sweat as they moved baskets and
barrows and wooden pallets of rubbish down to the shore. “What do they
mean to do with all that? Build a seawall? Or repair it, rather.” There was an
untidy ramble of fortifications outside the remains of the extant seawall,
which had suffered much from the siege bombardments.
“They should do, but I daresay they’ll just shove that lot into the water and
be done with it. As to a sleeping place, try Mrs. Warren’s, on Broad Street.”
Denys picked up his hat and gave William a quick wave of the hand. “I’ll ask
about Tarleton.”
William nodded in acknowledgment and pushed off in search of Broad
Street, Mrs. Warren, and food—not necessarily in that order. He found food
quickly, in the form of rice and red beans cooked with sausage, at a stall near
the parade ground. No troops were drilling, but as usual with an army nearby,
there were plenty of the civilians—sutlers, laundresses, food vendors,
prostitutes—who fed off the army like a horde of voracious lice.
Well, turnabout’s fair play,
 he thought, returning his bowl to the rice-and-
beans proprietor for a second helping. Eating this one somewhat more slowly,
he scanned the passing crowds for any trace of Amaranthus, or Banastre
Tarleton, but no trace did he see—and he thought he would instantly have
perceived either one, both having a taste for vivid dress.
Replete, he walked slowly round the city, up and down the major streets,
peering into shops and banks and churches as he went. He had no idea
whether either Amaranthus or Ban was religious—somehow, he doubted it—
but the churches were cool, and it was good to sit down for a few moments
and listen to the silence, as a respite from the city’s noise.
He reached Mrs. Warren’s house just before sunset, and after a very decent
fish supper went to bed, dog-tired and low in spirit.
These conditions were reversed in the morning, and he sprang from bed
with mind and body renewed, determined in spirit. He’d go first to
Cornwallis’s headquarters; he’d seen the house, with its regimental flags, on
his peregrinations the evening before. Someone there would doubtless know
at least where Banastre Tarleton was 
supposed
 to be.
Someone did. The news, however, was not encouraging: Colonel Tarleton
had taken a company of his British Legion southward two weeks before, in
pursuit of a body of fleeing American militia. A messenger had come back to
report the outcome of a small but nasty fight near a place called Waxhaws;Tarleton’s troops had overcome the Americans, killing or injuring most of
them and taking the rest prisoner. However, Colonel Tarleton had been
injured by reason of his horse falling on him, and had not yet returned to
Charles Town.
All right, that crossed Ban pretty definitively off William’s list. Tarleton
couldn’t possibly have been lending Amaranthus aid in her escape. What
next?
The docks, of course. He’d begun searching there last night, before his
stomach had had other ideas. But if she 
was
 heading for Philadelphia, as
she’d said, and had not taken a ship from Savannah—which she hadn’t, he’d
checked—then Charles Town was the next large port from which she might
reasonably have done so. And surely a young woman traveling alone (God,
was
 she alone? Might she have eloped with someone? Surely not …) would
find ship travel safer, as well as more comfortable, than risking travel on
roads swarming with soldiers, sappers, ex-slaves, and commercial wagons.
It was a beautiful day, and he began his search with diligence, starting with
the harbormaster’s office for a list of ships sailing within the last week for
Philadelphia or New York (
just in case she
 is 
heading for Ben …
) and
manifests for those who had posted them. Her name was not on any of the
lists—but then, he argued with himself, she wouldn’t necessarily be; if she’d
sailed as a private passenger on a small boat, she wouldn’t be listed anywhere
…
In the end, it came down to what he’d already known it would: a slog
through the docks on foot, asking questions of everyone he came across.
After an hour of this, the beautiful day was beginning to dim, as a fogbank
moved in. He decided to slake his thirst and began walking up the quay— a
small one that docked fishing boats and smaller commercial ships—toward
shore. What he found, though, was Denys Randall. Again.
“Hoy!” William said loudly, coming up behind Denys and clapping him on
the shoulder. “Do you 
live
 on the docks?”
“I might ask the same of you,” Denys said shortly, and William now
perceived that he wasn’t alone; he was trying to shield a small man, whose
lined face made him look like a Christmas nutcracker, from William’s view.
“Who are you looking for now?”
“A young woman,” William said mildly. “Who’s your friend?”
Denys was for once deprived of his air of light mockery and self-
composure. William thought he presently resembled nothing more stronglythan a cat on hot bricks. Denys glanced swiftly at his companion, whose
resemblance to a Christmas nutcracker was becoming more pronounced by
the moment, then turned back to William, a pulse throbbing visibly at the side
of his jaw.
“I must go and speak to someone,” he said. “Quickly. This is Herr Weber;
keep an eye on him. I’ll be back, quick as I can.” And with that, he vanished
down the quay toward the water, nearly running in his haste.
William hesitated, not sure what to do. He was somewhat afraid that Denys
might have taken fright—well, clearly he 
had,
 but fright at what?—and
abandoned his German companion altogether. In which case, what was he to
do with the fellow?
Weber was staring down at the planks of the quay, brow slightly furrowed.
William cleared his throat.
“Would you care for a drink?” he asked politely, and nodded toward an
open-fronted shanty on the shore, where a couple of large barrels and the
presence of a sailor lying on the ground insensible probably indicated an
establishment that sold liquor.
“Ich spreche kein Englisch,”
 the man said, spreading his hands in polite
apology.
“Keine Sorge,”
 William said, bowing. 
“Ich spreche Deutsch.”
 He might
have informed Herr Weber that his breeches were on fire, rather than making
a simple statement to the effect that he, William, spoke German. Alarm
convulsed the nutcracker’s features and he turned wildly, looking for Denys,
who had by now disappeared.
William, afraid that Weber was about to flee, grasped him by the arm. This
resulted in a sharp cry and a blow to William’s stomach. Considering
Weber’s size, it wasn’t a bad try, but William grunted at the impact, let go
Weber’s arm, grabbed the man by both shoulders, and shook him like a rat.
“Still!”
 he said. 
“Ich tue Euch nichts!”
The statement that he meant Weber no harm seemed not to soothe the
gentleman, but the shaking at least stopped him struggling to get away. He
went limp in William’s grasp and stood gasping.
“What’s going on?” William demanded sharply, in German. He nodded
down the quay. “Is that man keeping you prisoner?”
Weber shook his head.
“Nein. Er ist mein Freund.”“Well, then.” William let go and stepped back, hands spread in token of
harmlessness. 
“Meiner auch.”
Weber nodded warily and straightened his waistcoat, but declined further
conversation, resuming his wooden impassiveness. A fine tremble passed
through his person at intervals, but his face showed nothing, though he
glanced now and then toward the deepening fog at the end of the quay.
William could see shapes—mostly masts that poked suddenly out of the mist
as the air shifted—and the thick air carried random shouts that sounded eerily
distant one moment and startlingly close at hand the next. The fog was
deepening, creeping over the quay, and he had a sudden sense of
disorientation, as though the world were dissolving under his feet.
And then Denys was suddenly there, with no warning. His face was still
anxious but bore a set resolution. He seized Weber’s arm, glanced at William,
and said briefly, 
“Kommt.”
 William wasted no time in argument, but seized
the gentleman’s other arm, and between them, he and Denys rushed the little
man into the fog and up a gangplank that suddenly appeared in front of them.
A tall man in a blue coat manifested himself on deck, flanked by two
sailors. He looked closely at Denys, nodded, then, catching a glimpse of
William, started back as though he’d seen a demon.
“
One
 soldier,” he said sharply to Denys, catching him by the sleeve. “One,
they said! Who’s this?”
“I’m—” William began, but Denys kicked him in the ankle. “His friend,”
William said, nodding casually at Denys.
“There’s no time for this,” Denys said. He reached into his breast and
withdrew a small, fat purse, which he handed over. The captain, for so he
must be, William thought, hesitated for a moment, glanced suspiciously at
him again, but took it.
The next instant he was hurtling back down the gangplank, propelled by an
urgent shove in the back from Denys. He hit the quay staggering, but
regained his balance at once and turned to see the ship—it looked like a small
brig, from what he could see through the mist—draw back the gangplank like
a sucked-in tongue, cast off a final line, and with a rattle of shrouds and a
snap of filling sails move slowly away from the quay. In moments, it had
disappeared into the grayness.
“What the devil just happened?” he asked. Rather mildly, all things
considered. Denys was breathing like he’d run a mile under arms, and the
edge of his neckcloth was dark with sweat. He glanced over his shoulder tobe sure that the ship had gone, and then turned back to William, his breath
beginning to slow.
“Herr Weber has enemies,” he said.
“So does everyone, these days. Who 
is
 Herr Weber?”
Denys made a sound that might have been an attempt at a wry laugh. “Well
… he’s not Herr Weber, for starters.”
“Are you planning to tell me who he 
is
?” William said impatiently.
“Because I’ve got business elsewhere, if you haven’t.”
“Besides looking for a girl, you mean?”
“I mean supper. You can tell me who our recent friend is on the way.”
“HE HAS A few aliases,” Denys said, halfway through a bowl of chowder,
thick with clams. “But his name is Haym Salomon. He’s a Jew,” he added.
“And?” William had eaten his own chowder in nothing flat and was wiping
the bowl with a chunk of bread. The name sounded vaguely familiar, but he
couldn’t think why it should. 
Salomon. Haym Salomon …
 It was the word
“Jew” that supplied the missing link of memory.
“Is he Polish, by chance?” he asked, and Denys choked on a clam.
“Oh, he is.” William raised a hand toward the barmaid and pointed at his
empty bowl with a gesture indicating that he’d like it refilled. “How did he
escape being executed in New York?”
Denys coughed, gagged, and coughed explosively, scattering the tabletop
with bread crumbs, soup droplets, and a large chunk of clam. William rolled
his eyes, but reached for the beer pitcher and refilled their mugs.
Denys waited until the fresh chowder had been brought and his eyes had
stopped watering, then leaned over his bowl, speaking in a voice barely loud
enough to be heard over the banging of cannikins and blustering talk in the
taproom.
“
How
 in God’s name do you come to know that?” he said.
William shrugged. “Something my uncle said. A Polish Jew, and he’d been
condemned to death as a spy in New York. He was rather surprised to hear of
him alive, and here. So,” he added, taking a dainty spoonful of chowder, “if
that’s who your little friend is—and rather plainly he 
is
—then I’m rather
wondering just who—or rather, what—
you
 are, these days. Because Herr
Weber is plainly not in the employ of His Majesty.”Denys drank the rest of his beer deliberately, brows knitted as he
considered William.
“I suppose it doesn’t matter that you know; he’s already out of reach,” he
said at last. He belched slightly, said, “Excuse me,” and poured more beer,
while William waited patiently.
“Mr. Salomon is a banker,” Denys said, and having evidently made up his
mind to tell William more or less the truth, went on. Born in Poland, Salomon
had come to New York as a young man and made a successful career. He had
also begun to meddle—very cautiously—in revolutionary politics, arranging
various financial transactions for the benefit of the new Congress and the
emergent revolution.
“But he wasn’t as cautious as he thought, and the British 
did
 catch him and
he was indeed condemned to death—but then he got a pardon, though they
put him on a hulk in the Hudson and made him teach English to Hessian
soldiers for eighteen months.” He took another gulp of beer. “Little did they
know that he was urging them all to desert—which a good number of them
actually did, apparently.”
“I know,” William said dryly. A group of Hessian deserters had tried to kill
him during Monmouth—and came bloody close to doing so, too. If his
wretched Scottish cousin hadn’t found him in the bottom of a ravine with his
skull cracked … but no need to dwell on that. Not now.
“Persistent fellow, then,” he said. “So now he’s here, and as there don’t
seem to be any Hessians around to be traduced, I assume he’s gone back to
his financial tricks?”
“So far as I know,” Denys said, now all nonchalance. “Good friend of
General Washington’s, I hear.”
“Good for him,” William said shortly. “And what about 
you
? As you’re
sitting here telling me all this, am I to assume that you also are now a
personal chum of Mr. Washington’s?” William was, in fact, not really
surprised to be hearing these things.
Denys drew out a handkerchief and patted his lips delicately.
“Not me, so much as my stepfather,” he said. “Mr. Isaacs is a good friend
of Mr. Salomon’s and shares both his political sentiments and his financial
acumen.”
“
Is
?” William said, raising his eyebrows. “Didn’t you tell me that your
stepfather had died and that’s why you’d dropped the ‘Isaacs’ from your last
name.”“Did I?” Denys looked thoughtful. “Well … a good many people 
believe
he’s dead, let’s put it that way. It’s often easier to get certain things done if
people don’t know exactly who they’re dealing with.”
The fact that he, William, plainly didn’t know whom 
he’d
 been dealing
with was becoming painfully obvious.
“So … you’re a turncoat, but you haven’t bothered actually taking it off
and turning it inside out, is that it?”
“I think the actual term might be 
intrigante,
 William, but what’s in a word?
I began working with my stepfather when I was fifteen or so, learning my
way around the worlds of finance and politics. Both those threads weave
through war, you know. And war is expensive.”
“And sometimes profitable?”
Something that might be offense rippled under Denys’s placid expression,
but vanished in a small gesture of dignified dismissal.
“My real father was a soldier, you know, and he left me a comfortable sum
of money, with the stipulation that I should use it to buy a commission—if I
should turn out to be a boy, that is. He died before I was born.”
“And if you’d been a girl?” William began suddenly to wonder whether
Denys might have a loaded pistol in his lap, under the table.
“The money would have been my marriage portion, and doubtless I’d now
be the wife of some rich, boring merchant who beat me once a week, fucked
me once a month, and otherwise left me to my own devices.”
Despite his wariness, William laughed.
“My mother wanted me to be a clergyman, poor woman.” Denys shrugged.
“As it is, though …”
“Yes?” William’s calves tightened. His left hand was under the table, still
holding the spoon from his chowder, the handle jutting out between the
clenched fingers of his fist. It wasn’t the weapon he’d have chosen, but if
necessary, he was prepared to jam it up Denys’s nose. A conversation like
this could have only one end: to invite William to join Denys in his intrigue.
He was halfway amused at the situation. Also somewhat annoyed, but
cautious with it. If Denys did issue such an invitation and if William refused
point-blank—Denys might consider it dangerous to leave William at large to
repeat all this.
“Well …” Denys eyed his uniform. “You did tell me you’d resigned your
commission.”“I did. This”—he waved his free hand down the front of his red coat—“is
just to give me countenance—and safe passage—while I look for my cousin’s
wife.”
Denys’s eyes widened.
“This is the girl you’re after? Is she lost?”
I notice that you don’t ask which cousin.
 “No, she’s not lost; she had a
falling-out with her husband”—
to say the least
—“and decided to go to her
father’s house. But my uncle became concerned about her safety on the road
and sent me to see that she reached her destination safely. I thought that if she
passed through Charles Town—which she likely would—she might call upon
Ban Tarleton for any assistance; she and her husband are acquainted with
him.”
“Unfortunately, Major Tarleton isn’t in Charles Town.” The voice spoke
behind him, an English voice that his body recognized before his mind did,
and he turned round fast, spoon clenched hard.
“Good day, Captain Lord Ellesmere,” said Ezekiel Richardson. He glanced
indifferently at the spoon and bowed slightly. “I trust you’ll pardon the
interruption, gentlemen. I happened to overhear Major Tarleton’s name. He
and Major Ferguson are, in fact, in hot pursuit of several groups of retreating
American militia, running south.”
William hesitated for a moment, torn between curiosity—leavened by
indignation—and expedience. But it was an instant too long; Richardson
pulled up a stool and sat down at the small, round table, between William and
Denys. Well within grabbing—or shooting or stabbing, for that matter—
distance.
“Has Herr Weber left us in good order?” Richardson asked, presumably of
Denys, but his eyes were fixed on William.
“Rather jumpy,” Denys said, “but quite intact. Our friend William was
most helpful in keeping him from jumping off the dock and swimming home
whilst I went and made the final arrangements.”
“We’re most obliged to you, Lord Ellesmere.”
“My name is Ransom, sir.”
The sparse eyebrows rose.
“Indeed.” Richardson, who was not in uniform, but wearing a decent gray
suit, darted a quick glance at Denys, who shrugged slightly.
“I think so,” he said obliquely.“If what you think is that I will choose to join you in your treasonous
games, gentlemen,” William said, pushing back from the table, “I must
disabuse you of the notion. Good day.”
“Not so fast,” Richardson said, clamping a hand on William’s forearm. “If
you please—my lord.” There was a slight mocking inflection to that “my
lord”—or at least that’s how it sounded to William, who was in no mood for
trifling.
“No commission, no rank, and not ‘my lord.’ Be so kind as to remove your
hand, sir, or I shall remove it for you.” William made a slight gesture with his
spoon, which was flimsy but made of tin and whose handle came to a
triangular point. Richardson paused, and William’s muscles tightened. The
hand lifted, though, just in time.
“I suggest you consider Denys’s suggestion,” Richardson said, his tone
light. “Resigning your commission has doubtless caused some gossip in army
circles—and if you are declining to be addressed by your title, it will cause
more. I do think, though, that you might hesitate to cause the sort of gossip
that will be unleashed if the reason behind your actions were to be made
public.”
“You know nothing of my reasons, sir.” William stood up, and so did
Richardson.
“We know that you are the bastard son of one James Fraser, a Jacobite
traitor and present rebel,” he said pleasantly. “And one look at the two of you
—drawn side by side in the newspapers?—would be enough to convince
anyone of the truth.”
William uttered a short laugh, though it came out as a hoarse bark.
“You say what you like, sir, to whomever it pleases you to say it. Go to the
devil.”
And with that, he stabbed the spoon, handle first, into the table, and turned
to walk away. Behind him, Richardson spoke, his voice still pleasant.
“I know your sister,” he said.
William’s shoulders tensed, but he kept on walking until the docks of
Charles Town lay far behind.131
Thunderstorms on the Ridge
July 4, A.D. 1780
To Colonel James Fraser, Fraser’s Ridge
From John Sevier
Mr. Fraser—
I write first to thank you for the Gift of your most excellent Whisky.
I had Occasion to visit Mrs. Patton recently and shared with her a
small Bottle that I had upon my Person. Judging from her Demeanor,
I believe your Custom will be welcome at her Mill at any Time you
wish, provided you come armed with the right Sort of Currency.
I write also to tell you that Nicodemus Partland, while
inadvertently responsible for my Enjoyment of your Whisky, is
otherwise no Gift to a liberal Society. Mr. Cleveland, in his Capacity
as Constable, imprisoned Mr. Partland and three of his Companions,
on Charges of disturbing the Peace. He kept them for three Weeks in
his Barn, and then released them separately, one each Week, for the
succeeding three Weeks, thus ensuring that Mr. Partland would not
be greeted by a large Group of Followers upon his eventual
Reappearance.
I have kept an Ear out, but have heard Nothing of any new Effort to
raise a Party of Aggression (for I will not call such a Body a
Committee of Safety, as the Term is often much abused) near the
Treaty Line.
If the Cherokee Lands lie quiet, other Places do not. I have had
Word of a Major Patrick Ferguson, who in the Midst of the Siege of
Charles Town was sent to the South with Major Tarleton (for I knowyou are familiar with this Gentleman’s Name) and his Loyalist British
Legion, 
whence they ousted an American Force at Monck’s Corner,
near Charles Town. You had asked me if I knew of Major Ferguson,
and now I do. I shall watch out for any further News of him.
Yr. Obt. Servant,
John Sevier
July 10, 1780
THERE HAD BEEN THUNDERSTORMS on the mountain all week and the
day had begun with a brief rattle of rain against the shutters an hour or so
before dawn and a blast of cold wind that shot down the chimney, hit the
smoored embers, and spewed hot ashes all over the bedroom floor. Jamie
leapt out of bed and sloshed water from the ewer across the hearth rug,
stamping out stray sparks with his bare feet and muttering sleepy execrations
in Gaelic.
He poked up the remaining embers, stuffed a couple of chunks of fat pine
and a longer-burning hickory log in among them with a bit of fresh kindling,
and stood there in his shirt, arms folded tight against the chill of the room,
waiting to be sure the fresh wood had caught. Still snug in bed, I blinked
drowsily, appreciating the sight of him. The rising light of the new fire
glowed behind him and flickered on the stones of the mantel, making the
shadow of his long body visible through the linen. The touch of that body
was still vividly imprinted on my skin, and I began to feel somewhat less
sleepy.
When he was sure the new fire was well underway, he nodded and
muttered something—whether to himself or the fire, I couldn’t tell; there
were
 Highland fire charms, and he undoubtedly knew a few. Satisfied, he
turned, crawled back into bed, wrapped his long cold limbs around me,
sighing as he relaxed into my warmth, farted, and went blissfully back to
sleep.
By the time I woke up again, he was gone, and the room was warm and
smelled pleasantly of the ghosts of turpentine and fire. I could hear the wind
whining round the corners of the house, though, and the creak of the new
timbers and lath of the third-floor walls just above us. Another storm was
coming; I could smell the sharp scent of ozone in the air.Fanny and Agnes were up; I could hear the muffled sound of their voices
down in the kitchen, amid heartening sounds of breakfast being made. Agnes
had agreed, with a mixture of trepidation and excitement, to go to Charles
Town with the Cunninghams, and then to London, by which time she would
theoretically have made up her mind as to which of the two lieutenants would
be her husband. The captain had survived, but had had a setback that delayed
their departure. He had rallied but was still in fragile health, and Jamie had
told him that he was welcome to stay until the roads were safer. There was no
chance of his riding; his legs were still paralyzed, though he did have
sensation in his feet and I 
thought
 I’d seen a faint twitch of his left toe.
Silvia and the girls were up, too, though only a faint murmur of voices
reached me from the heights of the third floor. Jamie had considered giving
them one of the Loyalists’ forfeited cabins, but he, Jenny, and Ian had all
thought it might be bad luck for Quakers to inherit the spoils of war, as it
were. He and Ian and Roger would build them a new cabin, before the winter
came. As for me, I was more than happy to have three more females able to
cook on the premises, though the Hardmans’ expertise didn’t extend to much
beyond roasting potatoes and making stews.
I wasn’t picky. I was still reveling in the novelty of having several
someone elses who would deal with the constant juggling act of turning food
into meals, to say nothing of helping with things like soap and candle
making. And laundry …
Roger and Bree had gone to Salem with the wagon, to trade for pottery and
woven cloth—Bree hadn’t yet had time or space to begin building a loom—
but there were plenty of willing hands available for the domestic chores.
I splashed my face with cold water, brushed my teeth, and got dressed,
feeling more alert as I started planning the day. Jamie hadn’t gone hunting
this morning; I could hear his voice downstairs, exchanging pleasantries with
the girls. If he meant to spend the day at home, perhaps I could induce him to
retire with me for a short rest after lunch …
How did he do that? I wondered. How could just the sound of his voice, no
words, just a soft rumble, make me recall the warm dark of our predawn bed?
I was still thinking about it, in a vague sort of way, when I reached the
kitchen, to find him licking the last drops of milk off his spoon.
“How dissipated of you,” I said, sitting down opposite him with a small pot
of honey and half a loaf from the pie safe. “Milk on your parritch?” Most
Highland Scots turned up their long noses at such indulgence, preferring thestern virtue of oatmeal unadorned by anything more than a pinch of salt.
“Jenny would disown you.”
“Likely,” he said, undaunted at the prospect. “But wi’ Ban and Ruaidh
both in calf, we’ve milk to spare and it wouldna be right to let it go to waste,
now, aye? Is that honey?” His eyes had focused on the honey pot as soon as I
set it down.
I broke off a small chunk of bread, carefully spread a dab of the pale honey
onto it, and handed it to him.
“Taste that. Not like that!” I said, seeing him about to engulf the bite. He
froze, the bread halfway to his mouth.
“How am I meant to taste it, if I’m not to put it in my mouth?” he asked
warily. “Have ye thought of some novel method of ingestion?” Fanny giggled
behind me. Agnes, setting a platter of fried bacon at his elbow, squinted at
“ingestion,” but didn’t say anything. He lifted the morsel to his nose and
sniffed it cautiously.
“Slowly. You’re meant to savor it,” I added reprovingly. “It’s special.”
“Oh.” He closed his eyes and inhaled deeply. “Well, it’s got a fine, light
nose.” He raised his eyebrows, eyes still closed. “And a nice bouquet, to be
sure … lily o’ the valley, burnt sugar, something a wee bit bitter, maybe …”
He frowned, concentrating, then opened his eyes and looked at me. “Bee
dung?”
I made a grab for the bread, but he snatched it away, stuffed it in his
mouth, closed his eyes again, and assumed an expression of rapture as he
chewed.
“See if I ever give 
you
 any more sourwood honey!” I said. “I’ve been
saving that!”
He swallowed, blinked, and licked his lips thoughtfully.
“Sourwood. Is that no what ye gave Bobby Higgins last week to make him
shit?”
“That’s the leaves.” I waved at a tall jar on top of the simples cabinet.
“Sarah Ferguson says that sourwood honey is monstrously good and
monstrously rare, and that the folk in Salem and Cross Creek will give you a
small ham for a jar of it. I sent some with Bree.”
“Will they, so?” He eyed the honey pot with more respect. “And it’s from
your own wee stingards, is it?”
“Yes, but the sourwood trees only bloom for about six weeks, and I’ve
only the two hives set near them, so far. I took this as soon as the treesstopped blooming. That’s why it’s so—”
A thunder of feet coming onto the porch and in the front door drowned me
out, and the air was filled with excited boys’ voices shouting, “Grandpa!” 
“A
Mhaighister!”
 “Mr. Fraser!”
Jamie stuck his head out into the corridor.
“What?” he said, and the running feet stumbled to a ragged halt in a storm
of exclamations and pantings, in the midst of which I picked out one word:
“Redcoats!”
JAMIE DIDN’T WAIT to hear more. He got up, pushed the boys out of the
way, and headed for the front door.
I ran into the surgery, snatched a big, curved amputation knife from the
cupboard, and rushed after Jamie and the boys. Jem, Aidan, and two friends
were still panting and explaining, in a confused gabble. “There’s two of
’em!” “No, there’s three!” “But t’other one, he’s not a soldier—he—” “He’s
a black man, 
a Mhaighister!
”
A black man? That would be nothing notable anywhere in the Carolinas—
save in the high mountains. There were a few free blacks in Brownsville, and
small settlements that included people of mixed blood, but—a black man in a
red coat?
Jamie had left his rifle standing beside the door the day before, and now
grabbed it, his face set and wary.
“Bidh socair,”
 he said briefly to the boys. “Go to the kitchen, but stay
inside and keep your lugs open. Ye hear any kind of a stramash, take the
women out the back and put them up a tree. Then go fetch your fathers,
quick.”
The boys nodded, breathless, and I pushed past them with a brief look
strongly suggesting that they’d best not even 
think
 of trying to haul me out
the back door and shove me up a tree, no matter 
what
 happened. They all
looked shifty, but hung their heads.
Jamie yanked the door open and cold air 
whoosh
ed down the hall,
whipping my petticoats up in a froth round my knees.
The men—three of them, on horseback—were riding slowly up the rise
toward the house. And just as the boys had said, all three were red-coated
British soldiers, and the third, the man in the lead, was indeed a black man. In
fact … they all were.I saw Jamie glance round at the woods and surrounding landscape—were
they alone? I peered anxiously past his elbow, but couldn’t see or sense
anything amiss. Neither did he; his shoulders relaxed slightly, and he checked
his rifle to be sure it was primed—it was always kept loaded—and set it
carefully back behind the door, then stepped out onto the porch. I wasn’t
letting go of my knife, but did hide it in the folds of my skirt.
The oncoming men saw us on the porch; the leader checked his horse for a
moment, then raised a hand to us. Jamie raised a hand in reply, and they came
on.
Dozens of possible reasons for such a visitation were darting through my
head, but at least they didn’t look overtly threatening. The leader halted by
our hitching post, swung down, and dropped his reins, leaving his horse to
the other soldiers, who remained mounted. That was vaguely reassuring;
perhaps they’d come only to ask directions—so far as I knew (and devoutly
hoped), the British army had no present business with us. Plainly this wasn’t
Major Patrick Ferguson.
I had an odd feeling between my shoulder blades, though. Not fright, but
something uneasy. Something seemed very familiar about this man. I felt
Jamie take a deep breath and let it out again, carefully.
“I bid ye welcome, sir,” he said, his voice pleasant, but neutral. “Ye’ll
pardon my not using your surname; I never kent what it was.”
“Stevens,” said our visitor, and taking off his laced hat, bowed to me.
“Captain Joseph Stevens. Your servant, Mrs. Fraser. And … yours, sir,” he
added, in a distinctly ironic tone that made me blink. He was wearing a
military wig, and suddenly I saw him as I’d known him before, in a neat
white wig and green livery, at River Run plantation.
“Ulysses!” I said, and dropped the knife with a loud 
thunk.
JAMIE INVITED “CAPTAIN STEVENS” to come in, with the sort of
exquisite courtesy that meant he was doing a mental rundown of the location
of all weapons inside the house. I saw him usher Ulysses before him to the
laird’s study and glance at the rifle that was standing behind the front door as
he followed, nodding to the round-eyed boys—and an equally round-eyed
Fanny, who had appeared from the springhouse—as he went.
“Fanny,” I said, “go to the kitchen, please, and get a pitcher of milk and a
plate of biscuits—”“We ate all the biscuits for breakfast, ma’am,” Fanny said helpfully.
“There’s half a pie in the pie safe, though.”
“Thank you, sweetheart. You and Agnes take the pie and milk out to the
two men on the porch, please. Oh—Aidan. Take this back to my surgery, will
you?” I handed him the amputation knife, which he received as one being
given Excalibur, and bore it off, gingerly balanced across his palms.
I slipped into the study and closed the door behind me. I’d last seen
Ulysses at River Run plantation, near Cross Creek, where he had been butler
to Jamie’s aunt Jocasta. He had left under what might politely be called
strained circumstances, it having been revealed that he’d been not only
Jocasta’s butler for twenty years but also her lover—and had killed at least
one man and—just possibly—Hector Cameron, Jocasta’s third husband. I
didn’t know what he’d been doing for the last seven or eight years, but the
fact that he’d come anywhere near Jamie now—and accompanied by an
armed escort—was deeply unsettling.
“Mrs. Fraser.” He’d turned when I came in, and now bowed to me, looking
me over with a deliberately appraising, un-butler-like gaze. “I’m pleased to
see you well.”
“Thank you. You’re looking quite … well, yourself. Captain Stevens.” He
was. Tall and imposing in a well-tailored uniform, broad-shouldered and fit.
Despite his apparent health, though, his face showed the marks of hard living
—and his eyes were different. No longer the courteous blankness of a
servant. These eyes were deep-lined, fierce, and, quite frankly, made me want
to take a step backward.
He saw that, and his lips drew in a little in amusement, but he looked
away.
Jamie was reaching into his cupboard for whisky. He nodded Ulysses to
the visitor’s chair across the desk and set the battered pewter tray with bottle
and glasses on the desk before taking his own chair.
“May I?” I said, and at Ulysses’s nod I poured him a respectable dram, and
the same for Jamie. And for me. I wasn’t going anywhere until I found out
what “Captain Stevens” was doing here. I took my glass and sat down on a
stool, a little behind Jamie.
“Slàinte.”
 Jamie lifted his glass briefly, and Ulysses smiled slightly.
“Slàinte mhath,”
 he said.
“Ye’ll have kept your 
Gàidhlig,
 then,” Jamie said, a deliberate reference, I
thought, to River Run, where most of the servants had had at least a passingacquaintance with the language of the Highlands.
“Not surprising,” Ulysses replied, not at all discomposed. He took a sip of
the whisky, paused to let it spread through his mouth, and shook his head
with a small “mm” of approval. “I joined Lord Dunmore’s company in ’74.
You’ll know his lordship, of course.”
Jamie stiffened slightly.
“I do,” he said politely. “Though I’ve not had the pleasure of his
acquaintance since the days before Culloden.”
“What?” I said. “I don’t recall a Lord Dunmore.”
“Well, he hadna got the title then.” Jamie glanced back at me and smiled a
little, a rueful sharing of the memory of those fraught days. “But ye kent him,
too, Sassenach—John Murray, he was then; just a lad, a page to Charles
Stuart.”
“Oh. Yes.” I did recall him, just barely—a homely boy with receding chin,
a large nose, and red hair that stuck out in tufts. “So now he’s Lord Dunmore
…?”
“Yes. Of late, governor of the Colony of Virginia,” Ulysses said. “And
more recently, commander of a major force against the Shawnee Indians in
Ohio. A successful venture in which I was privileged to take part.” He did
smile then, and I felt a small qualm in the pit of my stomach at the look of it.
Indian wars were a messy business.
“Aye,” Jamie said, dismissively. “But surely the army has nay business of
that kind wi’ the Cherokee. Though perhaps ye’ve come wi’ their allowance
of powder and bullets from the government?”
“I have no army business with the Cherokee, no,” Ulysses replied politely.
“In fact, I think of retiring from the army soon. Perhaps I shall follow your
example, Mr. Fraser, and set up for a landlord. But for the moment, sir, my
business is with you—though this visit is a personal one, rather than an
official call. As yet.”
“A personal visit,” Jamie repeated, and leaned back a little in his chair,
tilting his head. “And what might your personal business be with me?”
“Your aunt,” Ulysses said, and leaned forward, eyes fixed on Jamie’s face.
“Does she still live?”
I was taken aback but at the same time realized that I wasn’t really
surprised at all. Neither was Jamie, who didn’t change his expression but
took a long, slow breath before replying.
“She does,” he said. “Though I canna tell ye a great deal more than that.”Ulysses’s expression had certainly changed. His face was vivid, charged
with urgency. “You can tell me where she is.”
I couldn’t always tell what Jamie was thinking, but in this instance, I was
reasonably sure we were thinking the same thing.
Jocasta had married one of Jamie’s friends, Duncan Innes—while still
carrying on her long-term affair with Ulysses, as we learned much later. In
the chaotic aftermath of events at River Run and the subsequent dramatic
revelations, Ulysses had fled, Jocasta had sold River Run, and she and
Duncan had moved to Nova Scotia, and thence to a small farm on St. John’s
Island.
I knew that the British army offered freedom to slaves who would join
their ranks, and obviously that was the path Ulysses had chosen with Lord
Dunmore. Jocasta had secretly manumitted him years before, but officially
recognized freedom was a much safer path, especially in North Carolina,
where a slave freed by his or her master must leave the colony within ten
days or be subject to recapture and sale.
So now he was a free man, by the goodwill of the British government.
Completely and permanently free—so long as he wasn’t captured by
Americans with other ideas. While that knowledge made me happy for him, I
had a great many reservations.
Behind the bland mask of servitude, this man had lived for twenty years as
the unknown master of River Run, and had killed without compunction. He
had, very plainly, loved Jocasta Cameron passionately—and she, him. And
now he had come looking for her again … Very romantic. And very
unsettling. I recalled vividly the skeletal remains of Daniel Rawlings,
sprawled on the floor of the mausoleum at River Run, and a ripple of
gooseflesh ran up my back.
I glanced quickly at Jamie, who carefully didn’t look at me. He sighed,
rubbed a hand over his face, then dropped it, meeting Ulysses’s eyes.
“I havena heard from my aunt anytime these five years past,” he said.
“And I’ve heard little more about her save that she 
is
 still alive. And well. Or
at least 
she was when I heard it from my cousin Hamish, when I met him at
Saratoga. That will be three years past. And that’s the last I’ve heard.”
All of that was mostly true. On the other hand, we did know a bit more
than that, as Jocasta now and then wrote to her old friend, Farquard
Campbell, who lived in Cross Creek. But I could see why Jamie didn’t meanto set Captain Ulysses Stevens on a dangerous path toward an unwarned and
literally unarmed—the poor man had only one—Duncan Innes.
Ulysses looked hard into Jamie’s eyes for a long minute; I could hear the
ticking of Jenny’s tiny silver watch on the shelf behind me; she’d left it when
she’d come down to lend a hand with combing and carding several fleeces
the week before. At last, Ulysses gave a small grunt, which might have been
either amusement or disgust, and sat back.
“I thought it might be like that,” he said mildly.
“Aye. I’m sorry not to have a better answer for ye, Captain.” Jamie pushed
back his chair and made to rise, but Ulysses raised a pink-palmed hand to
stop him.
“Not so fast, Mr. Fraser—or no, I beg your pardon; it’s 
General
 Fraser
now, is it not?”
“No, it’s not,” Jamie replied shortly. “I resigned my commission in the
Continental army and I’ve no connection with it anymore.”
Ulysses nodded, urbane as always. “Of course, forgive me. But there are
some things harder to renounce than a commission, are there not?”
“If ye’ve more to say,” Jamie said, an edge in his voice, “say it, then go
wi’ God. There’s nothing for ye here.”
Ulysses’s smile showed a missing pre-molar on one side, and a gray dead
tooth beside it. “I do apologize, Mr. Fraser, but I think you’ll find you’re
mistaken. I do have business here. With you.”
I let my breath out, then lost it altogether when he reached into his coat and
produced a very official-looking document, sealed with red wax. Red wax, in
my experience, was usually a bad sign.
“Read that, sir, if you will,” Ulysses said, and unfolding it, placed it
carefully on the desk in front of Jamie.
Jamie raised his brows and looked at Ulysses for a moment, but then
picked up the letter with a shrug and popped the seal off with the tip of the
skinning knife he used as a letter opener. His spectacles were sitting on the
desk, and he put them on with deliberate slowness, smoothing out the creases
in the letter.
I could hear voices in the house; the girls had come back from the
springhouse with the cheese for supper and the crock of butter we’d need for
tomorrow’s baking. I caught a whiff of raspberries as Fanny’s footsteps
passed the door, and the soft clank of her tin bucket, brushing the wall as sheturned to call to Agnes. We’d make a fresh pie, then … if the berries survived
a kitchen full of hungry boys …
Jamie said something very terrible in Gaelic, took off his spectacles, and
gave Ulysses a look meant to set his wig on fire. I plunged a hand into my
pocket for my own spectacles and took the letter from him.
It was sent from one Lord George Germain, secretary of state for the
American Department. I’d heard quite a bit about Lord George Germain;
John Grey had worked under him briefly as a diplomat and held a low
opinion of the man. But that didn’t matter just now.
What 
did
 matter was that it had come to the attention of Lord George
Germain, secretary of state, et cetera, that one James Fraser (known erstwhile
in Scotland as Lord Brok Turch, a convicted and pardoned Jacobite) had, in
the Year of Our Lord 1767, fraudulently obtained a grant of land in the
Colony of North Carolina, by misrepresenting and disguising to Governor
William Tryon his identity as a Catholic, such persons being prohibited by
law from holding such grants.
I felt as though I were being suffocated.
It was true. Not that Jamie had misrepresented himself to Governor Tryon;
the governor had known all about Jamie’s Catholicism but had turned a
deliberately blind eye to it for the sake of getting Jamie’s help in settling—in
more ways than one—the tumultuous North Carolina backcountry during the
War of the Regulation. But it was undeniably true that Catholics were by law
not allowed to receive land grants. And so …
I forced a breath and read on:
There being at present no duly-appointed Governor for the Colony
of North Carolina, the Secretary of State for the Colonies now orders
the aforesaid James Fraser to surrender the Grant of Lands thus
fraudulently obtained, to Captain Ulysses Stevens of His Majesty’s
Company of Black Pioneers, acting as Agent of the Crown, and
vacate the Premises of the Grant (Location and Dimensions being
described in the attached Document). Any Tenants presently living on
the Grant may remain for the Space of one Year. After such Time,
Tenants must leave or make Arrangement to deliver Rent as may be
determined by the new Holder of this Grant.The words blurred into spots before my eyes, and I dropped the letter back
on the desk.
“You bloody 
reptile
!” I said, looking at Ulysses. He ignored me.
“I would take prompt notice of that, if I were you, Mr. Fraser.” He nodded
at the paper. “You see that there is no mention of prosecution, of fines or
imprisonment. There might have been. I have the original agreement, signed
by you, in the course of which it is stated that you are not a Catholic. And
should you choose to ignore—”
The door opened, and Fanny’s neat capped head poked in.
“Sir, Agnes says are these men staying for supper?”
There was a moment of profound silence, and then Jamie rose slowly to his
feet.
“They are not, 
a leannan.
 Go and say so, aye?”
He waited, still standing, until the door had closed again. I was now
breathing so fast that white spots showed at the edge of my vision, but I saw
his face very clearly.
“Leave my house,” he said quietly. “And do not come back.”
Ulysses stayed where he was, a faint smile on his face, and then rose too,
very slowly.
“As I was saying, 
sir,
 I should obey that order promptly. For if you choose
to ignore it, the army will have more than sufficient justification to come and
burn this house over your head.” He paused, and turned to look deliberately
at the door where Fanny had vanished. “Over all your heads.”
Jamie made a quick movement and Ulysses flinched, much to my pleasure.
But Jamie had merely snatched the official letter from the desk. He crumpled
it into a ball and, turning, hurled it into the hearth. Then turned again on
Ulysses, with an expression that made the man stiffen.
He didn’t speak. Ulysses stooped swiftly and plucked the letter out of the
smoldering ashes, shook it clean, then turned on his heel and went, back
straight as a butler carrying a tray.
JAMIE SAT DOWN slowly, and set his hands very precisely on the desk in
front of him, palms on the wood, ready to launch him into action. As soon as
he’d decided what action to take.
There actually 
was
 an acting governor of North Carolina—Richard
Caswell, whom we knew fairly well. He was not, though, a governorappointed by the British government; he’d been temporarily elected by the
Committee of Safety appointed by the Provincial Congress; both of these
rather fluid entities, but neither of them legitimate, so far as Lord George
Germain was concerned.
“They can’t really …” I began, but stopped. They could. All too easily, and
I swallowed, my skin prickling with sudden fear. The smell of fresh sawdust
and oozing pitch had come in the front door with the gust of wind, from the
spot by the red cedar tree where the men cut shims and adzed shingles for the
roof. Wood. No one who’s lived through a house fire hears the word “burn”
with any sense of equanimity, and I wasn’t feeling even slightly equanimous.
Neither was Jamie.
“I don’t suppose it’s a forgery,” I said at last. “That letter.”
He shook his head.
“I’ve seen enough official documents to ken the seals, Sassenach.”
“Do you think—he’s responsible for it? Did he sic the government onto
us? 
Could
 he?”
Jamie’s brows went up and he glanced at me.
“I imagine a good many folk know about it … but I doubt most of them
have anything against me, and even fewer would be able to get the
secretary’s attention for such a wee matter.”
“Mmm. Lord Dunmore, perhaps?” I suggested delicately. “He certainly
wouldn’t care, but if he felt that he owed Ulysses something …”
The blood was rising in Jamie’s face, and his left hand folded into a fist.
“What was it the 
balgair
 said? That he thought of becoming a landlord
himself?”
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.” I looked hard at the battered surface of the
desk, as though the gaudy letter was still there. “And he said 
he
 has the
original document. Not ‘the government’ or ‘Lord Germain.’ Him.”
The British government was in fact in the habit of confiscating rebel
property and bestowing it on their own lackeys—they’d done it all over the
Highlands, 
after Culloden, and Jamie had saved Lallybroch only by deeding
it to his ten-year-old nephew before Culloden.
A moment’s silence.
“Do I think he has more than those two men with him?” he asked, but he
wasn’t asking me, and immediately answered his own question. “Aye, I do.
How many, that’s the question …”Whatever the answer was, it propelled him to his feet, a look of decision
on his face. With an underlying layer of intent ferocity that I had no trouble
distinguishing. I felt much the same, shock and fear fading into fury.
“That 
bastard
!” I said.
He didn’t reply, but thrust his head out into the hall and bellowed,
“Aidan!” in the direction of the kitchen.
BOBBY HIGGINS TURNED up first, his pale face flushed with alarm and
excitement. He wasn’t a good horseman but could ride well enough on an
open trail—and since the bear, he had resumed carrying a musket.
“Ian will be coming down, quick as he can,” Jamie told him, hastily
saddling and bridling Phineas, the fastest of our three saddle horses. “And
I’ve sent the lads to carry word to the Lindsays, Gilly MacMillan, and the
McHughs. They’ll spread the word further, but they’ll come on here by
themselves. You come wi’ me, and when we’re sure of the track, I’ll send ye
back here to tell the others and lead them on to join me, aye?”
“Yes, sir!” Bobby said it by reflex, straightening his back. Once a soldier,
always a soldier. Jamie clapped him on the shoulder and put his own foot in
the stirrup.
“Away, then.”
He blessed whoever was in charge of the weather, be that saint or demon,
for the rain had held off, and it was no trick to follow the trail of Ulysses and
his two men on the muddy ground.
It shortly became evident that there 
were
 more than two men with Ulysses;
Jamie and Bobby came upon a spot nay more than a mile from the house,
where the marks in the churned-up mud made it clear that Ulysses had joined
a band of twenty men, at least; maybe more.
“Go back to the house!” he shouted to Bobby, and waved a hand,
encompassing the small clearing. “Tell Ian to bring as many men here as he
can and leave word for the rest; a blind man could follow this lot!”
Bobby nodded, pulled down his hat, and set off uphill, leaning perilously
back in his saddle, reins clutched to his chest. Jamie grimaced, but waved
reassuringly when Bobby looked back over his shoulder. He only needed to
stay on the horse as far as the house.
“Even if he falls off and breaks his neck,” he muttered to himself, reining
round, “they can follow our track this far. If it doesna pour.” He lookedupward, into a dizzying swirl of black clouds, and saw the flash of silent
lightning. He counted ten before the roll of distant thunder reached him.
“Trobhat!”
 he said to Phin, and they set off downhill, following the black
hoofprints still showing clear.
THE MOUNTED BAND was moving briskly, but not fleeing. And while
there were sprinkles of rain on his face, the storm had not yet broken. Jamie
kept well back, always with an ear behind him for his own men coming.
And come they did, to his unspoken but vast relief. He heard them and
reined uphill to meet them out of earshot of the troops he was following—he
supposed they must be regular British troops, for Ulysses wouldn’t go
through the mummery of pretending to be a British soldier if he weren’t one.
If they were, though, he’d have to go canny. He wasn’t wanting a physical
fight; his infant militia weren’t up to taking on trained soldiers yet.
The back of his mind had been keeping its peace to this point, but now it
took the opportunity of his relaxed vigilance to ask him just what the devil he
did
 want.
He wanted to get Ulysses alone, with a dirk in his hand and five minutes to
use it, but failing that, he wanted to catch up to the man and go through his
saddlebags, both for the damned letter—why had he not been quick enough
to stop the man taking it?—
and
 for the original grant, should Ulysses be
carrying it. Which meant cutting him out of his own companions and
sequestering him somewhere, briefly. He would have given the rest of the
fingers on his right hand to have Young Ian with him now, but he didn’t dare
wait.
He crossed himself, with a quick prayer to St. Michael, and threaded his
horse carefully through a clump of spruce. Emerging on the far side, he saw
the flash of a horse’s flank and heard the jingle of harness.
“
Trobhad a seo!
 Over here!” It wasn’t raining yet, but the air still held that
strange, muffled quality and he felt as though he’d shouted through a pillow.
They heard him, though, and within a minute or two, they were on their
way.
“Who is it we’re after, sir?” asked Anson McHugh, politely. The eldest of
Tom McHugh’s sons, he’d come with his father and a younger brother, as
well as the Lindsay brothers and a few others who lived close enough to get
the summons in time.“A band of black British soldiers,” Jamie told him.
“Black soldiers?” Anson asked, looking puzzled. “Is there such a thing,
then?”
“There is,” Jamie assured him dryly. “Lord Dunmore—ye ken Lord
Dunmore? Oh, ye don’t. Nay matter—he started it some years back by
getting into a moil wi’ the Virginians he was meant to be governing. They
wouldna do as he said, so he put out word that any slave who chose to join
the army would be freed. And fed, clothed, and paid,” he added, thinking that
this was more than most Continental soldiers could expect.
Anson nodded, his long young face serious. All the McHughs were
serious, save their mother, Adeline—and God knew the woman needed a
sense of humor, wi’ seven bairns, all boys.
“Is it treason we’re going to commit, then?” Anson asked. A faint gleam of
excitement came into his eyes at the thought.
“Very likely,” Jamie said, and suppressed an inappropriate smile at the
thought. He’d had a flash of memory: a contentious conversation between
himself and John Grey, on a road in Ireland. Grey, annoyed by Jamie’s
refusal to tell him what he knew about Tobias Quinn’s aims, had said, 
“I
suppose it is frivolous to point out that assisting the King’s enemies—even by
inaction—is treason.”
To which he had himself replied evenly, 
“It is not frivolous to point out
that I am a convicted traitor. Are there judicial degrees of that crime? Is it
additive? Because when they tried me, all they said was ‘treason’ before
putting a rope around my neck.”
He was surprised to find that the inappropriate smile had crept onto his
face despite the current urgent situation—and the fraught circumstances of
the memory. A shout from Gillebride MacMillan made him turn sharply from
Anson and kick his horse into the highest pace he could sustain on a slippery
blanket of wet pine needles.
Panting with the hurry, they reached Gillebride, who silently pointed the
way with his chin.
The soldiers had stopped by a small creek to water the horses; that was
luck. He could see Ulysses standing on the near bank, leaning against a bare
willow’s trunk, the drooping, leafless branches falling in a sort of cage about
him.
Taking that as a good omen, Jamie gathered his men and made his aims
known. He let Anson McHugh shout, “One … two … 
three
!” and on thatsignal, the group split like a dropped egg, Gillebride and the McHughs going
for the left flank, as it were, with himself and the Lindsays riding straight into
the creek to split the group, and himself meaning to seize upon Ulysses—
Kenny Lindsay to back him up, if needed.
“Make sure o’ the horses!” he shouted, leaning toward Kenny. “I dinna ken
which one belongs to our man. It’s the saddlebags I want!”
“Aye, Mac Dubh,” Lindsay said, grinning, and Jamie let out a Highland
whoop that made Phineas—unused to such a thing—swerve madly, ears laid
back.
The black soldiers sprang up at once to defend themselves, but most of
them were dismounted, and their horses hadn’t liked the screech any more
than Phineas did. Ulysses had started from his willow tree like a water rat
flushed by a fox, and dived for his tethered horse.
Jamie pulled his own horse up into a slithering stop amid a shower of wet
leaves and flung himself off. He ran through the creek edge, ignoring rocks
and the cold water that splashed his legs, and threw himself at Ulysses just as
the man was getting his left foot into the stirrup. His blood was up and he
dragged Ulysses away from the horse, shoved him, then punched him in the
belly.
“Saddlebags!” he bellowed over his shoulder, and caught a glimpse of
Kenny sliding off his own horse, preparing to make a run for the bags. The
glimpse took his attention off his own business for a split second and Ulysses
hit him hard on the ear and pushed him backward into the creek. The cold
water surging up through his clothes was as much a shock as the startling
pain in his ear, but he got enough breath back to roll over and scramble
clumsily to his feet. There was the boom of a pistol shot at close range;
Kenny 
had fired at Ulysses, but missed, and one of Ulysses’s men dived at
Kenny from behind and took his legs out from under him.
The erstwhile butler had got halfway into the saddle. He booted his horse
and shot straight into the creek toward Jamie, who leapt to the side, then fell
again as a slippery stone rolled under his foot. The horse clipped him in the
hip with a hind foot as he tried to rise and knocked him sprawling.
He was too infuriated even to curse coherently. His left eye was watering
profusely and he dashed his sleeve over it—to no effect, the sleeve being
sodden.
The Lindsays had taken off in pursuit of Ulysses and the small group of his
nearby soldiers—the McHughs had chased their own game away from thecreek, up into a tangled growth of alders and hemlocks; he could hear shouts
and the occasional ring of swords and gun barrels clashing.
He didn’t want any killing, and had said so, but the young McHughs might
not remember that in the heat of their first real fight. And Ulysses’s soldiers
were likely not under any such proscription. His own horse was still standing
where he’d left it, 
mirabile dictu.
 Phineas wasn’t at all pleased to see his
owner still moving, and when he clambered into the saddle sopping wet, the
horse tried to bite him in the leg. He snapped the rein smartly across Phin’s
nose, pulled the horse’s head round, and turned back uphill, heading for the
sounds of affray.
The storm had broken and it was raining hard; he could barely make out
the dark traces of a deer’s trail that led upward. But then they burst out
suddenly into a small, dark clearing, filled with layers of dead leaves,
trampled into the mud by stamping horses. Some of the British soldiers had
muskets, but the attackers were keeping them too busy to aim.
For the most part. One gun went off with a 
foom!
 and a cloud of white
smoke, and before he could see was anyone hurt by it, the ground in front of
him moved. It bloody 
moved
! Phineas had had enough, and when he kept the
gelding from turning tail, the horse suddenly changed his mind and, with a
furious squeal, charged the moving shape.
An enormous black boar exploded from the leaves under which it had been
sleeping, and all of the horses went mad.
THE SOUND OF horses and men came faintly to me through the trees from
the direction of the house. I was in the root cellar, turning over yams and
checking for rot, but I dropped the yam I was holding and popped out of the
cellar like a groundhog from its hole, listening hard.
Not fighting.
 There were several men, but no screaming or sounds of
violence. I slammed the cellar door and ran for the house, but slowed a bit
when I heard Bluebell barking. Not her hysterical 
“Strangers!”
 bark, nor yet
the view-halloo version reserved for skunks, possums, raccoons,
woodchucks, or anything else she might consider worth chasing. It was her
delighted yap of welcome, and the dart of terror that had struck me in the
cellar dissolved in relief. Probably no one was dead, then.
I trotted up the path, rubbing the dirt off my hands with my grubby
gardening apron, and wondering how many men Jamie had brought with himand what in God’s name I could feed them for supper. I also wondered
whether Jamie had retrieved Lord George Germain’s ruinous letter.
I arrived just in time to say goodbye to the Lindsays, who were away
home, they said; Kenny’s wife would have something on for supper.
“The rest went on afore us,” Murdo said, nodding vaguely toward the
eastern side of the ridge. “We only came this way in case Mac Dubh should
need a hand.”
A hand with what?
 I wondered, but didn’t detain Murdo, who was already
mounted and clearly anxious to be away—it was late afternoon and the sky
was still black and roiling overhead. I waved them farewell and went inside
to see what—or who—Jamie had brought back. Surely not Ulysses …
It wasn’t. I heard him talking to someone in my surgery, in a courteous
way, and another man’s reply, but not a man I knew.
I twitched back the curtain—
maybe he’ll be home long enough to build me
a proper door one of these days
—and stopped dead in surprise. It wasn’t
Ulysses, nor either of the soldiers who had accompanied him to the door, but
plainly this 
was
 one of his soldiers, for the man was black and wore a wet
British military uniform, though not one I’d ever seen before: black breeches
and a scarlet coat, without decoration beyond the shoulder-knot insignia of a
corporal, but sporting a stained white sash that ran from his shoulder across
his chest, bearing the embroidered words 
“Liberty to the Slaves.”
“Ah, there ye are, Sassenach.” Jamie rose from my workbench stool. His
clothes clung to him, obviously wet. “I hoped ye’d be back soon. May I have
the pleasure to present to ye Corporal Sipio Jackson—of His Majesty’s
Company of Black Pioneers?” He gestured to the man lying on the table.
“Dinna mind the courtesies, Corporal; I dinna want to have to pick ye up
again.”
“Your mos’ obedient servant, madam.” Sergeant Jackson didn’t rise, but
rolled heavily up on one elbow and bowed as deeply as possible to me, eyes
wary. He had quite an odd accent: English, but with something softer mixed
in.
“How nice to meet you, Mr. Jackson,” I said, looking him over. The reason
for his immobility was obvious: his right leg was broken and he was pale as
suet. It was a nasty-looking compound fracture, with the jagged end of his
tibia protruding through his woolen stocking. Someone had taken his boot
off.“How long ago did this happen?” I asked Jamie, taking hold of the
sergeant’s ankle and feeling for the fibula just above the joint. There was
bleeding from the torn flesh, but it was only oozing now; the stocking was
soaked with blood, but it was rusty at the edges; not that fresh.
Jamie glanced out the window; the clouds were beginning to part, and a
sullen red glow lit their edges.
“Maybe two hours. I gave him whisky,” he added, with a nod at the empty
cup near the corporal’s hand. “For the shock, aye?”
“I thank you, sir,” the sergeant said. “It was mos’ helpful.” He was gray as
a ghost and his face was slick with sweat, but he was awake and alert. His
eyes fixed on my hands, one moving slowly up his shin, the other feeling his
calf gently. His breath jerked as I touched a spot on his calf an inch or two
below the level of the protruding tibia.
“Your fibula’s fractured as well,” I informed him. “Hand me those
scissors, will you, Jamie? And give him another tot, but mixed half and half
with water. How did this happen, Corporal?”
He didn’t relax as I cut the stocking off—he was thin and rangy, and I
could see the muscles in his leg clenched tight—but he took in a little more
air, and nodded thanks to Jamie for the fresh tot.
“Fell off my horse, madam,” he said. “’Twas frightened by a … pig.”
I looked up at him, surprised at the hesitation. He saw my look, grimaced,
and amplified his answer.
“A right 
big
 pig. Nevah have I seen one so big.”
“’Twas,” Jamie agreed. “Not the White Sow herself, but one of her spawn
for sure; a boar. It’s in the smoke shed,” he added, with a jerk of his head
toward the back of the house. “No a wasted journey,” he added. His eyes
were resting on Corporal Jackson’s face, his own expression calm, but I
could feel the calculation going on behind those eyes.
I rather thought the corporal could, too; I hadn’t started doing anything
overtly painful to his leg, but the hand not holding the whisky cup was
clenched in a loose fist, and the wary look with which he’d greeted me hadn’t
changed by a hair.
“Is Fanny in the house?” I said to Jamie. “I’ll need help to set and bandage
this leg.”
“I’ll help ye, Sassenach,” he said, rising and turning toward my cupboards.
“Tell me what ye need.”I gave him a narrow look and he looked straight back, calmly implacable.
He wasn’t leaving me alone with a man who was technically an enemy, no
matter how incapacitated.
I was torn between minor irritation and an undeniable sense of relief. It
was the relief that bothered me.
“Fine,” I said shortly, and he smiled. Then I paused, a question striking
me.
“Jamie—will you come with me for a moment? You’ll be all right here,
Mr. Jackson. Don’t move too much.” Corporal Jackson lifted sketchy
eyebrows at me, but nodded.
I took Jamie back into the kitchen, closing the baize door that separated it
from the front of the house.
“What are you planning to do with him?” I asked bluntly. “I mean—is he
your prisoner?” I’d been planning to set the leg, bandage it, and then do what
was called in this time the Basra method—augmented by my own small
innovations. In essence, light—though fragile—plaster-of-Paris-soaked
bandages wound over a stocking and padding (dried moss was all I had at the
moment that would answer, but it worked well enough) that would
immobilize the limb but let the corporal move about, with a cane and some
care. But if Jamie needed him to be immobilized, I would just realign the
bones, dress the wounds, and splint the limb.
“No,” he said slowly, frowning in thought. “I canna easily keep him
prisoner, and there’s nay purpose in it. I ken well enough what Ulysses means
to do, because he told me himself. Holding his man wouldna sway him an
inch.”
“Will he come back for Mr. Jackson, do you think? I mean—he’s a British
army officer now.”
Jamie looked at me for a moment, then smiled in wry realization.
“Ye still think they’re honorable men, don’t ye, Sassenach? The British
army?”
“I—well, some of them 
are,
 aren’t they?” I said, rather taken aback by this
question. “Lord John? His brother?”
“Mmphm.” It was a grudging acquiescence that stopped well short of full
agreement. “Did I ever tell ye what His Grace did to me twenty years ago?”
“Actually, no, I don’t think so.” I wasn’t surprised that he should still carry
a grudge about it, whatever it was, but that could wait. “As for the army ingeneral … well, I suppose you have 
some
 small point. But I fought with the
British army, you know—”
“Aye, I do,” he said. “But—”
“Just listen. I lived with them, I fought with them, I mended them and
nursed them and held them when they died. Just—just as I did when we
fought—” I had to stop and clear my throat. “When we fought for the Stuarts.
And …” My voice faltered.
“And what?” He stood very still, leaning on his fists on the kitchen table,
eyes fixed on my face.
“And a good officer would never leave his men.”
The big room was silent save for the murmur of the fire and the bumping
of the kettle, about to boil. I closed my eyes, thinking, 
Beauchamp, you idiot
…
 Because he’d done that. Abandoned his men at Monmouth, in order to
save my life. It didn’t matter that the battle was over, the enemy in retreat,
that there was no danger to the men at that point, that nearly all of them were
militia on temporary enlistment, whose service would be legally up by the
next day’s dawn. Many had left already. But it didn’t matter. He’d left his
men.
“Aye,” he said softly, and I opened my eyes. He straightened up slowly,
stretching his back. “Well, then. D’ye think Ulysses is that kind of officer?
Will he come back for his corporal?”
“I don’t know.” I bit my lip. “What will you do if he does?”
He looked down at the tabletop, frowning as though the scrubbed oak
planks might be a scrying-glass that would show him the future.
“No,” he said at last, and shook himself. “Nay, he won’t come himself, but
he likely will send someone else. He won’t come within my grasp, and me
warned, but he’ll not leave the man.” He thought for another moment and
nodded, to himself as much as me.
“Can ye mend him so that he can travel, Sassenach?”
“Yes, within limits. That’s why I asked you.”
“Do that, then, if ye will. When it’s over, I’ll talk to Corporal Jackson and
make out what to do.”
“Jamie.” He’d turned to go, but stopped and turned round to face me.
“Aye?”
“
You’re
 honorable. I know it, and so do you.” He smiled a little at that.
“I try to be. But war’s war, Sassenach. Honor only makes it a bit easier to
live wi’ yourself, afterward.”I WAS MORE than a little perturbed by that 
“and make out what to do,”
 but
I wasn’t personally equipped to do more than reduce Corporal Jackson’s
fracture, stop the bleeding, and relieve his pain, so far as possible.
“Right,” I said to Jamie. “I’m going to need you, though, for a few
minutes. Someone’s got to hold on to him while I pull his leg straight, and
Fanny’s nowhere near tall or strong enough.”
Jamie looked less than enthused at this prospect, but followed me back to
the surgery, where I explained things to the corporal.
“You haven’t got to do a thing but lie still and relax as much as you can.”
“I will do my best, madam.” He was sweating and clammy and his lips
were nearly white. I hesitated for a moment, but then reached for my ether
bottle. The possible strain on his heart versus the advantages of his leg being
completely limp … no contest.
“I’m going to make you fall asleep,” I said, showing him the wickerwork
mask and the dropping bottle. “I’ll put this mask on your face, and then put a
few drops of this liquid onto it. It smells a little … odd, but if you just breathe
normally, you’ll go to sleep and it won’t hurt when I set your leg.”
The corporal looked more than dubious about this, but before he could
protest, Jamie squeezed his shoulder.
“If I wanted to kill ye, I’d just have drowned you in the creek or shot ye,”
he said, “rather than lug ye all the way uphill so my wife could poison ye.
Now lie down.” He pressed Jackson’s shoulders firmly down and the man
gave way, reluctantly.
His eyes above the mask were wild, glancing to and fro as though bidding
a final farewell to his surroundings.
“It will be all right,” I said, as reassuringly as possible.
He made a sudden, urgent sound and, reaching up, took hold of the
dangling small leather bag that had slipped out from its place between my
breasts when I bent over him.
“What is this?” he demanded, pushing the wicker mask aside with his other
hand. He looked shocked. “What is in it?”
“Ahh … to be honest, I don’t know, exactly,” I said, and took it gingerly
from his fingers. “It’s a … um … I suppose you’d call it a medicine bag—a
sort of … amulet? An Indian healer gave it to me, some years ago, and once
in a long while, I add something to it—a stone, perhaps, or a bit of herb. But
… it didn’t seem right to pour out what she’d put in.”His look of shock had faded into one of intense interest, tinged with what
looked like respect. He put out a tentative forefinger and, raising one brow to
ask my permission, touched the worn leather. And I felt it. A faint pulse that
throbbed once, against the palm of my hand.
He saw me feel it and his face changed. It was still gray with pain and cold
and blood loss, but he was no longer scared—of me, Jamie, or anything else.
“It is your 
moco,
” he said softly and nodded, certain.
“
Moco
?” I said, not certain at all, but having some notion what he meant.
Surely he hadn’t said 
mojo …
“Yes.” He nodded again and took a long, deep breath, his eyes still fixed
on the bag. “My great-grandmama, she is Gullah. She is a hoodoo. I think
you are one, too, madam.”
He turned his head abruptly to Jamie.
“Will you help me, sir? In my sack—a piece of red flannel cloth, with a pin
stuck through.”
Jamie looked at me in question, but I nodded, and shaking his head he
went to pick up a ragged rucksack, dumped in the corner of the room. In a
moment, he came back, a small red bundle in his hand.
Jackson nodded his thanks and, rolling onto one elbow, carefully pulled the
pin, unfolded the cloth, and stirred the contents with a careful forefinger. A
moment later, he picked something from the rubble of stones and feathers and
seeds, dried leaves and scraps of wood and iron, and beckoned to me to put
my hand out, then deposited something dark and hard in my palm.
“This is High John the Conqueror,” he said. “My great-grandmama gives
him to me, and says to me it is man’s medicine and will heal me if I am hurt
or sick. You put this into your 
moco
 before you put your hands on me,
please.”
It was a dried nodular root, so dark a brown as to be almost black, but a
very peculiar one. I could see why his great-grandmother said it was man’s
medicine, though: it looked exactly like a tiny pair of testicles.
“Thank you,” I said, rubbing my thumb over the object. It felt like a well-
polished bit of hard root, but I wasn’t feeling any particular sense of anything
from it. “Your great-grandmother is a … hoodoo? Would that be a sort of
healer?”
He nodded, though his mouth shifted sideways, slightly dubious.
“Mos’ly, madam.”Jamie cleared his throat in a meaningful sort of way. He was standing near
the fire, and small wisps of steam were rising from his hair and clothes.
“Well, then.” I tucked the bit of root into my amulet, cleared my throat,
and picked up the mask again. “Lie down, Mr. Jackson. This won’t take a
moment.”
IT DID, OF course, take somewhat longer than that—but the look of
amazement on Corporal Jackson’s face when he blinked and opened his eyes
to see his leg, straightened, bandaged, and wrapped in drying strips of linen
soaked in a mixture of gypsum, lime, and water was very gratifying.
“Hau!” he said, and added something in a language I didn’t recognize,
almost to himself.
“You might feel a little dizzy,” I said, smiling at him. “Just close your eyes
and rest for a bit. The plaster on your leg needs to dry before we can move
you.”
I eased a folded towel under his head and covered him with my trusty
surgery blanket.
“I’ll send you something warm to drink that will help the pain,” I told him,
tucking the blanket round his shoulders. “And I’ll be back to check on you
soon.”
Fanny was in the kitchen, chopping bacon into small bits, watched closely
by Bluebell, but she amiably stopped doing this in order to make Mr. Jackson
a posset.
“Warm milk with an egg beaten up in it—if we have any eggs?”
“Yes’m, there are,” she said proudly. “I found three this morning. But I
think they might be duck eggs,” she added dubiously. “’Twas near the creek,
and they’re summat bigger than your Scotch dumpys lay.”
“So much the better, as long as they’re moderately fresh,” I said. “If there’s
an embryo—you know, the beginnings of a duck?—in the egg, just lift it out
and give it to Bluebell; it won’t hurt the posset. Not that Corporal Jackson is
likely to notice,” I added reflectively, “once you’ve added two jiggers of
whisky and a spoonful of sugar. I think he’ll fall asleep right away; if he
doesn’t, though, you can give him one spoonful of the laudanum.”
I left her with instructions to come fetch me if the corporal seemed feverish
or disturbed in any way, and went upstairs to take care of my second patient.JAMIE WAS SITTING on the bed naked, rubbing his loosened wet hair with
a towel. I came to him, took the towel, kissed him on the back of the neck,
and took over the toweling, massaging his scalp. He sighed and let his
shoulders slump in relief.
He wasn’t shivering, but he was cold. Too cold even for goose bumps; his
flesh had a smooth nacreous look and was damp and chilly to the touch.
“You look like the inside of an oyster shell,” I said, rubbing my hands
together to generate some warmth before applying them to his shoulders.
“Let’s try a little friction.”
He made a small sound of amusement and leaned forward, stretching his
back in invitation.
“If ye thought I looked like an oyster, I’d worry,” he said. “Oh, God, that
feels good. How’s your man, then?”
“I think he’ll be fine, as long as he can be kept off the leg for a few weeks.
Complex fracture is always a touchy thing, because of the chance of infection
or displacement, but the break itself was relatively clean.”
I caught sight of his discarded clothes. His greatcoat lay on the floor in a
sopping pile, oozing water, and his hunting shirt, buckskin breeches, and
woolen stockings lay in a smaller wet pile beside it.
“What on earth did you do?” I asked, continuing to rub his back, but more
slowly. “Fall into the water?”
“Aye, I did,” he said, in a tone of voice indicating that he didn’t want to
talk about it. 
So he hasn’t got the letter.
 It made me look more closely at him,
though, and now with his hair pulled back, I noticed that his left ear was
bright red—and swollen, when I got a closer look at it.
“The boar?” I asked, touching it gingerly.
“Ulysses,” he said tersely, moving his head away from my touch.
“Indeed. What else?”
“A horse kicked me,” he said, reluctantly. “It’s nothing, Sassenach.”
“Ha,” I said, taking my hands off him. “I’ve heard 
that
 one before. Show
me.”
He made a disgruntled noise but leaned to the side and moved his arm.
There was a fresh pale-blue bruise that ran from his hip down the side of his
leg for eight inches or so. I prodded it, eliciting a few more disgruntled
noises, but so far as I could tell, no bones were broken.
“I told ye,” he said. “Can I lie down now?”He didn’t wait for permission, but stretched out on the bed with a luxurious
groan, flexed his toes, and closed his eyes.
“D’ye maybe want to finish drying me off?” One eye cracked open. “A
wee bit o’ friction wouldna come amiss.”
“And what if Fanny comes up while I’m applying this friction, to say Mr.
Jackson’s dying?”
“Could ye save him if he was?” One hand was idly combing through the
damp reddish-blond bush of his pubic hair, in case I’d missed his point,
which I hadn’t.
“Probably not, unless he was choking on the posset.”
“Well, he’ll ha’ finished the posset long before ye reach the point of no
return here …”
He’d told me long ago that fighting gave one—a male one, I assumed—a
terrible cockstand, assuming you weren’t too badly wounded. I supposed this
desire for friction should be reassuring.
I sat down beside him and took a thoughtful grasp of the point in question.
It was also cold, blanched, and shrunken, but seemed to be thawing rapidly in
my hand.
“It would help me think,” he suggested.
“I don’t believe men think at all in such circumstances,” I said, but began
to apply a very tentative sort of friction. His body hair had dried and begun to
rise in its usual exuberant fuzz.
“Of course we think,” he said, closing his eyes again. An expectant look
was beginning to bloom on his face; I’d definitely got his circulation
restarted.
“About what, exactly …?” I lay down beside him and nuzzled his
shoulder, not letting go. A large, cold hand rose up the back of my thigh,
pushed under petticoat and shift, and grasped my bottom, with intent. I
gasped, but didn’t—quite—shriek.
“That,” he said, with satisfaction. “Would ye maybe like to be on top,
Sassenach? Or maybe bent over a pillow—for the view?”
I WASN’T SURE whether the adrenaline of battle just didn’t diffuse
immediately, the recent nearness of death inducing a strong need to
reproduce— or whether the desire for sex merely expressed a need toreassure oneself that one was still alive and in reasonable working order.
Regardless, I had to admit that it had a settling effect.
I shook and patted myself back into some sort of order, looked at my
reflection in the glass, then shook my head, and wound my hair up into a
makeshift bun, precariously fastened by a couple of quills stolen from
Jamie’s desk as I passed the study. I could hear voices in the kitchen, and one
of them was Ian’s, which lifted my heart.
He and Tòtis were sitting at the table, eating bread and honey, conversing
with Fanny and Agnes in a mélange of languages: I recognized English,
Gaelic, and what I assumed to be Mohawk, plus a few words of French and a
certain amount of sign language regarding food.
“So 
there
 you are!” I said, not quite accusingly.
“Here we are,” Ian agreed, amiably. “I hear ye’ve a visitor, Auntie.”
“We’ve had more than one,” I replied, and sat down, suddenly aware that it
had been many hours since I’d eaten anything. “Did the girls tell you?”
“They’ve told me about the black soldiers,” he said, smiling at the girls.
“And the man whose leg ye’ve sawed off? But I daresay ye ken a bit more
about what’s happened, Auntie?”
“I do.” I reached for a slice of bread and the honey pot and filled him in.
His eyes went round when I told him about the reappearance of Ulysses,
whom he knew but hadn’t seen since that worthy’s departure from River Run
years before. The same eyes narrowed when I told him just what Ulysses had
said.
“Aye,” he said, when I’d finished my tale. “What does Uncle Jamie mean
to do about it?”
“He hasn’t told me yet,” I said uneasily. “But he didn’t take out after the
man. I mean, he could have followed Ulysses after the fight and left someone
else to bring Corporal Jackson back here, but he didn’t.”
Ian lifted a shoulder, dismissing this.
“Well, he doesna really need to chase him, does he? Ye say Ulysses has a
good-sized band of men—anyone could track a group like that, especially wi’
the ground like it is.” He bent and lifted Tòtis’s foot up high, to display the
coating of mud that covered the boy’s moccasin and fringed the edge of his
leggings. “And Uncle Jamie’s got a prisoner,” he added, putting down the
foot and ruffling Tòtis’s hair, which made the boy giggle. “No point in
chasing Ulysses without the militia—and it would take half a day to gather
Uncle Jamie’s men.”“I’m sure he wouldn’t do that,” I said, pouring a cup of milk. “The last
thing he’d want is a pitched battle that might get men killed—on either side.
Let alone kill soldiers and bring down the wrath—well, more wrath—of the
British army.”
“Aye, that would cause talk,” Ian said thoughtfully. “And the fewer folk
who ken about that letter, the better.”
“Jesus, I hadn’t even thought about that,” I said. The bread and honey was
restoring my depleted blood glucose and I was beginning to be able to think
coherently. For the contents of that letter to become widely known—and thus
known to Loyalists, not only on the Ridge but from the nearby backcountry—
would be disastrous. They’d like nothing better than to rally a so-called
Committee of Safety—cover for anything from blackmail to brigandage—
and come arrest the Fraser of Fraser’s Ridge. Or burn his new—illicit—house
over his head, as Ulysses had threatened.
“King beaver, forsooth,” I muttered under my breath.
“Uncle Jamie’s not damaged?” Ian said, an expression that couldn’t 
quite
be called a smirk on his face as he looked me over.
“He’s asleep,” I said, ignoring the undertones. “Would you like some
apple-and-raisin pie, Tòtis?”
Tòtis was normally a rather solemn little boy, but at this suggestion, he
grinned hugely, displaying the gap where a late baby tooth had recently fallen
out.
“Yes, please, Great-auntie Witch,” he said.
Fanny giggled.
“Great-auntie Witch?” I said, giving Ian an eye as I got up to fetch the pie.
He shrugged. “Well, the Sachem calls ye …”
The Sachem lived by himself, in a small dwelling he’d built that looked
like part of the forest, but I gathered that he spent a great deal of time with the
Murrays.
The Sachem was one thing; the inhabitants of the Ridge were something
else. I couldn’t stop the more suspicious-minded tenants thinking—or saying
—that I was a witch, but it was another thing to have my own great-nephew
saying so in public.
“Hmm,” I said to Tòtis. “Perhaps you could call me by the Mohawk name
for witch?”
He frowned at me, puzzled. Ian, with a slightly odd look on his face, bent
down and whispered something in the boy’s ear. Both of them then looked atme, Tòtis in awe and Ian with circumspection.
“I dinna think so, Auntie,” he said. “There 
is
 a Mohawk word for it, but it’s
a word that means ye have powers, without sayin’ quite what 
kind
 of
powers.”
“Oh. Well, just Great-auntie, then, please.” I smiled at Tòtis, who returned
the smile, but with an expression of caution.
“Aye, that’ll do fine.” Ian got up and brushed crumbs off his buckskins.
“Tell Uncle Jamie I’ve gone to have a wee keek at Ulysses. I want to make
sure he’s really got off the mountain and isna lurkin’ about. And I want to
ken which way he’s going. So as we can find him when we want him.”132
Man’s Medicine
THE HOUSE BEGAN TO breathe again, as things eased gradually through
the evening. Ian hadn’t returned, but I’d sent Jem and Tòtis up to tell Rachel
where he’d gone, and both boys returned for supper. The weather cleared and
warmed, and a wonderful sunset spread a blazing curtain of bright-gold cloud
in the western sky. Everyone went to sit on the porch and enjoy it, and I told
Jamie—who had come down to eat—where Ian was. He’d paused for a
moment, brow furrowed, but then nodded and relaxed, taking my hand. The
vibrations of Ulysses’s visitation were still with us but beginning to fade,
though the presence of Corporal Sipio Jackson in my surgery was an uneasy
reminder.
I organized the four older girls into shifts to sit with Corporal Jackson and
administer food, if wanted, honey-water, whether wanted or not, and
laudanum, if needed. Then I fumbled my way upstairs, my eyes already
closing, and fell asleep with no memory of undressing.
When I woke, somewhere past midnight, I discovered that this was
because 
I hadn’t undressed at all but merely collapsed onto the bed. Jamie
was sleeping deeply and didn’t stir when I got up and went down to relieve
the watch and check on my patient.
Agnes was dozing in my rocking chair, but stirred and rose groggily when
I came into the surgery. I put a finger to my lips and waved her back. Her
knees folded at once; she was asleep again almost before her bottom hit the
cushion. The chair rocked gently back under her weight—she was visibly
pregnant by now—then came to rest. The only light came from the smothered
embers in the tiny brazier on the counter, but the diffuse glow made the
surgery seem soft and dreamlike, glimmering among the bottles, hazy among
the hanging herbs drying overhead.Corporal Jackson was asleep now, too; I’d looked in twice before going to
bed, and finding him the last time wakeful, feverish, and in what hospital
personnel tactfully call “discomfort,” had given him a tea of willow bark and
valerian, with a few drops of laudanum. His face was slack and calm, mouth
a little open, breathing with a slight congestive sound. I put both hands gently
on his leg; one below the plaster dressing, a thumb on the pulse in his ankle,
and the other on his thigh. His flesh was still noticeably warm, but not
alarmingly so. I could feel the pulse of his femoral artery, slow and strong,
and felt my own pulse in the fingertips of the hand on his ankle. I stood still,
breathing slowly, and felt the pulses equalize between my hands.
The slow beat of the mingled pulses made me think suddenly of Roger’s
throat—and of Brianna’s heart. And then of William. 
So she’d met her
brother, at last.
That thought made me smile and at the same time experience a deep pang
of regret. I’d have given a great deal to see that meeting.
From John’s carefully composed letter, it had been clear that that meeting
was what he really wanted. Not that he wouldn’t want to help Bree to a fat
commission, or have her there for the sake of her own company—but I
recognized the commission as being merely the shimmering fly on the
surface of his pond. Jamie, who probably knew John a lot better than I did,
quite clearly saw that, too—and yet he’d simply picked up the baited hook,
examined it, and then deliberately swallowed it.
Yes, he’d needed guns, urgently. Yes, he wanted to restore Germain to his
parents. To some extent, he probably also wanted Roger to be ordained. But I
knew what he wanted most, and knew that John wanted it just as badly. They
wanted William to be happy.
Clearly, neither one was in a position to help William come to terms with
the fact that they’d both lied to him. Let alone help him pick up the pieces of
his identity. Nobody could do that but William. But Brianna 
was
 a part of his
identity and possibly something for him to hang on to while he fitted the rest
of his life together.
Even more than I would have wanted to see the meeting between William
and Bree—each knowing who the other was—I longed to see Jamie’s face
watching such a meeting.
I shook my head and let the vision fade, listening to Corporal Jackson’s
body and the whisper of sand through the hourglass (Agnes and Fanny were
meant to change places every two hours, but neither one could stay awakethat long), letting the peace of the night surgery flow into me. And from me,
with luck, into the young man under my hands. I’d thought him older when I
first saw him, but with the lines of tension, fear, and pain smoothed out of his
face, it was clear that he wasn’t more than twenty-five.
Moved by an impulse, I let go of his leg and fetched my medicine-bag
amulet from the cupboard.
Nobody was watching, but I still felt self-conscious when I reached into
the bag and withdrew the John-the-conqueror root. There must be some ritual
connected with its use, but as I had no idea what that might be, I’d have to
roll my own. I paused for a moment, holding the root in the palm of my hand,
and thought of the woman who’d given it to him. His great-grandmother,
he’d said. So she’d held this root herself, just as I did now.
“Bless your great-grandson,” I said softly, laying the root on his chest,
“and help him to heal.”
I didn’t know why, but I felt I must stay—and I’d been at this business
long enough to know when not to argue with myself. I roused Agnes and sent
her upstairs to her bed, then sat down myself in the rocking chair and rocked
gently, pressing down with the tips of my stockinged toes. After a time, I
stopped and sat listening to the quiet of the room and the breathing of the
man and the slow even beating of my own heart.
DAWN’S EARLY LIGHT roused me from my dozing trance. I got up,
stiffly, and checked my patient. Still sleeping, though I could see dreams
moving behind his closed eyelids; he was coming gradually to the surface.
His skin was cool, though, and the flesh above and below the plaster was
firm, no sense of puffiness or crepitation. The fire in the brazier had died to
ash, and the air held a moving freshness.
“Thank you,” I murmured, plucking the conqueror root off Mr. Jackson’s
chest and restoring it to my amulet. Man’s magic could be a useful thing, I
thought, given recent events and the prospect of lots more like them.
I went out to the privy, then upstairs, where I washed my face, brushed my
teeth, changed to a fresh shift, and put my work gown back on. The smell of
bacon and fried potatoes was creeping enticingly into the room, and my
stomach gurgled in anticipation. Perhaps there was time to grab a quick bite
before Mr. Jackson rejoined the living …Fanny and Agnes were giggling together over a slightly scorched pan of
corn bread, but looked up guiltily when I came in.
“I forgot,” Fanny said, apologetic, “but then I remembered.”
“It will be fine,” I said, sniffing it. “Put out butter and a little honey with it
and no one will notice. Have you seen Himself this morning?”
“Oh, yes’m,” Agnes said. “We went to the surgery a minute ago, to see if
you were there or if the soldier wanted breakfast, and Mr. Fraser was there,
with a, um, utensil in his hand. He told us to go and make up a plate whilst he
talked to Corporal Jackson.” She nodded at a pewter plate on the end of the
table, this holding two bannocks with jam, a heap of fried potatoes, and six
rashers of bacon.
“I’ll take it,” I said, scooping up the plate and taking a fork from the
yellow 
jar on the table. The metal was warm and the smell divine. “Thank
you, girls. Keep the food warm until Mr. Fraser or I come back, will you?”
It was very thoughtful of Jamie to call on the corporal with a chamber pot,
I thought, amused. That should go some way toward easing his mind. I
paused outside the quilt that covered the surgery door, listening to be sure I
wouldn’t interrupt Mr. Jackson at a delicate moment.
The quilt was red-side out. I couldn’t recall whether I’d pinned it up that
way yesterday or not. It was a double-sided quilt that Jamie had bought me in
Salem: two heavy woven wool pieces of cloth, elaborately fastened together
with a beautiful quilting stitch that curled into leafy circles and zigzagged
down the edges. The red cloth was the color of old brandy—or blood, as
Jamie had observed more than once—and the other side was a deep golden
brown, dyed with onion skins and saffron. It was my habit to put the quilt up
red-side out when I was conferring privately with a patient or doing
something embarrassingly intimate to them, as an indication to the household
that they ought not to burst in without knocking.
I heard a last trickle, a deep sigh from Corporal Jackson, and the metallic
scrape of a tin chamber pot sliding across wood, then the noise of Jamie—
presumably—sliding it under the counter.
“I thank you, sir,” Jackson said, courteous but wary.
“Well, ye’re no my prisoner,” Jamie said, in a matter-of-fact tone of voice.
“But ye do seem to be my guest. As such, of course ye’re more than welcome
to stay for as long as ye like—or need to. But I canna help but think ye might
have other places ye’d rather be, once my wife is pleased wi’ your leg.”Mr. Jackson made a brief sound in which surprise and amusement were
mingled in equal proportion, and there was a rustling noise and the creak of
my rocking chair as Jamie evidently made himself comfortable.
“I’m mos’ grateful for your hospitality, sir,” Jackson said. “And your
wife’s care of me.”
“She’s a good healer,” Jamie said. “Ye’ll do fine. But your leg’s broken, so
ye’re no walking out on your own. I’ll take ye in my wagon where ye want to
go, so soon as Claire says ye’re fettled.”
Jackson seemed a bit taken aback by this, for he didn’t answer at once, but
made a sort of low humming noise.
“I’m not your prisoner, you say,” he said, carefully.
“No. I’ve nay quarrel wi’ you, nor reason to do ye harm.”
“You and your men seem to think otherwise yesterday,” the corporal
pointed out, a cautious tone in his voice.
“Ach, that.” Jamie was silent for a moment, then asked, with no apparent
emotion other than mild curiosity, “Do ye ken Captain Stevens’s intent in
calling upon me?”
“No, sir. And I don’ wish to know,” Jackson said firmly.
Jamie laughed. “Likely a wise choice. I willna tell ye, then, save to say it
was a personal matter between him and me.”
“It looked that way.” Was that a hint of humor in Jackson’s voice? I was
listening so intently that I’d paid no attention to the food I was holding, but
the scent of bacon at close range was insistently seductive.
“Aye.” The hint of humor was stronger in Jamie’s voice. “I’m figuring that
he didna drag the lot of you up here just to make a show of force for me. But
there’s nothing else within fifty miles of this place—it’s nearly a hundred
miles to the nearest town of any size, save Salem, and neither the Crown nor
Captain Stevens would have business wi’ the Moravian brothers and sisters.
Ye ken them?”
It was a casual question—ostensibly, I thought, and nibbled the crispy end
of a rasher—and Jackson answered it likewise.
“I’ve been to Salem, once. You right, soldiers have no business there.”
“But they have business in the backcountry, apparently.”
Dead silence. Then I heard the faint squeak of my rocking chair, going
back and forth, back and forth. Slowly. I swallowed the bacon, feeling a
tightness in my throat.For a roving company of British soldiers to have “business” in a general
way, they must have intended one of two things—or possibly both. To rouse
Loyalists, or to hunt, harass, and discomfit rebels. And a company of Black
soldiers wouldn’t be sent to inspire Loyalists to form militias and turn against
their neighbors. I glanced involuntarily at the ceiling above me, hearing in
memory the crackle of wood and remembering the look of burning timbers,
about to collapse.
But they wouldn’t burn this place—yet. Ulysses wanted it.
“If I 
was
 your prisoner,” Jackson said at last, slowly, “I wouldn’ have to
answer your questions, is that right? I don’ know,” he added shyly. “I haven’
been a prisoner before.”
“I have,” Jamie assuredly him gravely, “and aye, that’s right. Ye have to
tell your captors your name and rank, and the company ye belong to, but
that’s all.” I heard the chair rock forward, and Jamie’s slight grunt as he rose
to his feet. “Ye dinna even have to tell me that much, as my guest. But as ye
honored me with your name and rank, and Captain Stevens told me your
company, you’re square either way.”
I blinked at that. Perhaps he’d meant it casually, but 
“you’re square”
 was
one of the coded phrases Freemasons used to identify one another; I’d heard
it frequently in Jamaica when we had enlisted the local Lodge to help in our
search for Young Ian. Were there black Freemasons in this time? Jackson
made no reply, though.
“But I dinna suppose ye want to spend the next several weeks on my
wife’s table. She’ll be needing it, sooner or later,” Jamie said.
“So.” His voice was slightly louder; he’d turned toward the door. “Say
where ye’d like to go, Corporal, and someone will take ye there. In the
meantime, let me go and see where your breakfast has got to.”
AFTER BREAKFAST AND a further brief discussion with Corporal
Jackson, Jamie wrote a note and sent Jem up the hill to Captain Cunningham
to deliver it. And two hours later, Lieutenants Bembridge and Esterhazy
appeared at our door. I didn’t know what either the captain or Mrs.
Cunningham had said to them, but neither one was battered, and when seen,
they appeared to be working—somewhat uneasily—with each other. Just
now, they both appeared rather nonplussed, and announced that they had
come to 
escort our prisoner—er, guest—to the captain’s cabin. The captainhad agreed—as the leading Loyalist on Fraser’s Ridge—to offer Corporal
Jackson refuge until such time as he could be reunited with his company.
“He can’t walk,” Jamie advised them. “I’ll lend ye a mule.”
“He can’t ride, either,” I said. “You’ll need to make a travois for him.”
While the men went out to do this, I checked the corporal’s condition—
feverish, but not a high fever, a certain amount of pain and some redness, but
—I sniffed his leg discreetly—no overt infection, and I wrote up a medical
note for Elspeth Cunningham, with a description of the injury and notes on
care of the plaster cast. I offered him elevenses, which he refused, but he did
drink another medicinal posset, involving an egg, cream, sugar, extract of
willow bark, black cohosh, and meadowsweet, a good slug of whisky—and
enough laudanum to fell a horse.
“You’re sure you want to go?” I asked, watching as he sipped the posset.
“We’re happy to take care of you until you’re healed enough to rejoin your
company.”
The corporal was heavy-eyed and his face was flushed, but he managed a
smile.
“It’s bettah I go, madam. This Cap’n Cunningham, he can send to Cap’n
Stevens, he will make provision for me to go to Charlotte.”
I shook my head dubiously. He was doing well enough, but being dragged
uphill for two miles behind a mule while suffering from a broken leg wasn’t
anything I’d wish on an enemy, let alone an innocent man. Still, it was his
choice. I took my amulet bag from round my neck and opened it. The usual
scent wafted out as I dipped my finger into it, earthy and unidentifiable but
with an odd sense of reassurance.
“Well, let me give you back your High John the Conqueror,” I said,
smiling as I plucked it out. “I hope you won’t need it on your journey, but
just in case …”
“Oh, no, madam.” He waved a slow hand at me, pushing it away. “Its
magic remain with me ’cause you have healed me with it—but it is part of
your magic now.”
“Oh. Well … thank you, Mr. Jackson. I’ll take good care of it.” The hard
little root was smooth and glossy, and my fingers caressed it briefly as I
tucked it back into the amulet and tied the neck. He nodded approvingly,
yawned suddenly and shook his head, then upended the posset cup and
drained it. He put out his free hand suddenly, his fingers curling in invitation.I took it, automatically putting a finger on his wrist—pulse a little fast, but
strong, and while his hand was very warm, it wasn’t alarming …
Then I realized that he was saying something, soft and slurred, but not
English.
“I beg your pardon?”
“I bless you,” he said, blinking drowsily. He smiled and his fingers
loosened and slid free. A moment later, he was asleep.
When we had seen the travois party safely off, and the girls and Jem had
all gone off on their own errands, Jamie and I returned to the kitchen for a
second breakfast.
He sat down gingerly, grimacing a little, but shook his head at my
inquiring look.
“I’ll do. But I’ll maybe have a dram wi’ my parritch.” I looked at him
narrowly.
“Have two,” I suggested, and he didn’t argue.
The big black-iron spider was hot in its bed of glowing charcoal, and I laid
down several fresh rashers of bacon and broke the last of the eggs from the
root cellar one at a time into a bowl to check that they were good before I
dropped them into the sizzling fat. I could feel the house gradually settling
back around us as the sense of intrusion and disruption faded. Still, the inside
of my nose prickled at the smoke from the frying bacon, and the remembered
smell of fire was sharp at the back of my throat.
“What do you think Ulysses will do now?” I asked, setting down the
plates. My voice was steady, but my hands weren’t; the spoon twitched in my
fingers as I shook salt onto the eggs and sent a spray of white crystals over
the table.
Jamie’s eyes were focused on the table, but I thought he hadn’t even seen
the scattered salt. He’d heard me, though, and after a moment he sat up
straight and nodded, as though to himself.
“Kill me,” he said, with a sigh. “Or try to,” he added, seeing my face. The
corner of his mouth curled up. “Dinna fash, Sassenach. I dinna mean to let
him.”
“Oh, good,” I said, and he smiled, though it was a wry one. The bench
creaked with his weight as he leaned forward and brushed the spilled salt
neatly into the palm of his hand. He tossed a pinch of it over his left shoulder
and carefully poured the rest back into the saltcellar.
I began to relax enough to feel hungry and picked up my fork.“If he can somehow make away wi’ me, though,” he went on
dispassionately, taking up the pepper, “he can ride up with his men and turn
you and the lassies out and take possession o’ the place, wavin’ his letter
under the noses of the tenants. They wouldna like it, but Cunningham and his
men would support him, and while the Lindsays and MacMillans and Bobby
are all good fighting men, none o’ them are what ye’d call leaders. They’d
not stand long, against trained soldiers and Cunningham’s lot—and Ulysses
wouldna hesitate to burn 
them
 out, should he feel the need. He wouldna mind
a small war, at all.”
“Ian and Roger wouldn’t stand for that,” I said.
Jamie cocked a brow at me.
“Ian’s a Mohawk and he’d fight to the death, but he’s never commanded
men,” he pointed out. “Mohawk dinna really fight that way. And while a
good many of the men on the Ridge 
like
 him, just as many are that wee bit
afraid of him—and liking’s not enough to get a man to risk his life and
family. As for Roger Mac …” He smiled a little, ruefully.
“I won’t say I’ve never seen a priest be a bonnie fighter, because I have.
And Roger Mac 
can
 draw folk together and make them listen. But it’s no his
business to make war and he hasna got any experience in doin’ it. Besides—”
He straightened his back and stretched, with a muffled popping of vertebrae.
“Oh, God. Besides,” he repeated, and gave me a very direct look, “there’s
nay 
telling when Roger Mac and Bree will be home from Salem. And I dinna
ken when ‘Captain Stevens’ may come back—but come back he will,
Sassenach.”
I glanced at the window. It was raining again, a speckle of fine droplets.
“I don’t suppose,” I said diffidently, “that Frank mentioned His Majesty’s
Company of Black Pioneers in that book?”
“He did not. Yon bastard was only concerned wi’ the Scots,” he said,
frowning. “I dinna recall one word in that book about black soldiers.” Then
his face went blank for a moment and he made a Scottish noise between
disgust and amusement. “Nay, he did say there were black men at the battle
of Savannah. They were from Saint-Domingue, though—wi’ the French
navy.”
He made an impatient gesture, dismissing all this complication.
“What I do ken is that Stevens will try to kill me if he can, and the sooner
the better. And I also ken he’ll send someone to fetch his corporal sooner
than that.”The kitchen was warm and cozy but the breakfast congealed in my
stomach.
“I don’t think so. Corporal Jackson said that Cunningham would make
provision to send him to Charlotte,” I blurted.
Jamie stared at me for a moment, and I could see the counters falling into
place behind his eyes.
“Ah,” he said, plainly thinking what I was: Charlotte must be the place
where Ulysses planned to rendezvous with the rest of the Company of Black
Pioneers. “That will be where Ian’s gone, then. He should be back soon, and
then …”
“No!” I said. “You can’t take your militia after him!”
“I dinna mean to,” he said mildly, and picked up his fork. “It would be
good exercise, but the weather’s chancy, and the game’s beginning to gather
and move. The men need to be hunting deer, not British soldiers. Besides,
ken what would happen if I caught him but some of his men got away to tell
the tale?”
I did, but I let go the breath I’d been holding; he wasn’t going to do it.
Then a second thought struck me in the solar plexus. I froze for a moment.
“No,” I said, and stood up suddenly, looming over him. “No! If you go
hunting that man alone, Jamie Fraser, you—you—can’t.”
He blinked. Bluebell jerked out of sleep with a small, startled 
wuff!
 but, not
seeing anything unusual, she sidled up to Jamie and nosed his leg. He put a
hand down to scratch her ears but kept his gaze on me, considering.
“Jamie,” I said, trying to keep my voice from trembling. “If you love me
… don’t. 
Please
 don’t. I can’t bear it.” I couldn’t. I couldn’t bear the thought
of his being killed, but nor could I bear the thought of his hunting,
performing execution. The sound of a rifle shot echoed in my head whenever
I thought of the man he had killed, rousing other echoes—of that night, a
heavy body in the dark, pain and terror and helpless suffocation.
“And I don’t even bloody know if you shot him,” I said abruptly, and sat
down. “The man … whose name I don’t know.”
He looked at me for a moment, head on one side, then reached out
delicately and scooped up a bit of yellow with a fingertip. He touched this to
my lower lip and I licked it off by reflex: warm, savory, delicious.
“I love you,” he said softly, and his hand cupped my cheek, big and warm.
“As an egg loves salt. Dinna fash, 
mo chridhe.
 I’ll think o’ something else.”133
Such an Odd Feeling
Fraser’s Ridge
July 8, A.D. 1780
From: Captain William C.H.G. Ransom
To: Mrs. Roger MacKenzie of Fraser’s Ridge
Dear Sister—
Such an odd Feeling to write that; my first Time of doing it.
I haven’t much—Time, I mean—but I have recently been involved
in a number of strange Circumstances, one of which invoked your
Name—or rather, not your Name; the Fellow only said, “I know your
Sister.”
Possibly he does. However, I have known this Man—his Name is
Ezekiel Richardson—over the Course of several Years, during which
he has arguably attempted on one or more Occasions to kill or abduct
me, or otherwise to interfere with my Actions. I first knew him as a
Captain in His Majesty’s Army, and much more recently, as a Major
in the Continental Army.
Upon our most recent Meeting (near Charles Town), he looked at
me oddly and remarked that he knew you. His Manner—and indeed,
his saying such a Thing at all—was Peculiar in the Extreme and
aroused a profound Feeling of Unease in me.
I will not presume to instruct you, as I haven’t the vaguest Notion
as to what Advice I should give. But I felt that I must warn you—
though against What, I have no Idea.With my Deepest Respect and Affection,
Your Brother (damn, I’ve never written that before, either),
William
PostScriptum: Such was my Sense of Disquiet, I undertook to try to
sketch Major Richardson’s Likeness, in Case he should seek you out.
He has a most undistinguished Face; the only Distinction I remarked
in it is that his Ears are placed unevenly—possibly not to the Extent in
which they appear in this crude Sketch, but if he is telling the Truth,
you may 
perhaps recognize him, should he ride up to your Door one
Day, and be on your Guard.
BRIANNA’S HANDS HAD GROWN sweaty in the reading, and a trickle of
perspiration ran down the side of her neck. She knuckled it absently away
and wiped her wet hand on her skirt before unfolding the smaller paper.
It 
was
 a crude sketch, a face-on portrait with the ears comically oversized
and attached asymmetrically to the head, like butterflies about to take flight.
She smiled for an instant, and then looked closer at the face between those
ears. It 
wasn’t
 distinctive at all—which might have made the drawing better
than it otherwise might have been, she thought, frowning. There was simply
nothing complicated about the major’s very ordinary face, though she was
pleased to see that William did indeed have at least some basic skill in
drawing: he’d added a deep chiaroscuro to the left side of the face and quick
thumb-shading to add hollows beneath the small, clever-looking eyes that …
She stopped, something tickling at her brain, and looked closer. Could
anyone actually have ears that noticeably off-kilter? Big ears were one thing,
but displaced ears … Perhaps if the man had had an accident that severed one
ear and a surgeon had sewed it back on awry … The notion made her smile,
despite her uneasiness, but another thought was pushing up behind the first,
triggered by the thought of surgery. 
Plastic surgery.
She looked again, closer, at that very ordinary face, lacking most of the
normal lines of expression. Alarm was flooding through her, even before her
mind had dotted the I’s and crossed the T’s.
She felt suddenly ill and sat down abruptly, eyes closed. She hadn’t eaten
lunch and now felt nauseated on an empty stomach. Common with morningsickness, her mother had said—but this wasn’t morning sickness. She opened
her eyes and looked again.
And this time she breathed cold air smelling of pine and heather and
burning rubber and hot metal and the acrid ghost of gunpowder. Remembered
the hail-like sound of shotgun pellets pattering through gorse and heather.
And the warm, greasy feel of an old wool cap in her hand, pulled off the head
of a man whose face she hadn’t quite seen, as he tried to kidnap Jem and
Mandy from the dark dooryard of Lallybroch. But now she saw him plain and
saw through his disguise. Both of them.
Someone will come.
She leaned over and threw up.
ROGER WAS SITTING under a tree on the creek bank, theoretically writing
a sermon about the nature of the Holy Trinity but in actuality hypnotized by
the clear brown water gurgling past, letting random quotes about streams and
water and eternity roll round inside his skull like rocks being dragged
downstream, clacking into each other as they went.
“Time is but the stream I go a-fishing in,” he murmured, trying it out. He
wasn’t worried about plagiarizing words that hadn’t been written yet.
Besides, 
Davy Caldwell had assured him that quotation was the backbone of
many good sermons—and a good place to start, if you found yourself without
a thought in your head.
“Which is the case, roughly nine times out of ten,” Davy had said, reaching
for a mug of beer. “And the tenth time, ye should write your brilliantly
original thought down and put it aside and read it through next day, to be sure
ye’re not talking out your arse.”
“I always thought Ralph Waldo Emerson was talking out his ass, but surely
you aren’t going to say 
that
 in your next sermon, are you?”
“What?” He looked up from his notebook to see Bree making her careful
way down the bank, and his heart lifted at the sight of her. She looked
pregnant.
“If you live to be a hundred, I want to live to be a hundred minus one day,
so I never have to live without you,” he said.
“What?” she said, startled. “Who said that?”
“Should I be hurt that you didn’t think it was me?” he said, laughing. “It’s
A. A. Milne. From 
Winnie-the-Pooh,
 if you can believe it.”“At this point,” she said, and sat down, sighing heavily, “I’ll believe
anything. Look at this.”
She handed him an odd-looking drawing of a man’s head, the sheet
showing the marks of having been folded.
“My brother sent it to me,” she said, and smiled, despite her apparent
uneasiness. “He’s right, it does feel strange to say it. ‘Brother,’ I mean.”
“What is it? Or rather, who?” He could see 
what
 it was; a quick sketch of a
man’s head, done in heavy graphite pencil. He frowned at it. “And what’s
wrong with him?”
“Well, there’s a pair of good questions.” She took a deep breath and settled
herself. “That’s a drawing of a man named Ezekiel Richardson. William says
he’s a turncoat—started with the British, switched to the Continentals. He’s
also some kind of skunk, who’s tried to do William harm of various kinds,
but hasn’t yet succeeded. Does he look familiar to you?”
Roger glanced up at her, puzzled.
“No. Why should he?” He returned his gaze to the paper and slowly traced
the outline of the face. “His ears aren’t quite straight, but I suppose William
doesn’t have quite your artistic talent.”
She shook her head.
“No. Not that. Try imagining him with longer, curly, sandy-colored hair,
light eyebrows, and a sunburn.”
Now slightly alarmed and wondering why, Roger frowned at the portrait of
a man with slicked-back dark hair, level dark brows, and small eyes that gave
away nothing.
“He certainly hasn’t got much expression …”
“Think bad plastic surgery,” she suggested, and there was a split second of
incomprehension before it hit him. His mouth opened, and his throat closed,
hard, and for an instant he was hanging, falling through a foot of air and
ending with a heart-stopping jerk.
“Jesus,” he croaked, when his throat finally let go its death grip. “A time
traveler? You really think so?”
“I know so,” she said flatly. “Do you remember, when we lived at
Lallybroch, a guy named Michael Callahan—he went by ‘Mike’—who was
an archaeologist who worked on Orkney? He came to look at the Iron Age
fort on the hill above the—our—graveyard.” He saw her throat swell as she
swallowed, hard. “Maybe he wasn’t looking at the fort. Maybe he was
looking at the graves—and us.”He looked from her tight lips to the drawing, back again.
“I’m not saying you’re wrong,” he said carefully. “But—”
“But I saw him again,” she said, and he saw that she was clutching the
fabric of her skirt, bunched in both hands. “At the shoot-out at the O.K.
Corral.”
A surge of searing-hot vomit hit the back of his throat, and he forced it
down. She saw his face and let go the bunched fabric to take his hand in both
hers, holding hard.
“I wouldn’t have thought of it at all—but looking at the ears, and suddenly
it just came to me that the only thing I could think of that would make
someone’s ears be like that would be if they’d had some kind of surgery that
didn’t quite come out the way it was supposed to … and the way his face is
so blank—and just all of a sudden I remembered that night. He—he tried to
get into the van where the kids and I—I grabbed the woolly hat off his head,
and yanked out some of his hair with it, and I caught just a glimpse of his
face—and then I didn’t think about it again, because we were trying to get
away and then I got the kids to California, and … But just now.” She
swallowed again, and he saw that the paleness of her face had given way to a
flush of rage. “It’s him. I know it’s him.”
“Holy buggery,” he said, staring back at the expressionless face, trying to
match it to Callahan’s mobile, always smiling face. But everything was
beginning to fall into place, like dominoes paving a path to hell.
“He knew Rob Cameron,” he said. “And Cameron read the book. He knew
what we were.”
“Rob couldn’t travel,” she said. “But maybe Mike Callahan can. And he
knew we’d recognize his real face.”134
F. Cowden, Bookseller
Philadelphia
August 25, 1780
IT WAS NOT OUT of the ordinary, seen from the street. Not one of the
fashionable streets, but not an alley, either. The building was red brick, like
most of Philadelphia, with fresh white-painted brick facings on the windows
and doorway. William paused for a moment to give 
himself countenance and
wipe the sweat from his face, while pretending to examine the books
displayed in the window.
Bibles, of course, but only a large one with an embossed leather cover and
gilded pages, and a devotional-sized Book of Psalms beside it with a green
leather cover, bright as a tiny parrot. He instantly revised his original opinion
of the bookshop’s quality and likely custom, an opinion borne out by the neat
array of novels in English, German, and French—including the French
translation of 
Robinson Crusoe,
 intended for children, from which he’d been
taught French at the age of ten or so. He smiled, momentarily distracted by
the warmth of memory—and then glanced up from the display of books to
see Amaranthus hovering behind it, no more than her pale face visible
through the glass, as though she’d been beheaded.
The shock was so great that he gaped stupidly at her for a moment, but he
observed that while not gaping stupidly, she appeared at least to be equally
taken aback at sight of him. He drew himself up and fixed her with a stare
meant to convey that it was no use her running out of the back door and down
the alley, because he was undoubtedly faster than she was and would hunt her
down like a fleeing tortoise.
She correctly interpreted this look and her changeable eyes—black, in the
dimness of the shop—narrowed dangerously.“Try me,” he said. Out loud, to the startlement of an elderly lady who had
stopped beside him to peruse the bookshop’s wares.
“I beg your pardon, ma’am,” he said, bowing. “Will you have the goodness
to excuse me?”
Not waiting for an answer, he pushed open the shop’s door and went in.
Not surprisingly, Amaranthus was gone. He glanced hastily round the room,
which—like every bookshop he’d ever entered—had piles of books stacked
on every possible horizontal surface. The place smelled wonderfully of ink
and paper and leather, but just this minute he hadn’t time to enjoy it.
A gnome stepped out from behind the piled desk, leaning on an ebony
cane. It was only his height that was gnomish, William saw; he was slender
but upright, with a full head of gray hair, thick and worn short, and a darkly
tanned, deeply lined face whose lines were fixed in determination.
“Stay away from my daughter,” the gnome said, taking a double-handed
grip on his cane. “Or I shall …” His eyes narrowed, and William saw just
where Amaranthus had got both eyes and expression. Mr. Cowden—for
surely this must be he—looked thoughtfully at William’s feet, then allowed
his gaze to pass upward to his face—this a foot or so above his own.
“Or I shall break your knee,” Cowden said, deftly reversing his grip so as
to hold the cane in the manner of a cricket bat and adopting the stance of one
intending to smash the ball into the next county. So decided was his manner
that William took a step backward.
Torn between annoyance and amusement, he bowed briefly.
“Your servant, sir. I am … William Ransom.” He’d been about to
introduce himself as the Earl of Ellesmere, he realized. He also realized just
how much deference that title might be worth, as he wasn’t getting any on the
strength of his patronym.
“So?” inquired the gnome, not altering his posture in the slightest degree.
“I’ve come to deliver a message to your daughter, sir. From His Grace, the
Duke of Pardloe.”
“Pah,” said Cowden.
“Did you say 
‘Pah’
?” William inquired, incredulous.
“I did, and I propose to go on saying it until you remove yourself from my
premises.”
“I decline to leave until I’ve spoken with … um … well, whatever the
bloody hell she’s calling herself these days. The Viscountess Grey? Mrs.
General Bleeker? Or has she gone all the way back to Miss Cowden?”Mr. Cowden’s cane swiped within an inch of William’s knee, missing only
because William’s reflexes had carried him backward by a yard. Before the
man could swing again, William bent and snatched the cane from his hand.
He resisted the urge to break it—it was a fine piece, with a heavy bronze head
in the shape of a raven—and instead placed it on the top of the nearest
bookshelf, well out of Cowden’s reach.
“Now … why do you not wish me to speak to your daughter?” he asked,
keeping his tone as reasonable as possible.
“Because she doesn’t wish to speak to 
you,
” Mr. Cowden replied, his tone
slightly less reasonable than William’s, but not enraged, either. “She said so.”
“Ah.”
The lack of aggression in William’s reply seemed to calm the bookseller
slightly. His hair had risen like the crest of a cockatoo, and he made an
attempt to smooth it with the palm of his hand. William coughed.
“If she won’t talk to me at present, perhaps I could leave her a note?” he
suggested, gesturing toward an inkwell on the desk.
“Hm.” Cowden seemed dubious. “I doubt she’d read it.”
“I’ll lay you five to one she does.”
Mr. Cowden’s tongue poked into the side of his cheek, considering.
“Shillings?” he inquired.
“Guineas.”
“Done.” He moved behind the desk, drew out a sheet of paper, and handed
William a slender glass pen with a swirling thread of dark blue running up its
stem. “Don’t press too hard,” he advised. “It’s Murano glass and pretty
strong, but it 
is
 glass, and you’re a ham-handed fellow. In terms of size,” he
amended. “I don’t impugn your dexterity, necessarily.”
William nodded, and dipped the pen gently. Presumably one used it like a
quill … one did, and it wrote beautifully, smooth as silk and holding its ink
very well. No blots, either.
He wrote briefly, 
What are you afraid of? Whatever it is, it isn’t me. Your
most humble and obedient Servant, William,
 then sanded the sheet and waved
it gently to make sure it was dry. He didn’t see any sealing wax, but his father
had shown him some years ago how to fold a letter like a Chinese puzzle, in a
way that would make it nearly impossible to open and refold the same way.
He pressed the creases with his thumbnail, to make sure they would show,
should the letter be opened before reaching its intended recipient.
The bookseller accepted the folded square and raised a thick gray brow.“Tell her I’ll come back tomorrow at three o’clock, without manacles,”
William said, and bowed. “Your servant, sir.”
“Never have daughters,” Mr. Cowden advised him, tucking the note into a
breast pocket. “They don’t listen worth a damn.”
WILLIAM SPENT A wakeful night, between bedbugs, inquisitive moths
who seemed intent upon exploring his nostrils, despite these orifices lacking
any light whatsoever, and his thoughts, which were undefined but active.
“You go into a situation with an expectation,” his uncle Hal had told him
once, during a discussion of military tactics. “You should know what you
want to happen, even if what you want is no more than your own survival.
That expectation will dictate your actions.”
“Since,” his father had neatly interposed, “you might do something
different, if you only wanted to get out alive, than you would if your primary
desire was to keep a majority of your troops alive. And something else again,
if what you wanted was to defeat an opposing commander and damn the
cost.”
William scratched his middle, meditating.
Well, so … what
 do 
I want to happen?
On the face of it, he’d already achieved the stated purpose of his
expedition, that being to discover where Amaranthus was and her
circumstances and general well-being. Well, fine. She 
was
 with her father,
which is where she’d said she was going, and was plainly neither ill nor
injured, judging by the speed with which she’d left the premises.
What William wanted to know at the moment was whether or not she was
wearing her wedding ring. Unfortunately, he couldn’t decide what either its
presence or its absence might signify. He also couldn’t decide which
condition he’d personally prefer. Would the sight of her ringless hand fill him
with pity, sympathy, satisfaction—or excitement? He felt all those things,
imagining it … You couldn’t miss it: a thick gold band with an ovoid
swelling cut with a deep crease, in which was embedded a large diamond,
flanked by pearls and tiny beads of Persian turquoise.
He yawned, stretched, and relaxed, so far as was possible; the inn’s bed
was Procrustean for someone of his height, and he was lying with his knees
raised, a dark double hillock under the blankets. He’d have to find better
quarters if …If what?
What, indeed? It wasn’t in his orders to drag the woman back to Savannah.
He needn’t hang about in order to try to convince her to go with him. But
what about Trevor?
Uncle Hal’s message—which had been dictated by Lord John, who said
that Hal’s normal style of correspondence would drive any sane woman to
instant flight—made it clear that he regarded her as a daughter and that she
would always find protection and succor under his roof, for herself and her
son.
Is she sane, I wonder …?
He was growing sleepy, but felt a distant throb at the thought, which had
brought her suggestion regarding his personal difficulties to mind …
“You might … just possibly enjoy it.”
He’d rolled sideways, his legs folded up, and now pulled the pillow over
his head to muffle the sounds from the bar below, where the singing seemed
to be accompanied by someone beating a bass drum.
“You might, too,” he murmured, and slept.
AT THREE O’CLOCK the next afternoon, he presented himself at the
bookshop. Mr. Cowden was standing behind his desk, writing in a large
ledger. He looked up at William’s entrance, regarded him with a beady eye,
and then pulled out a shallow drawer, from which he removed a single golden
guinea and placed it precisely in the center of the desk.
“She’s in the courtyard out back,” he said, and returned to his accounts.
William picked up the guinea, bowed, and went out.
The so-called courtyard was a small, fenced plot of ground, but had been
designed by someone—probably Mr. Cowden—with a fine eye for a garden
and a diverse taste in plants. It took William a moment to spot Amaranthus,
even though he was looking for her. She was seated on a stone bench in one
corner overhung by a rose trellis—not blooming, but lushly leaved, the
foliage tinged with red. A small stone fountain bubbled in front of her; that’s
why he hadn’t seen her at once.
She wore black, which didn’t become her, and her hair was pinned up
under a cap with a tiny bit of lace edging. She still wore her wedding ring,
and he felt a small twinge of what might be disappointment. Then he saw that
while she still wore the ring, she’d changed it from her left hand to her right.He stopped just by the fountain and bowed to her.
“So you’re not afraid of anything, now?”
She looked him over, soberly, then lifted her eyes to meet his. Pale blue,
translucent.
“I wouldn’t say that. But I’m certainly not afraid of you.” It might have
been a challenge or a sneer, but it wasn’t. It was just a statement of fact and
rather warmed him.
“Good,” he said. “Why did you run when I came yesterday, then?”
“I panicked,” she said frankly. “I’d put away all thought of—of Father
Pardloe and Lord John and Savannah—”
“—and me?”
“And you,” she said evenly, “and after a bit, it all began to seem unreal,
like the sort of fantasy you have when you’re reading a good book. So when
you popped up like the Demon King in a pantomime—” She flicked a hand.
After a moment’s pause, she asked, “Do you want to sit down?”
He sat beside her, close enough to feel the warmth of her—it was a small
bench, and William was a large young man. He wasn’t sure quite what to ask.
Yet.
“You’re a widow, then?” he said at last, and picked up her hand,
examining the ring.
“Yes, I am,” she said coldly.
“Really? Or only so far as your father—and Philadelphia—know?”
She gave him a narrow look, but she didn’t pull her hand away, and she
didn’t reply at once, either.
“Because,” he said, stroking the back of her hand with his thumb, “if Ben’s
really dead now, you haven’t any reason for not coming back to Savannah
with me, do you? Don’t you want to see Trevor? He misses his mama.”
“You bastard,” she hissed. “Let go!” He did, folding his hands on his
knees.
There was no sound for several minutes, save the rattle and hum of traffic
in the street and the plash of the fountain. The smell of the garden was strong
in the air, and while it was by no means as lush as the southern scents of
Savannah, it was pungent enough to stir the blood—and memories of Mrs.
Fleury’s garden, with its cold wet stone and the silent witness of a black-eyed
toad.
“I’m the only one you can tell,” he said at last, quietly. “I don’t expect
your father knows, does he? What happened to Ben?”She laughed, short and bitter, but a laugh.
“‘What happened to Ben,’” she repeated. “Not, 
‘What Ben did’
? General
Washington didn’t come and kidnap him, you know. He 
went.
 He did it all,
all by himself!”
“You went to him, though, didn’t you?” This wasn’t entirely a guess; he’d
seen that her fingers weren’t shadowed with ink. Everyone who worked in a
printshop or a bookseller’s eventually had smudged fingers; her father did. If
hers weren’t, she hadn’t been here long.
She didn’t answer at once, but sat silently fuming, mouth pressed tight.
“I did,” she said at last. “The more fool I. I thought I could talk him round.
I’d seen what happened during the siege, in Savannah. I thought I could
convince him—for God’s sake, he was a British officer! He should 
know
what the army’s like, what they can do!”
“I suppose he does,” William said mildly. “Rather courageous of him to go
take up arms against them, isn’t it?”
She made a noise like an angry cat and flounced away from him.
“So he wouldn’t come back to Savannah with you. Why didn’t you just go
yourself? You know the Greys would welcome you with open arms—if only
because you’d take Trev off their hands.”
She breathed hard through her nose, then suddenly flounced back round to
face him.
“I did see Ben. I saw him in bed with a black-haired whore who was
sucking his—” Choler choked her as efficiently as Ben had likely choked his
inamorata when he saw Amaranthus looming in the doorway.
William hesitated to say anything, for fear of making her leap up and run
inside. Instead, he placed his hand on the bench between them, barely
touching her fingers. And waited.
“He got up and pushed me into his dressing room and kept me from going
back into the bedroom until she’d got up and run, the filthy twat.”
“Where the devil did you learn a word like that?” he asked, truly shocked.
“A book of erotic poetry in Lord John’s library,” she said, glowering at
him. “I would have killed both of them, right there, if I’d had any bloody
thing to do it with. You don’t go to a reunion with your estranged husband
with a knife in your shoe, though, do you?” She stared down at her naked left
hand. “I yanked my ring off and tried to make him swallow it. I almost
managed, 
too,” she said, defiant. There were tears of rage slicked down her
cheeks, but she didn’t seem aware of them.“I’m sorry you didn’t,” he said, and took a careful breath. “I don’t excuse
Ben, by any means, but … he’s a soldier, and he thought you’d left him
forever. I mean, a—a casual liaison—”
“Casual, my arse!” she snarled, snatching her hand away. “He’s married
her!”
The words struck him in the pit of the stomach. William opened his mouth,
but found nothing whatever to say.
“That’s why I brought the ring away with me,” she said, looking at it. “I
wouldn’t let 
her
 have it!”
Of course she’d also needed it for her widow’s imposture, but he rather
thought that continuing to wear it—if even on the right hand—might be
something in the nature of a hair shirt for her, but didn’t say that.
“Marry me,” he said, instead.
She was frowning at a bird that had landed on the edge of the fountain to
drink—a dressy little creature with black-and-white wings and dark red sides.
“Towhee,” she said.
“What?”
“Him.” She lifted her chin toward the bird, who promptly flew off. She
turned on the bench to look William full in the face, her own features more or
less composed.
“Marry you,” she said slowly. A twitch she couldn’t control showed briefly
at the corner of her pale mouth, but he didn’t think it was an impulse to
laugh. Maybe shock, maybe not.
“Marry me,” he said again, softly. Her eyes were bloodshot, and now a
cloudy gray. She looked away.
“You mean a 
marriage blanc,
 I suppose?” she said, her voice a little
hoarse. “Separate lives, separate beds?”
“Oh, no,” he said, and took hold of both her hands. “I definitely want to
bed you. Repeatedly. What sort of marriage do you call that?”
“Well, bigamy, for a start.” She was looking at him in a different way,
though, and the blood was thrumming in his chest.
“We can discuss the details on the way back to Savannah.” Still holding
her hands tightly in his, he leaned down and kissed her. Her mouth moved
under his, more in shock than response—but response it was.
“I did 
not
 say I’d do it!” she said, jerking back. He let her go, noting with a
distant satisfaction that she hadn’t wiped her mouth in disgust.“You can give me your answer when we get to Savannah,” he said, and,
getting to his feet, he offered her his hand.135
Just to Make Things Interesting
IN A SMALL TOWN to the south of Philadelphia, he’d hired them rooms in
a decent inn and was pleased to find a small looking glass on the wall above
his washbasin. He’d shaved carefully—Amaranthus had been first shocked
and then amused by the discovery that his sprouting beard was a vivid dark
red—and then dressed in his captain’s uniform, somewhat creased from being
rolled up in his portmanteau, but clean.
She blinked when he got into the coach beside her and placed his hat on his
knee.
“I thought you’d resigned your commission.”
“I did. I have. This is what you might call a 
ruse de guerre,
” he said,
gesturing at his scarlet coat. “Uncle Hal’s idea. He gave me a temporary
captain’s commission, with orders for travel that would let me pass through
any territory controlled by the King’s troops—which Richmond and Charles
Town most assuredly are. I wasn’t joking,” he added gently. “He 
was
 worried
about you and he does want you back.”
She glanced away, out the window, and bit her lip.
“I should have thought an earl would be shown a certain amount of
courtesy, even without a uniform.”
“I’m not an earl, either,” he said firmly, and her head swiveled sharply
round. She stared at him.
“I should have said, before,” he said. “If you were considering being a
countess as part of the perquisites of marrying me, I’m afraid that’s off.”
“I wasn’t,” she said, and her mouth twitched slightly. She turned back to
the window, through which the muddy streets of Richmond were giving way
to equally rain-soaked cornfields.
“How did you manage it?” she said, not turning round. “I thought Father
Pardloe told you a peer couldn’t stop being a peer without the permission ofthe King. Did you persuade the King?”
“I haven’t spoken to His Majesty yet,” William said politely. “But I shall.
Still, it doesn’t matter what he says; I’ve made up my mind, and I’m not the
Earl of Ellesmere anymore—if I ever was.”
That did make her turn around.
He felt a sudden rush of … something. Maybe fear but mostly excitement,
as though he were just about to jump from a high cliff into the sea, not
knowing if the water was deep enough and not caring.
“I’m a bastard,” he said. It wasn’t the first time he’d said it, and he felt sure
it wouldn’t be the last, but he took a deep breath before going on. “I mean—
I’m not legally a bastard, because the eighth earl and my mother were
married when I was born. But the old earl wasn’t my father.”
She looked him slowly up and down, pausing at his face, her gaze traveling
down and up again.
“Well, whoever he was, he must have been a, um … very striking
gentleman. Is that where—” She pawed vaguely at her chin, still staring at
him.
“Yes,” he said, not quite between his teeth. “And not ‘was’—he’s still
alive.”
“You’ve met him?” She’d turned entirely to face him, her eyes alive with
interest. He had the sudden illusion that he could feel the touch of her eyes on
his face, tickling his skin.
“I have. He—knows me. And that I know about him.”
She didn’t say anything for a bit, but he could see her turning this
revelation over in her mind. She still wore black but had taken to wearing a
fichu of dark blue with it, rather than white; it made her eyes brilliant and
warmed her skin. Plainly she knew it, and he hid a smile. She saw it,
nonetheless, and leaned back, pursing her lips.
“Do you mean to tell me who this gentleman is?”
“I hadn’t,” he admitted. “But—if you’re to marry me …”
“I am 
not
 accepting your proposal. Not now. Probably not ever,” she
added, giving him a look. “But even if I don’t, you should know that I
wouldn’t tell anyone.”
“Good of you,” he said. “His name is James Fraser. A Highland Scot, and
a Jacobite—or was, I should say. He has some land in North Carolina; I
visited there when I was quite young—didn’t have the slightest clue that he
was … what he is.”“He’s acknowledged you?” Amaranthus had never been one to hide what
she thought, and the direction of her thoughts just now was easy to make out.
“No, and I don’t want him to,” William said firmly. “He owes me nothing.
Though if you’re wondering how I shall support you without the Ellesmere
estates,” he added, “don’t worry; I have a decent small farm in Virginia that
my mother—well, my stepmother, really; Lord John’s first wife—left me.”
There was Helwater, as well, but he thought that might disappear along with
Ellesmere, so didn’t mention it.
“Lord John’s 
first
 wife?” Amaranthus stared at him. “I hadn’t thought he’d
been married at all. How many wives has he had?”
“Well, two that I know of.” He hesitated, but in fact, he rather enjoyed
shocking her. “His second wife was—well, she still is—the wife of James
Fraser, just to make things interesting.”
She narrowed her eyes, looking to see if he was making game of her, but
then shook her head, dislodging a hairpin that poked suddenly out of her hair.
He couldn’t resist plucking it out and tucking the liberated curl behind her
ear. A faint stipple of gooseflesh ran down the side of her neck and she
shuddered, ever so faintly, despite the humid heat inside the carriage.
Two weeks later …
EMERGENCE FROM THE coach was like hatching out of a chrysalis, he
thought, stretching his long-folded legs and his aching back before reaching
to help Amaranthus out of their traveling womb. Air, sunlight, and above all,
space! He yawned uncontrollably and air flooded into him, inflating him back
to his proper dimensions.
He’d intended to take Amaranthus back to Uncle Hal’s quarters, and
hesitated for a moment, but she said firmly that she’d rather go to Lord
John’s house first.
“I trust Uncle John to listen,” she’d said. “And fond as I am of Father
Pardloe—why are you looking like that? I 
am
 fond of him. I’m just never
sure what he’ll do about things. And Ben’s his son, after all.”
“Good point,” William admitted. “Mind, I doubt my father knows what
Hal will do, either, but he’s used to dealing with the effects, at least.”
“Exactly,” she’d said, and spoke no more on the drive through the city,
only glancing at her reflection in the coach’s window and touching her hair
now and then.The door of Number 12, Oglethorpe Street opened before he could knock,
his first inkling that something was wrong.
“Oh, you found her!” Miss Crabb was looking over his shoulder at
Amaranthus, her lean face shifting between pleased relief and a desire to stay
irritated. “The baby’s asleep.
“His Grace has gone to Charles Town,” the housekeeper added, stepping
back to let them in. “He thought he’d be back within two weeks, but sent a
letter that came two days ago that he was detained at my lord Cornwallis’s
pleasure.”
Amaranthus had disappeared up the stairs in search of Trevor, so this
explanation was delivered to William.
“I see,” he said, stepping inside. “Did my father go with His Grace?” It
was evident that Lord John wasn’t in the house, because if he had been, he’d
be present right now.
Miss Crabb’s abiding expression of discontent had shifted, showing
something of uneasiness.
“No, my lord,” she said. “He went out day before yesterday, and he hasn’t
come back.”136
Two Days Previously
THE NOTE HAD ARRIVED at Number 12 Oglethorpe Street just after
luncheon. It had been a casual meal, ham sandwiches and a bottle of beer,
consumed in the cookhouse while Lord John watched Moira dealing with an
enormous turbot that had been delivered that morning. The woman knew how
to wield a cleaver, he thought, despite her recalcitrant attitude toward
tomatoes. A pity; she was plainly capable of turning any tomato into an
instant ketchup with one blow. He watched with keen anticipation as she
squinted at the fish—it was so large that it hung off the sides of the small
table—deciding upon the direction of her next attack.
Before she could strike, though, a shadow fell through the open door of the
cookhouse and there was a brief knock upon its jamb.
“Mein Herr?”
 It was Gunter, an ostler from the livery stables Hal
patronized, obsequious in his leather apron.
“Ja? Was ist das?”
 Grey asked. He saw Moira blink, momentarily suspend
her next thwack, and swivel her head from him to Gunter and back, squinting
suspiciously.
Gunter shrugged, raising his brows in abnegation of responsibility, and
handed over a neatly folded note, sealed with candle wax, and waved a hand
over his shoulder to indicate that someone at the livery had given it to him.
Grey fumbled in his pocket for a coin, came out with a penny and a shilling,
handed over the shilling, and took the note with a brief word of thanks.
He’d thought at first that it was something for Hal, but the note was
addressed to 
Lord John Grey,
 in a neat, secretarial style quite at odds with the
note’s casually obscure delivery. The message inside was in the same hand,
but just as puzzling as the exterior.
My Lord,I am told that you once employed a Man by the name of Thomas
Byrd. This Man took Passage from England upon my Ship, the Pallas,
and paid for his Passage upon Embarkation. However, he has formed
an Attachment to a Young Person he met aboard—and this Young
Person did not pay for her Passage, having instead stowed away in
the Hold. Mr. Byrd says he will pay for her Passage, to avoid her
being taken up by the Sheriff and gaoled, but does not possess ready
Cash for this Purpose. Being reluctant to commit such a comely
young Woman to the local Prison, I asked whether Mr. Byrd might
have Friends who would bear his Expenses. He demurred, not
wishing to presume upon his Acquaintance, 
but I had heard him
mention your Name, whilst onboard, and so I take the Liberty of
informing you of his Circumstances.
Should you wish to assist Mr. Byrd, or at least to speak with him,
he is still aboard us. Pallas is docked at the eastern-most Warehouse
Quay.
Your most humble and obedient Servant, sir,
John Doyle, Captain
“How very peculiar,” Grey said, turning the paper over, as though the back
might be more informative.
“Oh, it ain’t peculiar, sir,” Moira assured him, wiping a hand across her
sweating brow. “It’s only a female.”
“What?”
“Female,” she repeated, gesturing at the decapitated fish. “It’s females
what has eggs, what’s called roe.”
“Oh.” He saw that she had not only removed the head, tail, and fins,
opened the great flat body, and shoveled out the guts, but had also reserved a
large, solid mass of some dark substance—presumably fish eggs—this
oozing oil onto a plate that had been set aside on a shelf, there being no room
for it on the scale-encrusted surface where the fish itself was being
transformed into dinner. “Quite,” he said. “Might we have some with eggs,
do you think?”
“Just what I had in mind, me lord,” she assured him. “Fresh toast soldiers
with poached eggs and roe, with a bit o’ melted butter to pour over. What His
Grace calls a horsederve.”“Splendid,” he said, with a smile. “I’ll be home for supper in good time!”
Had it not been for this stark obtrusion of femininity, he might not have
gone. But the mention of females had reminded him of Tom’s marked
susceptibility to young women—something that had (so far as he knew) been
held in strict abeyance during his two marriages. But his last letter from Tom
—who wrote infrequently, but well—had told him that Tom’s second wife
had recently died, and as his eldest boy was now eighteen, he had it in mind
to leave young Barney in charge of the business for a bit and perhaps
undertake a journey to Germany, he not having visited there since their early
acquaintance with the Graf von Namtzen, and he begged that Lord John
would be so kind as to extend his regards to the 
graf,
 when Lord John might
be in communication with the same.
He supposed it was at least possible that Tom, embarked on a personal
voyage of discovery, might have been inspired to leave Europe altogether.
And that in doing so, still in the throes of grief, he might well have been
drawn to a young woman in obviously dire straits. Tom was a gallant man,
and a very kind one.
On the other hand, this letter had a distinct smell of fish, and it wasn’t
turbot. He folded it thoughtfully and tucked it into his waistcoat pocket.
“What the hell,” he said aloud, startling Moira in mid-chop. “Oh, I beg
your pardon, Mrs. O’Meara. I meant only that it’s a pleasant day for a walk.”
IT 
WAS
 A pleasant day, with a breeze stirring the heavy summer air, and he
enjoyed the stroll down to Bay Street, where he stopped to climb down the
steps and walk barefoot on the sandy beach for a bit, before resuming a
casual peregrination toward the warehouse district.
The produce fleet—fishermen and farmers bringing fruit and vegetables
from upriver—consisted mostly of small boats, and thus docks near to Bay
Street tended to be narrow and close together. The docks owned by the
warehouses, though, were stout, wide affairs down which barrows could be
driven, barrels rolled, and crates hauled with minimal danger of falling into
the water. The big ships that sailed foreign seas anchored either by the
warehouse docks or out in the river, if there was a great deal of ship traffic.
There 
was
 a great deal of such traffic at the moment, and Grey stopped to
admire it; a beautiful sight, with tall masts swaying and sun glinting off the
wings of the seabirds circling the ships. He liked ships of all sorts, though thesight of them always made him think of one James Fraser, who disliked ships
to the point of nearly dying of seasickness every time he went aboard one. He
smiled, the memory of an eventful Channel crossing with the Scotsman many
years ago being now distant enough as to be entertaining.
He’d kept away from the easternmost dock, not being a complete fool. He
bought some apples from a seller on one of the smaller docks, taking the
opportunity to look over at the larger ships.
“What’s that Indiaman, anchored out in the channel?” he asked the apple
seller, gesturing briefly at a large ship clearly capable of crossing the
Atlantic. It was flying no flag he recognized, though.
“Oh,” she said, having glanced indifferently over her shoulder. “
Castle,
 it’s
called. No, I tell a lie, it’s 
Palace,
 that’s it.”
Well, that was one fact noted: a ship named 
Pallas
 did exist and was an
Atlantic sailor. Whether Tom Byrd was or ever had been aboard her was
another question, but—
“Sir? Sir!” The repetition jerked him from his thoughts to see a runty sailor
with a rusty beard before him. “There’s summat on your hat, sir,” he said,
pointing upward.
Seagulls instantly in mind, Grey clapped a hand over his head, then seized
the hat and brought it down for inspection. Suddenly his vision went dark and
something light tickled his face. Then something exploded in his head and
everything went dark.
HE CAME ROUND with a sharp ache in the back of his head and a strong
urge to vomit. He attempted to roll onto his side in order to do so, but
discovered that his arms were bound to his sides. There was also a burlap
sack over his head, and this decided him not to vomit, even though a dizzy
sense of being rocked back and forth made the urge to do so still more urgent.
Shit. It’s a boat.
 Now he heard the splash of oars and the grunt of whoever
was wielding them, and smelled the fecund scent of the distant marshes. It
wasn’t a big boat; he’d been doubled up and stuffed into a small space
between the seats. His knees were wet.
Before he could congratulate himself on the acuity of his suspicions or
berate himself for stupidity in not paying sufficient attention to them, the
sound of the oars ceased, and the next moment the boat came to a stop with a
thump that jarred his throbbing head. More rocking and strong hands seizedhim and stood him up. A shout from whoever was holding him, and a rope
dropped from above, hitting his shoulder. The kidnapper—was there only
one?—wrapped this round his middle and knotted it, then shouted, “Heave
away!” and he was jerked into the air and hauled up like a side of beef.
Hands pulled him aboard and stood him up again, but he had no balance
with his arms bound and fell to his knees. The sack was jerked off his head,
and the stab of sunlight into his eyes was too much. He threw up on the shoes
of the man who stood before him, then collapsed gently onto his side and
closed his eyes in hopes of finding equilibrium.
There was a certain amount of cursing and colloquy going on above him,
but at the moment he didn’t care, as long as none of it resulted in his being
obliged to stand up again.
Then he heard a voice he recognized.
“For God’s sake, untie him,” it said impatiently. “What happened to him?”
He cracked one eyelid open. His ears had not betrayed him, but his eyes
had their doubts; everything overhead appeared in motion—masts, sails,
clouds, sun, faces were all swirling in a dizzying fashion that made him want
to vomit again.
“Someone hit me. On the head,” he said, closing one eye in hopes of
stopping the maypole dance. Rather surprisingly, it did, and the blandly
good-looking face of Ezekiel Richardson wavered into focus.
“My apologies,” Richardson said, and reaching down, pulled him to his
feet and held him by the elbows while someone undid the ropes. “I told them
to bring you, but I didn’t think to specify the means. Come below and sit
down; I imagine you could use a drink.”
HE RINSED HIS mouth with brandy and spat into a bowl, then sat back and
sipped a little, cautiously.
They sat in what was plainly the captain’s great cabin, for the stern
windows rose in a blaze of scintillant light reflected from the river below. It
made him queasy to look at it for more than a few seconds, but he was
beginning to feel better.
“I really do apologize,” Richardson said, and sounded as though he meant
it. “I have no personal animus against you at all, and if I could have managed
this without involving you, I would have.”Grey shifted his gaze reluctantly to Richardson, who wore the uniform of a
British infantry major.
“I have heard of double agents, and met them, too,” he said, more or less
politely. “But damned if I’ve seen one less able to make up his mind. Would
you care to tell me which side you’re really on?”
He thought the expression on Richardson’s face was meant to be a smile,
but it wasn’t altogether succeeding.
“That,” Richardson said, “is not as simple a question as you might think.”
“Well, it’s as good a question as you’re likely to get, under the
circumstances.” Grey closed his eyes and lifted the glass under his nose;
maybe inhaling brandy fumes would allay the headache without making him
drunk. He thought it might be dangerous to be drunk in Richardson’s
company.
“Let me ask you one, then.” Richardson was sitting in the captain’s chair;
it creaked as he leaned forward. “When I asked you whether you had any
personal interest in Claire Fraser, you replied that you didn’t, and then
promptly married her. Why did you do that?”
That made John open his eyes. Richardson had spoken mildly, but was
regarding him with the air of a very patient cat sat outside a mousehole. John
touched the back of his head gingerly, then looked at his fingers. Yes, he was
bleeding, but not heavily.
“I could tell you that it’s none of your business,” he said, wiping his
fingers on his breeches. “But as it is, there’s no reason for secrecy. You had
threatened to have the lady arrested for sedition. She was the widow of a
good friend. It seemed to me that keeping her out of your clutches was
perhaps the last office I could perform for Jamie Fraser.”
Richardson nodded.
“Just so,” he said. “A gallant gesture, my lord.” He seemed slightly
amused, though it was hard to tell. “I understand that the marriage was
necessarily of short duration, owing to Mr. Fraser’s unexpected return from a
watery grave. But did the lady tell you, in some exchange of marital
confidences, anything regarding her antecedents?”
“No,” Grey said, without hesitation.
“That seems rather remarkable,” Richardson said, “though given what
those antecedents are, perhaps the lady’s reticence was justified.”
A ripple of unease crept down the back of Grey’s neck—or perhaps it was
just a dribble of blood, he thought. 
Antecedents, my arse.
 He leaned back alittle, careful of his tender head, and gave Richardson what he hoped was an
inscrutable stare.
Richardson regarded him for a long moment, then, with a brief nod to
himself, rose and fetched a leather folder from the shelf and sat down again.
He opened the folder and removed an official-looking document, complete
with seal and stamp, though Grey couldn’t tell from where he sat whose seal
it was.
“Are you familiar with a man named Neil Stapleton?” Richardson asked,
cocking one brow.
“In what sense, familiar?” Grey asked, raising both of his. “I might have
heard the name, but if so, it’s been some time.” It 
had
 been some time, but
the name “Neil Stapleton”—better known to Grey as Neil the Cunt—had
struck him in the pit of the stomach with the force of a two-pound round shot.
He hadn’t seen Stapleton in many years, but he certainly hadn’t forgot the
man.
“Perhaps I should have inquired as to whether you knew him … in the
biblical sense?” Richardson asked, watching Grey’s face. He pushed the
document toward Grey, whose eyes fixed at once on the heading: 
Confession
of Neil Patrick Stapleton.
No,
 he thought. 
Bloody hell, no …
He took up the document, glad in a remote way to see that his hands
weren’t shaking, and read a moderately detailed and quite accurate account of
what had occurred between himself and Neil Stapleton on the night of April
14, 1759, and again on the afternoon of May 9 of the same year.
He laid down the document and stared at Richardson over it.
“What did you do to him?” he asked. His stomach tightened at the thought
of what they—for surely it 
was
 a “they” and not this man alone—
might
 have
done to a man like Neil.
“Do to him?” Richardson said, looking bland.
“Blackmail, bribery, torture …? He didn’t write this of his own free will.
What sane man would?” And whatever else he might be, Neil had never been
lacking in his wits.
Richardson shrugged.
“Is he alive?” Grey said, between his teeth.
“Do you care?” Richardson seemed only faintly interested. “Oh—but of
course you do. If he were dead, you could claim that this document is aforgery. But I’m afraid that Mr. Stapleton is, in fact, still alive, though I
naturally cannot guess as to how long he’ll stay in that condition.”
Grey stared at him. Was the fellow actually now threatening to have Neil
killed? But that made no sense.
“He is, however, in London. Fortunately, though, I have additional …
testimony, shall we say?—nearer to hand.” He rose and went to the cabin
door, opened it, and put his head out.
“Come in,” he said, and stepped back to allow Percy Wainwright room to
enter.
PERCY LOOKED DREADFUL, Grey thought. He was disheveled, his
neckcloth missing, and his curly, graying hair matted in spots, sticking up in
others. He was pale as skimmed milk, with dark circles under his eyes. The
eyes themselves were bloodshot and fixed on Grey at once.
“John,” he said, a little hoarsely. He cleared his throat, hard, then looked
away and said, “I’m sorry, John. I’m not brave. You’ve always been brave,
but I never have.”
This was no more than the truth, acknowledged between them and part of
the love they’d once shared; John had always been willing to be brave for
both of them. He felt a tinge of sympathetic pity beneath the larger sense of
annoyance—and the very much larger sense of fear.
“So you made him sign a statement of confession, too,” he said to
Richardson, doing his best to keep calm.
Richardson pursed his lips and opened the folder again, this time drawing
out a longer document. 
Well, it would be longer, wouldn’t it?
 Grey thought.
How long were we lovers?
“Unnatural acts 
and
 incest,” Richardson remarked, turning over the pages
of the new document. “Dear me, Lord John. Dear me.”
“Sit down, Percy,” Grey said, feeling unutterably tired. He caught a brief
glimpse of the document’s heading, though, and his spirits rose a fraction of
an inch. 
Confession of P. Wainwright,
 it said. So Percy had kept that one last
bit of self-respect; he hadn’t given Richardson his real first name. He tried to
catch Percy’s eye, but his erstwhile stepbrother was looking down at his
hands, folded in his lap like a schoolchild’s.
You did try to warn me, didn’t you?“You’ve gone to rather a lot of trouble for nothing, Mr. Richardson,” he
said coolly. “I don’t care what you do with these documents; a gentleman
does not submit to blackmail.”
“Actually, almost all of them do,” Richardson said, almost apologetically.
“As it is, though, I’m not blackmailing you.”
“You’re not?” Grey waved a hand at the folder and its small sheaf of
papers. “What on earth is this charade in aid of, then?”
Richardson folded his own hands on the desktop, leaned back, and looked
at Grey, evidently assembling his thoughts.
“I have a list,” he said, finally. “Of persons whose actions have led—either
directly or indirectly, but without doubt—to a particular outcome. In some
cases, the person him—or her—self performs the action; in others, he or she
merely facilitates it. Your brother is one who will facilitate a particular course
of action that in turn will decide this war.”
“What?” … 
actions have led … will facilitate … will decide …
 He shot a
sideways glance at Percy, who was looking up, but with an attitude of
complete bewilderment, and no wonder.
“What, indeed?” Richardson had been watching the play of thoughts on
Grey’s face. “I may be mistaken, but I believe that your brother intends to
make a speech to the House of Lords. And I further believe that the effects of
that speech will affect the will of the British army—and hence Parliament—
to pursue this war.”
Percy was listening to this in total bewilderment, and Grey didn’t blame
him.
“I desire that your brother 
not
 make that speech,” Richardson concluded.
“And I think that your life and honor are probably the only things that would
prevent him doing so.” He cocked his head to one side, watching Grey.
Grey blinked.
“If you think that, plainly you don’t know my brother.”
Richardson smiled. It wasn’t a pleasant expression.
“You’ve seen a man hanged for sodomy.”
“I have.” He had, in fact, not only attended that hanging but had pulled on
Bates’s legs in the desperate hope of hastening his end. He found that one
hand was idly rubbing his chest, in the place where Bates had kicked him.
“The American colonies are no more tolerant of perversion than is England
—probably less. Though you might have the luck to be stoned to death by a
mob rather than formally hanged,” he added judiciously, and nodded towardthe papers on the desk. “Your brother will appreciate the position, I assure
you. You—and Mr. Wainwright—will remain aboard as my guests, while
copies of these statements are delivered to your brother. What happens to you
after that will depend upon His Grace.”
He closed the folder, picked it up, and bowed.
“I’ll have some food brought. Good day, gentlemen.”137
Infamous and Scandalous Acts
WILLIAM’S FIRST RESPONSE TO learning of his father’s disappearance
was to go and look for him. He began at General Prévost’s headquarters.
No one had seen Lieutenant Colonel Lord John Grey, he was told. They
would like very much to know where he was, though, as Regimental Colonel
His Grace the Duke of Pardloe had left responsibility for the soldiers
remaining in Savannah in Colonel Lord John’s hands, and while the
executive officers over these soldiers were fully capable of keeping the men
fit and in order, they would certainly appreciate more specific orders, when
these should be forthcoming.
At least they knew where Uncle Hal was—or was supposed to be. In
Charles Town.
“Which is the devil of a lot of help,” he told Amaranthus, after two days of
searching. “But if Papa doesn’t turn up here quite soon …”
“Yes,” she said, biting her lip. “I suppose you’ll have to go find Father
Pardloe in Charles Town. If he …” Her voice died away.
“If he what?” he demanded, in no mood for obfuscation. She didn’t reply
at once, but went to the sideboard and took down a bulbous black bottle. He
recognized it; it was the German brandy Papa and Uncle Hal called black
brandy, though the name was really “Blood of Martyrs.” He waved it away
impatiently.
“I don’t need a drink.”
“Smell it.” She’d uncorked the bottle and now held it under his nose. He
took an impatient sniff, then stopped. And sniffed again, more cautiously.
“I don’t pretend to be a judge of brandy,” Amaranthus said, watching him.
“But Father Pardloe did give me a glass of this once. And it didn’t smell—or
taste—like this.”
“You tasted it?” He raised a brow at her and she shrugged.“Only a fingertip. It tastes much as it smells—hot, spicy. And that’s not
how it 
should
 taste.”
William dipped a fingertip and tried it. She was right. It tasted … wrong,
somehow. He wiped the drop of wine on his breeches, staring at her.
“Do you mean to say you think someone’s 
poisoned
 this?” His natural
incredulity was lessened by the worry of the last few days, and he found that
he wasn’t at all unwilling to believe this.
Amaranthus grimaced, gingerly putting the cork back into the bottle.
“A few weeks ago, Father Pardloe asked me did I know what foxglove is. I
told him I did, and that he’d seen it—Mrs. Anderson has quite a lot of it
bordering the front walk of her garden.” She took a short breath, as though
her corset was too tight, and met William’s eye. “I told him it was poisonous.
And I found that”—she nodded at the bottle—“locked up in the strongbox in
his office. He gave me a key some time ago,” she added pointedly, “because
all of my jewelry is in it.”
William looked at the bottle, black—and menacing. The fingers of the
hand that had touched the stuff felt suddenly cold and seemed to be tingling.
He rubbed them impatiently against his sleeve.
It wasn’t that he thought Uncle Hal wouldn’t kill someone he thought
needed killing; he just didn’t believe he’d do it with poison. He said as much
to Amaranthus, who looked at the bottle for a long moment, then back at him,
her eyes troubled.
“Do you think he might have meant … to kill 
himself
 with it?” she asked
quietly.
William swallowed. Faced with the imminent prospect of telling his wife
what had become of their eldest son, and the eventual prospect of having his
family and the regiment disgraced and destroyed … he didn’t 
think
 Harold,
Duke of Pardloe, would seize upon suicide as an escape, but …
“Well, he didn’t take it with him to Charles Town,” he said firmly. “It’s no
more than a three-day ride. I’ll go and find him. Put that stuff somewhere
safe.”
Charles Town
WILLIAM HAD NOT expected ever to meet Sir Henry Clinton again. But
there he was, frowning at William in a way that made it evident that Sir
Henry recalled very well who he was. William had been waiting in ananteroom of the gracious Charles Town mansion presently serving as
command headquarters for the Charles Town garrison, having requested a
brief audience with Stephen Moore, one of Clinton’s aides-de-camp with
whom he had been friendly—and one who he knew was familiar with the
Duke of Pardloe. He’d sent in his name, though, and five minutes later Sir
Henry himself popped up like a jack-in-the-box, his appearance nearly as
startling.
“Still 
Captain
 Ransom, is it?” Sir Henry asked, elaborately courteous.
There wasn’t any bar to a man resigning one commission and buying another,
but the circumstances of William’s resignation of his commission under Sir
Henry had been dramatic, and commanders in general disliked drama in their
junior officers.
“It is, sir.” William bowed, very correctly. “I trust I see you well, sir?”
Sir Henry made a 
hrmph
 noise, but nodded briefly. He was, after all,
surrounded by the evidences of a significant victory: the streets of Charles
Town were pitted and marred by cannon fire, and soldiers—many of them
black—were everywhere, laboriously restoring what they had spent weeks
blowing up.
“I am come with a message for the Duke of Pardloe,” William said.
Sir Henry looked mildly surprised.
“Pardloe? But he’s gone.”
“Gone,” William repeated carefully. “Has the duke returned to Savannah?”
“He didn’t say he meant to,” Clinton replied, beginning to be impatient.
“He left more than a week ago, though, so I imagine he’ll have got back to
Savannah by now.”
William felt a coolness on the back of his neck, as though the room around
them had subtly changed from one moment to the next and an unseen
window had opened.
“Yes,” he managed to say, and bowed. “Thank you, sir.”
He walked out into the street and turned right, with no intent in mind save
movement. He was at once alarmed and incensed. What the devil was Uncle
Hal about? How dare he go off about his own business when his own brother
had disappeared?
He stopped dead for a moment, as the thought struck him that his father
and uncle might have disappeared together. 
But why?
 The thought died in the
next moment, though, as he spotted a familiar red-coated form a hundredyards down the street, buying a packet of tobacco from a black woman in a
spotted turban. Denys Randall.
“The very man I wanted to see,” he said a moment later, falling into step
alongside Denys as he walked away from the tobacco seller.
Denys looked up, startled, then looked forward and back before turning to
William.
“What the bloody hell are you doing here?” he asked.
“I might ask the same of you.”
“Don’t be ridiculous; I’m supposed to be here, and you aren’t.”
William didn’t bother asking what Randall was doing. He didn’t care.
“I’m looking for my uncle Pardloe. Sir Henry just told me that he left
Charles Town more than a week ago.”
“He did,” Denys said promptly. “I crossed paths with him as I came down
from Charlotte on the … oh, when was it … the thirteenth? Maybe the
fourteenth …”
“Damn what day it was. You mean he was riding north, not south?”
“How clever you are, William,” Denys said in mock approval. “That’s
exactly what I meant.”
“Stercus,”
 William said. His stomach knotted. “Was he alone?”
“Yes,” said Denys, looking at him sideways. “I thought that odd. I don’t
know him to speak to, though, and hadn’t any reason to do so.”
William asked a few more questions, with no results, and so took his leave
of Denys Randall, with luck, for good.
North.
 And what lay to the north that might lead the colonel of a large
regiment to depart suddenly and without word to anyone, riding alone?
Ben. He’s going to see Ben.
 The vision of a black bottle rose in the back of
his mind. Had Hal thought of poisoning himself, his son, or both of them?
“Too bloody Shakespearean,” William said aloud, turning his horse to the
south. “Fucking 
Hamlet,
 or would it be 
Titus Andronicus
?” He wondered
whether his uncle ever read Shakespeare, for that matter—but it didn’t
matter; wherever he’d gone, he hadn’t taken the bottle. At the moment, all he
could do was go back to Savannah and hope to find his father there.
Three days later, he walked into Number 12 Oglethorpe Street and found
Amaranthus in the parlor, poking the fire. She swung round at the sound of
his step and dropped the poker with a clang. An instant later, she was
hugging him, but not with the fervor of a lover. More the action of a strandedswimmer reaching for a floating log, he thought. Still, he kissed the top of her
head and took her hands.
“Uncle Hal’s gone,” he said. “North.” Her eyes were already dark with
fear. At this, the little blood remaining in her face drained away.
“He’s going to see Ben?”
“I can’t think what else he could be doing. Have you had any word from
Papa? Has he come back?”
“No,” she said, and swallowed. She nodded at an open letter that lay on a
small table under the window. “That came this morning, for Father Pardloe,
but I opened it. It’s from a man named Richardson.”
William snatched the letter up and read it quickly. Then read it again,
unable to make sense of it. And a third time, slowly.
“Who 
is
 that man?” Amaranthus had retreated a little, eyeing the letter as
though it might suddenly spring to life and bite. William didn’t blame her.
“A bad man,” William said, his lips feeling stiff. “God knows who he
really is, but he seems to be—I don’t know, exactly. ‘Major General
Inspector of the Army’? I’ve never heard of such an office, but—”
“But he says he’s arrested Lord John!” Amaranthus cried. “How could he?
Why? What does he 
mean
 ‘infamous and scandalous acts’? Lord 
John
?”
William’s fingers felt numb and he fumbled the sheet of paper, trying to
refold it. The official stamp beneath Richardson’s signature felt rough under
his thumb, and he dropped the letter, which caught a whiff of air and spun
across the carpet. Amaranthus stamped on it, pinning it to the floor, and stood
staring at William.
“He wants Father Pardloe to go and speak to him. What the devil shall we
do
?”138
Inherited Evil
A week later
IT WAS QUIET, BAR the usual shipboard noises and shouted orders from
the deck of the 
Pallas,
 echoed faintly across the water from other anchored
ships.
Grey had quite recovered from the effects of his abduction and was
somewhat prepared when two deckhands came to fetch him from his small
cabin. They bound his hands loosely in front of him—a bit of thoroughness
that he 
appreciated as professional caution, though he deplored its immediate
effects—and propelled him forcibly up a ladder and across the deck to the
captain’s cabin, where Ezekiel Richardson was waiting for him.
“Sit, please.” Richardson gestured him to a seat and stood looking down at
him.
“I have as yet had no word from Pardloe,” he said.
“It may be some time before you can reach my brother,” Grey remarked, as
casually as possible in the circumstances. 
And where the devil
 are 
you, Hal?
“Oh, I can wait,” Richardson assured him. “I’ve been waiting for years; a
few weeks doesn’t signify. Though it would, of course, be desirable for you
to tell me where you believe him to be.”
“Waiting years?” Grey said, surprised. “For what?”
Richardson didn’t answer at once, but looked at him thoughtfully, then
shook his head.
“Mrs. Fraser,” he said abruptly. “Did you really marry her simply to oblige
a dead friend? Given your natural inclinations, I mean. Was it a desire for
children? Or was someone getting too close to the truth about you, and you
married a woman to disguise that truth?”
“I have no need to justify my actions to you, sir,” Grey said politely.Richardson seemed to find that amusing.
“No,” he agreed. “You don’t. But you do, I suppose, wonder why I
propose to kill you.”
“Not really.” This was in fact true, and the disinterest in Grey’s voice
needed no dissimulation. If Richardson truly meant to kill him, he’d already
be dead. The fact that he wasn’t meant that Richardson had some use for him.
That,
 he wondered about, but chose not to say so.
Richardson drew a slow breath, looking him over, then shook his head and
chose a new tack.
“One of my great-grandmothers was a slave,” he said abruptly.
Grey shrugged. “Two of my great-grandfathers were Scotch,” he said. “A
man can’t be responsible for his ancestry.”
“So you don’t think the sins of the fathers should be visited upon the
children?”
Grey sighed, pressing his shoulders against the chair to ease the stiffness in
his back.
“If they were, I should think humanity would have ceased to exist by now,
pressed back into the earth by the accumulated weight of inherited evil.”
Richardson shrugged slightly, whether in acknowledgment or dismissal of
the point, Grey couldn’t tell. Richardson turned to the wall of glass panes and
looked out, presumably to give himself time to think up a new conversational
gambit.
The sun was sinking and the light from the big stern window glittered from
a million tiny wavelets, coruscating across the glass, the ceiling—did you call
it a ceiling, in a ship?—and across the table at which Grey sat. It flickered
over his hands, which were still rather the worse for wear. He flexed them,
slowly, considering various nearby objects in terms of their effectiveness as
weapons. There was a rather solid-looking clock and the bottle of brandy, but
both were some distance away, on the far side of the cabin … 
God damn it,
that was 
his
 bottle of brandy! He recognized the handwritten label, even at
this distance. The bastard had been burgling his house!
“I beg your pardon?” he said, suddenly aware that Richardson had asked
him something.
“I said,” Richardson said, with a pretense of patience, “how do you feel
about slavery?” Not getting an immediate response, he said, much less
patiently, “You were governor of Jamaica, for God’s sake—surely you’re
well acquainted with the institution?”“I assume that’s a rhetorical question,” Grey said, gingerly touching the
healing but still-swollen laceration on his scalp. “But if you insist … yes. I’m
reasonably sure I know a great deal more about it than you do. As to my
feelings regarding slavery, I deplore it on both philosophical and
compassionate grounds. Why? Did you expect me to declare myself in favor
of it?”
“You might have.” Richardson looked at him intently for a moment, and
then seemed to come to some decision, for he sat down across the table from
Grey, meeting his eyes on the level. “But I’m glad you didn’t. Now …” He
leaned forward, intent. “Your wife. Or your ex-wife, if you prefer …”
“If you mean Mrs. Fraser,” Grey said politely, “she was in fact never my
wife, the marriage between us having been arranged under the false
impression that her husband was dead. He’s not.”
“I’m well aware of it.” There was a note of grimness in 
that
 remark, and it
gave Grey an uneasy feeling in the pit of his stomach.
The clock on the distant table uttered a clear 
ting!,
 then did it four more
times, just to make its point. Richardson looked over his shoulder at it and
made a displeased noise.
“I’ll have to go soon. What I want to know, sir, is whether you know what
Mrs. Fraser is.”
Grey stared at him.
“I realize that being struck over the head has somewhat impaired my
thought processes … 
sir
 … but I have the strong impression that it’s not I
who am suffering from incoherence. What the devil do you mean by that?”
The man flushed, a strange, patchy sort of flush that left his face mottled
like a frost-bitten tomato. Still, the look of displeasure on his face had eased,
which alarmed Grey.
“I think you have a good idea what I mean, Colonel. She told you, didn’t
she? She’s the most intemperate woman I’ve ever met, in this century or any
other.”
Grey started involuntarily at that, and cursed himself as he saw the look of
satisfaction in Richardson’s eyes.
What the devil did I just tell him?
“Ah, yes. Well, then—” Richardson leaned forward. “I am also—what
Mrs. Fraser, and her daughter and grandchildren, are.”
“What?” Grey was honestly gobsmacked at this. “What the devil do you
think they are, may I ask?”“People capable of moving from one period of time to another.”
Grey shut his eyes and waited a moment, sighed deeply, and opened them.
“I’d hoped I was dreaming, but you’re still there, I see,” he said. “Is that
my brandy? If so, give me some. I’m not listening to this sort of thing sober.”
Richardson shrugged and poured him a glass, which Grey drank like water.
He sipped the second, and Richardson, who had been watching him patiently,
nodded.
“All right. Listen, then. There is an abolitionist movement in England—do
you know about that?”
“Vaguely.”
“Well, it will take root, and in the year 1807, the King will sign the first
Act of Abolition, outlawing the slave trade in the British Empire.”
“Oh? Well … good.” He’d been covertly looking for an avenue of escape
ever since he’d awakened on deck and realized that he was on a ship. Now he
realized that he was looking at it. The windows in the lowest row of that great
wall of glass were hinged; two of them were in fact open, allowing a cool
breeze to come in from the distant sea.
“And in 1833, the House of Commons will pass the Slavery Abolition Act,
which will outlaw slavery itself and free the slaves in most of Britain’s
colonies—some eight hundred thousand of them.”
Grey was a slender man, and not tall. He 
thought
 he might be able to
squeeze through one of the panes. And if he could drop into the river, he was
fairly sure he could swim ashore, though he’d seen the river’s currents …
“Eight hundred thousand,” he said politely, as Richardson had paused,
evidently expecting a response. “Very impressive.” He was managing the
glass of brandy well enough with his wrists bound, but swimming was
another matter … He glanced briefly at the rope. Chew one of the knots
loose, perhaps … Ought he to wait until he was out in the water, in case
someone came in and caught him gnawing, though?
“Yes,” Richardson agreed. “But not nearly as impressive as the number of
people in America who will 
not
 be freed, and who will continue to be
enslaved, and then to suffer …”
Grey ceased listening, recognizing that the tone of Richardson’s speech
had shifted from conversation to lecture. He dropped his hands to his lap,
pulling inconspicuously to test the stretch of the rope ….
“I’m sorry?” he said, noticing that Richardson had stopped talking for a
moment and was glaring at him. “My apologies; I must have dozed offagain.”
Richardson leaned over, took the brandy glass from the table, and dashed
the dregs in his face. Taken unaware, Grey inhaled some of the liquid and
coughed and spluttered, eyes burning.
“
My
 apologies,” Richardson said, politely. “No doubt you’ll need a bit of
water with that.” There was a pitcher of water on the desk; he picked that up
and poured it over Grey’s head.
This was actually helpful in washing the stinging brandy mostly out of his
eyes, though it did nothing for the coughing and wheezing, which went on for
some minutes. When this at last eased, he sat back and wiped his eyes on the
backs of his tied hands, then shook his head, sending droplets across the desk.
Some of them struck Richardson, who inhaled strongly through his nose, but
then apparently regained control of himself.
“As I was saying,” he said, giving Grey a glare, “it’s the Revolution in
America that will allow slavery to flourish unchecked here—and then lead, in
part, at least, to another bloody war and more cruelty …”
“Yes. Fine.” Grey held up both hands, perforce, palms out. “And you
propose to do something about this by moving through time. I understand
perfectly.”
“I doubt that,” Richardson said dryly. “But you will, in time. It’s very
simple: if the patriots don’t succeed, the American colonies remain under
British law. They won’t engage in slave trading, and their existing slaves will
all be freed in the next fifty years. They won’t become a slaveholding nation,
and the Civil War—that’s going to happen in roughly a hundred years from
now, if we don’t manage to put a stop to the present war—won’t happen, thus
saving hundreds of thousands of lives, and the long-term consequences of
slavery will not … Are you trying to feign sleep again, Lord John? I might be
obliged to slap you awake, as the pitcher is empty.”
“No.” Grey shook his head and straightened up a little. “Just thinking. I
gather that you’re telling me that you mean to cause the current rebellion to
fail so that the Americans remain British subjects, is that right? Yes. All right.
How do you mean to do that?” Plainly the man wasn’t going to shut up until
he’d got his entire theory laid out—such people never did. He groaned
inwardly—his head was aching again, from the coughing—but did his best to
look attentive.
Richardson looked at him narrowly, but then nodded.“As I said—if you remember—my associates and I have pinpointed
several key persons whose actions will affect the trajectory of this war. Your
brother is one of them. If we do not prevent him, he’ll go to England and
deliver a speech to the House of Lords, describing his own experience and
observation of the American war, and insisting that while the war might
eventually be won, the expense of doing so will be disproportionate to any
benefit from retaining the colonies.”
Jesus. If Hal does do that, he’d be doing it for Ben. If the war stops and the
Americans are allowed to win, Ben won’t be captured and hanged as a
traitor. He won’t
 be 
a traitor, as long as he stays in America. Oh, God, Hal
…
 His eyes were watering again, but not from brandy fumes.
“He’s not the only person in a public position to hold that opinion,”
Richardson added, “but he’ll be one of the people who, by virtue of chance or
destiny, is in the right place at the right time. He’ll give Lord North the
excuse he’s been looking for to abandon the war and devote England’s
resources to more important ventures. It won’t be only Pardloe, of course—
we have a list—”
“Yes, you said that.” Grey was beginning to have an unpleasant feeling in
the pit of his stomach. “You said 
‘we.’
 How the devil many of you are
there?”
“You don’t need to know that,” Richardson snapped, and Grey felt a small
pulse of satisfaction. The answer was likely either “very few” or “no one but
me,” he thought.
Richardson leveled a finger at him.
“All you need to know, my lord, is that your brother must not give that
speech. With luck, his concern for your health will be sufficient to stop him.
If not, we will be compelled to reveal your character and activities in the
most public manner and make the scandal as sensational as possible by
having you executed for the crime of sodomy. That should be enough to
discredit your 
brother and anything he says.” He paused dramatically, but
Grey said nothing. Richardson stared at him, then gave a short laugh.
“But you will have the comfort of knowing that your death will mean
something. You will have saved millions of lives—and, incidentally,
prevented the British empire from making the greatest economic blunder in
history by abandoning America. That’s more than most soldiers get, isn’t it?”139
Dreams of Glory
Fraser’s Ridge
September 4, 1780
I WAS HAVING THE delightful sort of dream where you realize that you’re
asleep and are enjoying it extremely. I was warm, bonelessly relaxed, and my
mind was an exquisite blank. I was just beginning to sink down through this
cloudy layer of bliss to the deeper realms of unconsciousness when a violent
movement of the mattress under me jerked me into instant alertness.
By reflex, I rolled onto my side and reached for Jamie. I hadn’t achieved
the stage of conscious thought yet, but my synapses had already drawn their
own conclusions. He was still in bed, so we weren’t under attack and the
house wasn’t afire. I heard nothing but his rapid breathing; the children were
all right and no one had broken in. Ergo … it was his own dream that had
awakened him.
This thought penetrated into the conscious part of my mind just as my hand
touched his shoulder. He drew back, but not with the violent recoil he usually
showed if I touched him too suddenly after a bad dream. He was awake, then;
he knew it was me. 
Thank God for that,
 I thought, and drew a deep breath of
my own.
“Jamie?” I said softly. My eyes were dark-adapted already; I could see
him, half curled beside me, tense, facing me.
“Dinna touch me, Sassenach,” he said, just as softly. “Not yet. Let it pass.”
He’d gone to bed in a nightshirt; the room was still chilly. But he was naked
now. When had he taken it off? And why?
He didn’t move, but his body seemed to flow, the faint glow of the
smoored fire shifting on his skin as he relaxed, hair by hair, his breathing
slowing.I relaxed a little, too, in response, though I still watched him warily. It
wasn’t a Wentworth dream—he wasn’t sweating; I could almost literally
smell fear and blood on him when he woke from those. They came rarely—
but were terrible when they did come.
Battlefield? Perhaps; I hoped so. Some of those were worse than others,
but he usually came back from a dream of battle fairly quickly and would let
me cradle him in my arms and gentle him back toward sleep. I longed to do it
now. An ember cracked on the hearth behind me, and the tiny spurt of sparks
lit his face for an instant, surprising me. He looked … peaceful, his eyes
dark-wide and fixed on something he could still see.
“What is it?” I whispered, after a few moments. “What do you see, Jamie?”
He shook his head slowly, eyes still fixed. Very slowly, though, the focus
came back into them, and he saw me. He sighed once, deeply, and his
shoulders went loose. He reached for me and I all but lunged into his arms,
holding him tight.
“It’s all right, Sassenach,” he said into my hair. “I’m not … It’s all right.”
His voice sounded odd, almost puzzled. But he meant it; he was all right.
He rubbed my back gently between the shoulder blades and I gingerly
relaxed a little. He was very warm, despite the chill, and the clinical part of
my mind checked him quickly—no shivering, no flinching … his breathing
was quite normal and so was his heart rate, easily perceptible against my
breast.
“Do you … 
can
 you tell me about it?” I said, drawing back after a bit.
Sometimes he could, and it seemed to help. More often, he couldn’t, and
would just shake until the dream let go its grip on his mind and let him turn
away.
“I don’t know,” he said, the note of surprise still in his voice. “I mean—it
was Culloden, but … it was different.”
“How?” I asked warily. I knew from what he’d told me that he
remembered only bits and pieces of the battle, single vivid images. I’d never
encouraged him to try to remember more, but I 
had
 noticed that such dreams
came more frequently, the closer we came to any looming conflict. “Did you
see
 Murtagh?”
“Aye, I did.” The tone of surprise in his voice deepened, and his hand
stilled on my back. “He was with me, by me. But I could see his face; it
shone like the sun.”This description of his late godfather was more than peculiar; Murtagh had
been one of the more dour specimens of Scottish manhood ever produced in
the Highlands.
“He was … happy?” I ventured doubtfully. I couldn’t imagine anyone
who’d set foot on Culloden moor that day had cracked so much as a smile—
likely not even the Duke of Cumberland.
“Oh, more than happy, Sassenach—filled wi’ joy.” He let go of me then,
and glanced down into my face. “We all were.”
“All of you—who else was there?” My concern for him had mostly
subsided now, replaced by curiosity.
“I dinna ken, quite … there was Alex Kincaid, and Ronnie …”
“Ronnie MacNab?” I blurted, astonished.
“Aye,” he said, scarcely noticing my interruption. His brows were drawn
inward in concentration, and there was still something of an odd radiance
about his own face. “My father was there, too, and my grandsire—” He
laughed aloud at that, surprised afresh. “I canna imagine why 
he’d
 be there—
but 
there he was, plain as day, standing by the field, glowering at the goings-
on, but lit up like a turnip on Samhain, nonetheless.”
I didn’t want to point out to him that everyone he’d mentioned so far was
dead. Many of them hadn’t even been on the field that day—Alex Kincaid
had died at Prestonpans, and Ronnie MacNab … I glanced involuntarily at
the fire, glowing on the new black slate of the hearthstone. But Jamie was
still looking into the depths of his dream.
“Ken, when ye fight, mostly it’s just hard work. Ye get tired. Your sword’s
so heavy ye think ye canna lift it one more time—but ye do, of course.” He
stretched, flexing his left arm and turning it, watching the play of light over
the sun-bleached hairs and deep-cut muscle. “It’s hot—or it’s freezing—and
either way, ye just want to go and be somewhere else. Ye’re scairt or ye’re
too busy to be scairt until it’s over, and then ye shake because of what ye’ve
just been doing …” He shook his head hard at this, dislodging the thoughts.
“Not this time. Once in a long while, something comes over ye—the red
thing, is what I’ve always called it.” He glanced at me, almost shyly. “I had it
—well, I was far beyond that—when I charged the field at Culloden. This
time, though—” He ran a hand slowly through his hair. “In the dream … it
was different. I wasna afraid at all, nor tired—do ye ever sweat in your
dreams, Sassenach?”“If you mean literally, yes. If you mean am I conscious of sweating in the
dream … no, I don’t think so.”
He nodded, as though this confirmed something.
“Aye. I dinna think one smells things in a dream, either, unless it’s maybe
smoke because the house took fire around ye whilst ye slept. But I felt things,
just now, dreamin’. The rasp o’ the moor plants on my legs, gorse stuck to
the edge of my kilt, and the feel o’ grass on my cheek when I fell. And I felt
cold from the water I was lyin’ in, and felt my heart grow chill in my chest,
and the beating grow slower … I kent I was bleeding, but nothing hurt—and I
wasna afraid, either.”
“Did you take your clothes off in your dream?” I asked, touching his bare
chest. He looked down at my finger, blank-faced. Then let his breath out
explosively.
“God. I’d forgot that part. It was him—Jack Randall. He came out o’
nowhere, walking through the fight, stark naked.”
“What?”
“Well, dinna ask me, Sassenach, I dinna ken why. He just … was.” His
hand floated back to his chest, gingerly touching the small hollow in his
breastbone. “And I dinna ken why I was, either. I just … was.”140
Three Rounds with a Rhinoceros
Fraser’s Ridge
September 16, 1780
“ONE WOULD THINK YOU’D done this before,” I remarked, smiling up
between Brianna’s knees.
“If one thinks I’m ever doing this 
again
 …” she panted, but broke off, her
sweating face contorting like a gargoyle’s. 
“NRRRRGH.”
“Wonderful, darling,” I said, my fingers on the rounded, hairy object
showing briefly between her legs. I felt it for only a second before it
disappeared again, an instant’s throbbing pulse, but that was enough; there
was no sense of distress, only of bewilderment and an intense curiosity.
“Jesus, it looks like a coconut,” Roger blurted from his spot kneeling on
the floor behind me.
“ARRRGHHHH! NGGGGHHH! I’m going to 
kill
 you! You—effing—”
Brianna stopped, panted like a dog, then drove her blood-streaked legs hard
into the straw-covered floor, half-rose from the birthing chair, and the baby
shot out and fell heavily into my hands.
“Oh, my God,” said Roger.
“Don’t faint back there,” I said, busy swabbing the little boy’s nose and
mouth. “Fanny? If he falls over, drag him out of the way.”
“I won’t faint,” he said, his voice trembling. “Oh, Bree. Oh. Oh, Bree!” I
could feel him scuffling the straw as he rose to go to her, but my attention
was split between Brianna and the baby—a good bit of blood, a small
perineal tear, but no apparent hemorrhage—pink, wriggling, face screwed up
in the exact gargoyle’s expression his mother had had a moment before, heart
thumping like a tiny trip-hammer and … I was already smiling, but my smilewidened as he jerked away from my bit of gauze and started yelling like an
angry buzz saw.
“Apgar nine or ten,” I said happily. “Well done, darling—both of you!”
“Where’s his Apgar?” Fanny said, frowning at the baby. “Is that what you
call his—”
“Oh. No, it’s a list you run through with a new baby, to evaluate their state.
‘Apgar’ stands for Activity, Pulse, Grimace—he’s certainly got that—
Appearance—see how pink he is? A baby that’s had a difficult time might
have bluish fingers and toes, or be blue all over—that would be very bad.” I
had a quick vision of Amanda’s birth—and of the last blue baby I’d held—
and gooseflesh rippled over my arms. I closed my eyes with a quick prayer
for little Abigail Cloudtree and for the healthy grandson in my arms.
“What’s the ‘R’ for?” Roger asked, curious. I glanced up; he was cradling
Bree’s head, gently wiping back the strands of sweat-soaked hair pasted to
her face, but his eyes were glued to the baby.
“Respiration,” I said, raising my voice slightly to be heard over the baby’s
rhythmic—and loud—cries. “If they’re yelling, they’re breathing. Come
down here and cut his cord for him, Daddy. Fanny, come down here, too; the
placenta will be along any minute.”
“Where’s Da?” Brianna said, lifting her head.
“Just here, lass.”
Jamie, who had been lurking in the doorway, tucked his rosary into his
pocket and came in to Bree, bending down to kiss her forehead and murmur
something to her in Gaelic that made her tired-but-smiling face blossom.
The room reeked of blood and shit and the peculiarly fecund, swampish
smell of birthwaters.
“Here, sweetheart.” I rose, knees stiff from an hour of kneeling on the hard
floor, and put the naked baby into her arms. “Be careful, he’s still a little
slippery.” He had the faintly waxy look of a newborn, still coated with the
protective vernix that had sheltered him in the waters he’d just traversed. It
took a moment for my back to unkink sufficiently for me to stand fully
upright, and I stretched my arms up, groaning.
“I’m not seeing it yet,” Fanny said. She was still kneeling, peering intently
between Brianna’s splayed legs.
“See if he’ll suckle, will you, darling?” I said to Bree. “That will help your
uterus contract.”“That’s 
just
 what I need,” she muttered, but nothing touched the beatific
smile that flickered on and off through the exhaustion that veiled her face.
She tugged down the neck of her sweat- and bloodstained shift and carefully
guided Junior’s squalling face to her breast. Everyone watched, riveted, as he
rubbed his face to and fro on the breast, still squawking. Bree squinted down
her nose, trying to move her nipple with one hand while holding the baby
with the other. The nipples each showed a tiny drop of clear liquid.
“See?” I said to Fanny, nodding at them. “That’s colostrum. It comes
before the real milk. It’s full of antibodies and useful things like that.” She
turned her head to me, squiggle-eyed. “It means the baby will be protected
from any illness—well, most illnesses—that his mother has had,” I explained.
The baby squirmed, and Bree nearly dropped him.
“Whoa!” said nearly everyone. She scowled at Roger, who was closest.
“I 
have
 him,” she said. Junior threw his head back and then flung it
forward, found the nipple, and latched on with a sigh of exasperation that
said, “Well, at last!” so eloquently that everybody laughed and the room
relaxed.
A light tap on the doorjamb announced the advent of Patience and
Prudence Hardman, their faces alight with curiosity.
“We heard the baby cry,” Prudence said. “What is it, pray?”
“And is thee well, Friend Bree?” Patience asked, smiling tentatively at
Brianna, whose hair was beginning to dry and fluff, and who looked like a
lion that had gone three rounds with a rhinoceros and wasn’t yet sure who’d
won. She was still smiling, though, and stroked the baby’s head, looking
down at him.
“He’s a little boy,” she said, her voice rough from screaming, but soft.
“Ooh!” Patience and Prudence said together, then looked at each other and
laughed. Patience recovered, though, and asked whether Bree would like
something to eat.
“Mummy’s made some soda bread with jam, in case thee should be
famished, and there’s sweet milk aplenty,” Prudence added. “What is thy
son’s name?”
“I’m starving,” Bree said. “As for … urgh.” She broke off, her eyes closing
in a grimace. “Mmph.”
“There it is!” Fanny exclaimed. “It’s coming, I see— Oh!” She was on her
hands and knees, peering intently, and jerked upright as the placenta slithered
out and landed with a healthy 
plop!
 on the straw-strewn floorboards. Rogerand Jamie looked hastily away, but the two young Quakers nodded in solemn
approval.
“That looks just like Mummy’s, when she gave birth to Chastity,”
Prudence said. “We made a tea of it.”
The placenta, dark with its writhing network of blood vessels and trailing
the ropy remains of the umbilical cord, added its own meaty aroma to the
pungent sweat and the smell of trampled fresh straw.
“I think perhaps we’ll bury it in the garden,” I said hastily, seeing the look
on Bree’s face. “It’s very good for the soil. As to names—have you thought
of any?”
“Lots,” she said, and looked down, nestling the baby closer. “But we
thought we’d wait until we met him—or her—to decide for sure.”
“We thought perhaps Jamie?” Roger said, raising an eyebrow at the
present holder of that name, who shook his head.
“Nay, ye dinna want to have a Jemmy 
and
 a Jamie,” he objected. “They’ll
never ken who’s bein’ called. And Jem’s already named after your own da,
Roger Mac—but maybe the Reverend?”
Roger smiled.
“It’s a kind thought, but the Reverend’s name was Reginald, and I don’t
think … and 
you’re
 already named for Jamie’s father,” he said to Bree.
“Claire? What was your father’s name?”
“Henry,” I said absently, glancing at the miniature buttocks. A diaper
would be needed momentarily … “He doesn’t really look like a Henry, does
he? Or a Harry?” The blood flow had slackened after delivery of the placenta,
but it was still coming. “Sweetheart, I need you to move to the bed so I can
knead your belly.”
Roger and Jamie got Bree up, baby attached, and safely removed to the
bed, where I’d spread a canvas sheet. The discussion of names—with
everyone, including Fanny and the Hardmans, adding suggestions, and Bree
declaring emphatically that she wasn’t having little Anonymous going
without a name for months, like Oggy-
cum
-Hunter—went on for some time,
while I kneaded Bree’s large, increasingly flaccid belly—pausing
momentarily to check her normally beating heart—and then, feeling the
uterus stir sluggishly into action, stitched the small perineal tear and gently
washed her legs clean.
“Aye, well, there’s David, I suppose,” Jamie was saying. “That was my
da’s second name. And it’s the name of a King, forbye. Well, two, really—the 
Scottish one and the Hebrew one—a great warrior, though given to
fornication.”
A moment’s silence, and a small hum of thoughtful consideration.
“David,” Bree said, beginning to be drowsy. The baby had gone to sleep,
the distended nipple pulling slowly from his mouth as his head lolled. “Wee
Davy. That’s not bad.” She yawned and looked up at Jamie, who was looking
at the little boy with such tenderness that it struck me in the heart and tears
came to my eye. “Could we give him William for his second name, Da? I’d
like that.”
Jamie cleared his throat and nodded.
“Aye,” he said, his voice husky. “If ye like. Roger Mac?”
“Yes,” Roger said. “And Ian, maybe?”
“Oh, yes,” Bree said. “Oh, God, is that food?” I’d vaguely heard footsteps
on the stairs, and now Silvia, holding a tray with bread and jam, fried
potatoes, a bowl of stew, and a pitcher of milk, edged carefully into the room.
“I see all is well with thee, sister,” she said softly to Bree, and set down the
tray. “And the little one, praise God.”
“Here, Roger,” Bree said, struggling to sit upright with the baby in her
arms. “Take him.”
Roger did, and stepped back a little, so we could finish tidying Bree and
propping her up to eat. I glanced over to see Roger, his face soft, look up
from the freshly wrapped baby and see Jamie, who was shyly looking over
his shoulder at his new grandson.
“Here, Grandda,” Roger said, and carefully laid wee David William Ian
Fraser MacKenzie in his grandfather’s arms, the little boy’s head cupped in
Jamie’s big hand, held gently as a soap bubble.
Fanny, straightening up beside me with an armful of soiled and reeking
linens, turned from this beatific scene and looked at me seriously.
“I am 
never
 getting married,” she said.141
A Bee-loud Glade
Colonel Francis Locke, Rowan County Regiment of Militias,
Commander
August 26, A.D. 1780
Colonel Fraser:
I write to inform you that I have received a dispatch from Isaac
Shelby, informing me that upon the 19th ultimo, at Musgrove Mill,
near the Enoree River, a Force of some Two Hundred Patriot militia
from the County Militias of North Carolina and Georgia, under Cols.
Shelby, James Williams, and Elijah Clarke, attacked and defeated a
Loyalist Force guarding the Mill, which controls the local Grain
Supply and the River, this reinforced by a Hundred Loyalist Militia
and some Two Hundred Provincial Regulars, on their way to join
Forces with Major Patrick Ferguson.
I am informed it was a hot Fight, in which some Loyalist militia
attacked with Bayonets, but were overcome by Patriot Soldiers who
ran boldly upon them, yelling, shooting and slashing upon every
Hand and thus broke the Charge.
Captain Shadrach Inman of Clarke’s Georgia Militia was killed in
the first Attack, but succeeded in discomposing the Defenders, who
then found themselves in some Disarray and were thus overcome and
scattered, some 70 Men being captured, and nearly that Number
killed, whilst the Patriot Forces lost but four Men, with a Dozen
captured.
While I know you will join with me in rejoicing at this News, you
must also share my Concern. If so many Provincials and other
Loyalists are heading to join Ferguson from such a place asMusgrove Mill, the Countryside is roused throughout the Carolinas,
and we must expect great Trouble if Ferguson succeeds in amassing a
large Force, which looks very likely. We must prevent him while there
is yet Time.
I renew my Invitation for you and your Men to join the Rowan
County Regiment of Militias and reiterate my Promise that should you
do so, you will remain in Direct Command of your own Men, you
being solely subject to my Command and upon an Equal Footing with
the other Militia Commanders, with a Right to draw upon the
Supplies and Powder available to the Regiment. I will keep you
apprised of what News comes to me, and hope for your Company in
this great Endeavor.
Francis Locke, Colonel
Rowan County Regiment of Militias, Commander
JAMIE FOLDED THE LETTER carefully, noting dimly that his fingers had
slightly smeared the ink of Locke’s signature, by reason of his sweating
hands.
The temptation was great. He 
could
 take his men and join Locke, rather
than fight with the Overmountain men at Kings Mountain. Locke and his
regiment had routed a substantial group of Loyalists at Ramseur’s Mill in
June and made a creditable job of it, from what he heard. Randall’s book had
mentioned the incident briefly, but what it said matched the accounts he had
heard—down to mention of an unlikely group of Palatine Germans who had
joined Locke’s troops.
Beyond that, though … nothing more was said in the Book (for he couldn’t
help thinking of it as that) regarding Locke until a skirmish at a place called
Colson’s Mill in the following year. Kings Mountain lay between now and
then, casting its long shadow in his direction. And Jamie couldn’t leave the
Ridge undefended for any great span of time, regardless. He knew 
there were
still Tories amongst his tenants, and he thought of Nicodemus Partland. He’d
heard of no further attempts, but was well aware that almost anything—or
anyone—could come over the Cherokee Line without his knowing.
He sighed, tucked the letter into his pocket, and, unable to sit still with his
thoughts, walked up the hill to Claire’s garden, not meaning to tell her aboutLocke’s letter and his thoughts—just wanting the momentary comfort of her
presence.
She wasn’t there, and he hesitated inside the gate, but then closed it after
him and walked slowly toward the row of hives. He’d built a long bench for
her, and there were nine hives now on it, humming peacefully in the autumn
sun. Some of them were the coiled-straw skeps, but Brianna had built three
boxes, too, with wooden frames inside and a sort of drain to make harvesting
the honey easier.
Something was in the back of his mind, a poem Claire had told him once,
about nines and bees. Only a bit of it had stuck: 
Nine bean-rows will I have
there, a hive for the honey-bee, and live alone in the bee-loud glade.
 The
number nine always made him wary, owing to his meeting with an old
Parisian fortune-teller.
“You’ll die nine times before your death,” she’d told him. Claire had tried,
now and then, to reckon the times he should have died but hadn’t. He seldom
did, having a superstitious fear about attracting misfortune by dwelling on it.
The bees were about their business. The air was full of them, the late sun
catching their wings and making them glisk like sparks among the green of
the garden. There were some tattered sunflowers along one wall, their seeds
like gray pebbles, along with sedum and cosmos. Purple gentians—he
recognized those, because Claire made an ointment out of them that she’d
used on him more than once, and had brought some back from Wilmington
and coddled it here in a sandy spot she’d made for it. He’d dug the sand for
her and smiled at the pale splotch of soil among the darker loam. The bees
seemed to be liking the goldenrod—but Claire said they were hunting mostly
in the woods and meadows now.
He came slowly to the bench and put out a hand toward the hives, but
didn’t touch one until one or two bees had landed lightly on his hand, their
feet tickling his skin. “So they won’t think you’re a bear,” Claire had said,
laughing. He smiled at the memory and put his hand on the sun-warmed
straw and just stood there for a bit, letting go of his troublesome thoughts,
little by little.
“Ye’ll take care of her, aye?” he said at last, speaking soft to the bees. “If
she comes to you and says I’m gone, ye’ll feed her and take heed for her?”
He stood a moment longer, listening to the ceaseless hum.
“I trust ye with her,” he said at last, and turned to go, his heart easier in his
chest. It wasn’t until he’d shut the gate behind him and started down towardthe house that another bit of the poem came to him. 
And I shall have some
peace there, for peace comes dropping slow …142
Don’t You …?
September 20, 1780
From Col. John Sevier
To Col. James Fraser
We have word that Ferguson’s Loyalist Militia is on the move from
Camden, whence he departed with Cornwallis, but has now gone
South into North Carolina.
Word is that he proposes to attack and burn such Patriot
Settlements as he comes to on his Way. We propose to meet him at
some convenient Point in his Progress. Should you and your Troops
be of a Mind to join us, we will meet and muster at Sycamore Shoals
on the 25th of September.
Bring such Arms and Powder as you may have.
John Sevier, Colonel of Militia
September 21, 1780
To The Inhabitants of North Carolina
Gentlemen: Unless you wish to be eat up by an Inundation of
Barbarians, who have begun by murdering an unarmed Son before
his Father, and afterward lopped off his Arms, and who by their
shocking Cruelties and Irregularities, give the best Proof of their
Cowardice and want of Discipline, I say if you wish to be pinioned,
robbed, and murdered, and see your Wives and Daughters, in four
days, abused by the Dregs of Mankind—in short, if you wish ordeserve to live or bear the Name of Men, grasp your Arms in a
Moment and run to Camp.
The Backwater Men have crossed the Mountains; McDowell,
Hampton, Shelby, and Cleveland are at their head, so that you know
what you have to depend upon. If you choose to be pissed upon
forever and ever by a set of Mongrels, say so at once, and let your
Women turn their Backs upon you, and look out for real Men to
protect them.
Pat. Ferguson, Major 71st Regiment
Fraser’s Ridge
September 22, Anno Domini 1780
I, James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser, being of sound
Mind
JAMIE WONDERED HOW MANY men paused at this point to debate the
state of their minds with themselves. If ye’d been talking with a dead man for
the last year, ye might reasonably have some doubts, he thought. On the other
hand, who’d admit in writing that he kent for sure he was away with the
faeries?
Or if not actually mad, what about men who’d not been sober a day in
twenty years, or those who’d come back from war with something missing—
or something riding their backs. That thought made the hairs ripple from nape
to arsehole, and he clutched his quill so hard that it split with a tiny 
crack.
Aye, well, if he wanted his Last Will and Testament to be paid attention to,
he supposed he’d have to 
say
 he was of sound mind, no matter what he really
thought.
He sighed and looked over the quills he had left in the jar. Mostly goose or
turkey—but two were barred wing feathers from an owl. Well, he meant to
keep 
this
 quiet …
He cut the owl quill into a good point, composing his mind. The ink was
fresh, smelling sharply of iron and the woody scent of oak galls. It calmed
him. A wee bit.… do hereby declare that this is my Last Will and Testament, and so swear
before God.
I leave to my wife, Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp
 (damned if I’ll put 
his
name in this) 
Fraser, all Property and Goods of which I die possessed,
absolutely, with the Exception of certain individual Bequests as listed here
beneath:
To my Daughter, Brianna Ellen Fraser MacKenzie, I leave two hundred
Acres of Land from the Land granted me by the Cr …
 (well, two years more
and the bloody Crown won’t have anything to say about it, if Claire and the
others are right about what’s happening, and so far, they seem to be) … He
muttered 
“Ifrinn”
 under his breath and scratched out 
granted me by the
Crown,
 replacing it with 
from the land Grant known as Fraser’s Ridge.
He continued with similar bequests to Roger, Jeremiah, Amanda, and—
after a moment’s thought—Frances. Whether she might be his blood or not,
he couldn’t leave her without resources, and if she had land here, perhaps
she’d stay nearby, where Brianna and her family could take care of her, help
her to find her way in life, make a good match for her …
Oh, a moment—Brianna’s new bairn; 
David,
 he added, smiling.
Fifty acres to Bobby Higgins; he’d been a good henchman, Bobby, and
deserved it.
To my Son Fergus Claudel Fraser and his Wife, Marsali Jane MacKimmie
Fraser, I leave the Sum of five hundred Pounds in Gold.
Was that too much? Wealth like that would attract scoundrels like flies to
shit, if it was known. Both Fergus and Marsali were canny creatures, though;
he could trust them to take care.
There were small things to be given—his ruby stickpin, his books (he’d
leave the Hobbit ones to Jem, perhaps), his tools (those were for Brianna, of
course) and weapons (if they come back without me) … but there was one
more important person to be considered. He hesitated, but wrote it, slowly.
Just to see how it looked, put down on paper …
To my Son …
 He set the quill down carefully, so as not to make blots on
the paper—though he’d have to redo it in any case, because of the
scratchings-out.
It wasn’t as though William needed anything of a material nature from
him.
Or might he? Bree says the lad wishes to shed his title—if he does, will he
lose all the property belonging to it? But the duke thinks he can’t … And evenif he could, or refused it, John Grey will see to him; who does
 he 
have to
leave his money to, if not William?
That was logical. Unfortunately, 
he
 wasn’t; not at the moment. And
whether it was love, sinful pride, or something even worse, he couldn’t die
without leaving something of himself to William. 
And I’m no dying without
claiming William in public, whether I’m there to see his face when he hears it
or not.
 His mouth twitched at that thought, and he pressed his lips together to
stop it. More scratching out …
To my Natural Son, William James Fraser, known also as William
Clarence Henry George Ransom, known also as the Ninth Earl of Ellesmere
…
He bit the end of his quill, tasting bitter ink, then wrote:
… one hundred Pounds in Gold, the three Casks of Whisky marked with
JFS, 
and my green Bible. May he find Succor and Wisdom in its Pages.
“He might find more in the whisky,” Jamie murmured to himself, but his
soul felt lighter.
Ten pounds each to all of the grandchildren, by name. It made him happy,
seeing the whole list. Jem, Mandy, Davy, Germain, Joanie, Félicité—he
made a small cross on the paper for Henri-Christian, and felt his throat grow
tight—and the new wee boys, Alexandre and Charles-Claire. 
And any further
issue of … any of my children.
 That was an odd feeling, to think not only that
Brianna might bear more bairns but also Marsali—her sister Joan, if she
married (damn, he’d forgot to put Joanie with his other children; more
scratching out …)—or William’s wife, whoever she might be.
He was beginning to be sorry that he wouldn’t be alive to meet William’s
wife or see his children, but pushed that thought firmly away. If he made it to
Heaven, he was sure there would be some accommodation made for knowing
how your family was getting along without you, maybe letting you have a
wee look-in or lend a hand in some way. He thought being a ghost might well
be interesting … There were a number of folk he wouldn’t mind calling on in
such a state, just to see the looks on their faces …
Lo, children are an heritage of the
 
L
ORD
: and the fruit of the womb
is His reward. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are
children of the youth. Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of
them.He smiled at the thought, but thinking of children brought yet one more to
mind.
Damn, he’d forgotten Jenny, Ian, and Rachel, and wee Hunter James Little
Wolf—and Rachel’s new unknown, who wasn’t due until the spring.
He rubbed two fingers between his eyes. Perhaps he should think more,
finish this later.
The trouble was that he didn’t dare go to Kings Mountain without making
disposition of his property, in case he was right about what he thought Frank
Randall was telling him.
Would he lie? A historian, sworn—to himself, at least—to tell the truth as
far as he could?
Any man would lie, under the right circumstances—and given what Frank
Randall had certainly known of Jamie Fraser …
He couldn’t risk it. He picked up the quill again, and wrote.
To my Sister, Janet Flora Arabella Fraser Murray, I leave my
Rosary …143
Will I Tell You Something?
Sycamore Shoals, Washington County, Colony of North Carolina
September 26, 1780
I, OF ALL PEOPLE, should have known that written history has only a
tenuous connection with the actual facts of what happened. Let alone the
thoughts, actions, and reactions of the people involved. I did know that, in
fact, but had somehow forgotten, and had embarked on this military
excursion with the historical account firmly, if subconsciously, in mind.
I 
had
 assumed that the meeting at Sycamore Shoals would be the usual
boiling of miscellaneous people arriving at different times, followed by the
usual confusion and disorganization attendant on any enterprise involving
more than one leader, and that, indeed, was exactly what happened.
I 
hadn’t
 thought that no one—besides me—would bring anything
substantial in the way of food or medical supplies, nor did I realize that none
of the militia leaders knew where we were going.
The thought of Kings Mountain had been so long in my mind as a blunt,
rocky spike wreathed with menace that it had taken on the aspect of Mount
Doom. Prophesied and inexorable. But none of the militia who were going to
end up there knew it. Lacking one Franklin W. Randall’s (
Jesus H. Roosevelt
Christ,
 I thought. 
Had Frank’s parents actually named him after Benjamin
Franklin? Calm down, Beauchamp, you’re becoming hysterical …
) brief but
meticulous exegesis of the battle, Sevier, Shelby, Cleveland, Campbell,
Hambright, and the rest had no idea that we were headed for Kings Mountain.
We were in pursuit of Patrick Ferguson, a much less well-defined goal.
News of his movements reached us in dribs and drabs, depending on the
erratic arrival of scouts and the detail of their reports. We knew that he and
his growing body of Provincials—official British militia—and adherentLoyalists who had joined him out of fear or fury were moving south, toward
South Carolina, with the intent of attacking and destroying small patriot
settlements. Like Fraser’s Ridge, for instance. We knew, or thought we knew,
that his troops numbered more or less a thousand men, which was not
peanuts.
We had nine hundred or so, counting me. My presence had caused a lot of
staring and muttering, and Jamie had been summoned to talk to the other
militia leaders, presumably so they could tell him to send me home.
“I said I wouldn’t,” he replied briefly, when I’d asked him how 
that
conversation had gone. “And I said that if ye were molested or troubled in
any way, I would take my men right away and fight on my own.”
Consequently, I wasn’t troubled or molested, and while the staring and
muttering continued for a bit, it didn’t take more than a week of my attending
to the minor accidents and ills that beset an army until that stopped, too. I had
become the company medic, and there were no more questions as to what I
was doing there.
While we didn’t know 
exactly
 where Ferguson was, we weren’t precisely
wandering in the wilderness, either. Ferguson wasn’t moving his troops
across trackless mountains, and neither were we. An army needs roads, most
of the time, and the scouts reported which roads the Loyalist militia was
following. Plainly, we would converge at some point.
Jamie, Young Ian, Roger, and I knew where that convergence would be,
but that knowledge was of no practical value, as we couldn’t tell Colonel
Campbell and the rest how we happened to know that.
Nor would it be of much value if we could have. We were moving fast, and
in the general direction of Kings Mountain—so was Patrick Ferguson.
We had left Sycamore Shoals on September 26. The battle would happen
—according to history and Frank—on October 7.
IT WAS AUTUMN, and the weather was changeable. The first balmy days
gave way quickly to torrential rains and freezing winds in the mountains,
only to return to a brief sear of heat as we came down into a valley. We
carried no tents, and had only the occasional sheet of canvas for shelter, so
were frequently soaked to the skin. And while each man had brought
something in the way of provisions, these didn’t last long on the march.Lacking anything in the nature of a quartermaster or supply wagons, our
motley band existed hand-to-mouth, calling on the hospitality of family
members or known rebels whose farms we passed, occasionally raiding the
fields and farmhouses of Loyalists—though Sevier and Campbell did exert
themselves to keep the men from shooting or hanging the Loyalists they
victimized—or going hungry. There were two or three wagons—these
constantly bogging down and having to be heaved out of mud or dragged
through streams—but they were for the transport of weapons and powder;
Mrs. Patton had supplied a satisfying number of barrels. Some men always
carried their rifles, shot bags, and powder horns; others would leave them in
the wagons unless or until trouble threatened. Jamie and Young Ian always
carried theirs. I had two pistols, visible in holsters—and a knife in my belt
and another in my stocking. Even Roger was visibly armed, with pistol and
knife, though he normally didn’t carry his gun loaded and primed.
“I stand a much better chance hitting someone on the head with it,” he’d
told me. “Carrying it loaded just means I could shoot myself in the foot more
easily.”
Doctoring was what I did during the nightly wrangling over precedence. It
was clear that 
somebody
 needed to be in overall charge, but none of the
militia leaders was willing to submit his men to the orders of any of the
others. Eventually, they settled on William Campbell as the overall leader of
the group; he was in his mid-thirties, like Benjamin Cleveland and Isaac
Shelby, and a well-known patriot, a planter of substance—and the brother-in-
law of Patrick Henry. So far as I could tell, his chief qualification for the
present command was that he came from Virginia and therefore was free of
the entanglements and competitions amongst the Overmountain men.
“And he has a loud voice,” I observed to Jamie, hearing Campbell’s
shouting two campfires away. He appeared to be apostrophizing the rain, the
recalcitrant fire, and the fact that someone had taken the canvas off one of the
wagons, letting the guns get wet.
“Aye, he does,” he agreed, without much enthusiasm. “Ye need one, aye?
If ye’re going to send men into battle or get them out of one.”
“You’d best take care of yours, then,” I observed, handing him a wooden
cup of hot, mint-scented water. I’d got a fire started, under a sort of junior
lean-to made of canvas—our canvas, 
not
 the canvas from the wagon—and a
handy bush, but a fitful wind kept springing up, shaking the canvas andblowing wet off the trees, then passing on, only to return again in a few
minutes.
“Do you want a drop of whisky in that?”
He considered for a moment, but then shook his head.
“Nay, keep it. We may need it more, later.”
I sat down beside him and sipped my own cup, slowly, warming both my
hands and my insides. We hadn’t any food to cook, and precious little to eat:
corn dodgers and a bag of apples Roger had coaxed from a farmstead we’d
passed. Jamie had made the rounds of his men, making sure they’d got a few
scraps of whatever food was available and had places to sleep. Now he
leaned back against the trunk of a large pine beside me, took off his hat, and
shook the water off it.
“Will I tell ye something, Sassenach?” Jamie said, after a long silence. He
leaned back to look up at the crescent moon, briefly visible through the
shredding clouds, and set his hand on my knee. It was his right hand, and I
could see the thin line of the scar where I had removed his ring finger, white
against the cold-mottled darkness of his skin, the four remaining fingers
cramped with grasping reins all day.
“You shall,” I said, taking the hand and beginning to massage it. He didn’t
seem worried or upset, so it probably wasn’t bad news.
“I was sitting on the porch, just afore we left, and I had wee Davy in my
arms, him sucking on my thumb, and Mandy came up the steps covered in
mud, to show me a bone she’d found by the lake and ask who’d owned it. I
took it, looked at it, and told her it was from the backbone of a beaver, and
she looked at me and asked did I hear animals.”
I started to straighten and stretch his fingers, and he settled his back more
firmly against the tree and made a small sound of mingled pain and pleasure
in the back of his throat.
“Hear them … how?” It had rained on and off all day but had stopped in
the evening, and while I was damp all the way to my underthings, I’d
established enough equilibrium of body temperature not to be shivering, and
it was tranquil here, away from the large campfires.
“Ken she and Jem can tell where each other are, without seeing each
other?”
“They can?” I said, a little startled. “No, I don’t think I did know that.” I
wasn’t completely surprised to hear it, though. I supposed I’d actually seenthem do it a number of times, without really noticing. “Do their parents
know, do you think?”
“Aye, she said her mother kent it—had tried them, in Boston, having them
go some distance apart and say could each still tell where the other was.
Mandy didna pay attention to how far it was—it was only a game to them,
though she thought it was strange that her parents couldna tell where she or
Jem were, once she realized it.”
“Is it only her and Jem?” I asked. “Or can they, um, hear other people, too?
Like their parents, I mean.”
“I asked her that, and she said they can, aye—but not everybody. Just each
other and their parents. And you, but not so much.”
That gave me a shiver that had nothing to do with cold.
“Do they, er, hear you?”
He shook his head.
“Nay, I asked. She says I’m a different color in her head. She kens when
I’m near her, but canna feel me at a distance.”
“What color are you?” I asked, fascinated.
He made a small sound of amusement. “Water,” he said.
“Really?” I squinted at him. It was dark, and the tiny fire was sputtering on
damp wood, but my eyes had adapted to the dark and there was enough
moonlight to make out his features. “Any particular kind of water? Blue like
the ocean, or brown, like the creek?”
He shook his head. “Just water.”
“You should ask Jem if that’s what he thinks,” I said, and slid my fingers
between his, pressing his fingers back to stretch the knuckles.
“I will,” he said, with a slightly odd note in his voice. “If I see him again.”
And there it was. The stone in my heart, the lump of hot lead in my
viscera. I’d forgotten, briefly, worn out by the labor of the day. But the
thought of what might happen on Kings Mountain was never far from my
conscious mind.
Jamie felt my shock, and his fingers closed suddenly over mine, still cold,
but firm, and he put his other hand over mine as well, sheltering it.
“If I die this week, I’d ask ye three things, 
a nighean,
” he said quietly.
“Three things that I want. Will ye give them to me?”
“You know I will,” I said, though my throat was tight and my voice thick.
“If I can.”“Aye, I do,” he said softly, and raising my hand, kissed it, his breath warm
on my cold skin. “Well, then. When ye can, find a priest and have a Mass
said for my soul.”
“Done,” I said, and cleared my throat. “It might take some time, though. I
think the nearest priest is probably in Maryland.”
“Aye, fine. I’ll stick it out in Purgatory ’til ye manage. I’ve been there
before; it’s none sae bad.”
I 
thought
 he was joking. About Purgatory, at least.
“And the second thing?”
“Wee Davy,” he said. “Amanda says that he’s like me. The color o’ water.
He’s not the same as she and Jem are … and I think that maybe means he
canna pass through the stones.”
That one came out of nowhere, and I blinked. My eyelashes were heavy
with wet, and drops flowed down my cheeks like tears. His hands tightened
on mine and he turned his head toward me, a barely perceptible movement in
the dark.
“I’ve said this before, but I say it now again, and I mean it. If I’m dead, ye
should all go back. If it should be that Davy canna travel, give him to Rachel
and Young Ian. They’ll love him wi’ all their hearts and keep him safe.”
I wanted to say, 
“I love
 you 
with all my heart—and I can’t keep you safe.”
But I squeezed back and said, as well as I could for the real tears starting,
“I will.”
He lifted my hand and kissed my cold knuckles.
“Tapadh leat, mo chridhe.”
We sat together in silence, listening to the rain pattering through the
leaves, water dripping from the trees, distant voices. The infant fire had died
a-borning, though we could still smell the ghost of its smoke.
“You said three things,” I said at last. My voice was hoarse. “What’s the
third?”
He let go of my hand and opened my fingers, as I’d done for him a few
moments before, but his fingertips traced the lines of my palm and rested at
the base of my thumb, where the letter J had nearly faded into my skin.
“Remember me,” he whispered.
We made love to each other, under the layers of sodden clothing, finding
little warmth save that at the point of connection. We kept on well past the
point where it was clear that neither of us could finish. Our bodies slowly left
each other and we clung together through the dark until the dawn.144
A Hanging Matter
October 3, 1780
IT WASN’T THE FIRST time he’d gone to a battle knowing he’d die. The
difference was that last time, he’d wanted to.
The rain had kept them from lighting fires. They’d eaten what scraps they
had left and then huddled in the dark, under what shelter they could find.
He’d found a fallen tree, a big poplar whose roots had come up when the tree
went down, making a rudimentary shelter. There wasn’t much room; he sat
cross-legged, his back to the roots, and Claire was curled up beside him like a
dormouse, wrapped in her soggy cloak and covered with half of his, her head
resting warm on his thigh under the woolen folds. It was the only place he
felt warm.
He wasn’t the sort of soldier who fought old battles over beer and salted
bread in taverns. He didn’t seek to summon ghosts; they came by themselves,
in his dreams.
But dreams don’t always tell the truth; he’d had dreams of Culloden many,
many times over the years—and yet none of his dreams had shown him how
Murtagh died or given him the peace of knowing that he’d killed Jack
Randall.
Did
 you 
know?
 he thought suddenly, toward Frank Randall. The man was
a historian—and Jack Randall had been his ancestor, or at least he’d thought
so. That was how it had all begun, Claire had told him: Frank had wanted to
go to Scotland, to see what he could find regarding his five-times-great-
grandfather. Maybe he 
had
 found out what happened to him, found some
survivor’s account that told about Red Jamie, the Jacobite who’d gutted the
gallant British captain. And maybe that finding-out had set Frank Randall on
that Jacobite’s trail …He snorted, watching the breath curl away from him, white in the dark.
Claire stirred and huddled closer and he put a hand on her, patting her as he
might reassure a dog who’d just heard thunder in the distance.
“Uncle Jamie?” Ian’s voice came out of the darkness near his shoulder,
making him start, and Claire shuddered, waking.
“Aye,” he said. “I’m here, Ian.”
Ian’s lanky shape separated itself briefly from the night, and he crouched
beside Jamie, dripping.
“The colonels want ye, Uncle,” he said, low-voiced. “Someone’s brought
in some Tory prisoners and they’re arguing whether to hang the lot of them,
or only one or two as an example.”
“Christ. Ye dinna need to tell me whose idea 
that
 was.”
“What?” Claire said blearily. She’d lifted her head off his leg, and he felt
the sudden chill of the spot where she’d lain. She shook off the fold of his
cloak, emerging into the rain-chilled air. “What’s going on? Is someone
hurt?”
“No, 
a nighean,
” he said. “I’ve got to go for a bit, though. Here, it’s only
damp where I’ve been sitting; curl up there, and I’ll be back as soon as I
can.”
She cleared her throat—everyone had catarrh from spending day and night
in wet clothes beside smoky fires—and shook her head to clear that, too, but
Ian was wise enough to keep quiet, and she settled into the little half-warm
hollow he’d made, scuttering into the wet leaves and drawing herself up into
a ball.
THE RAIN HAD actually stopped, he realized. It was only that the dripping
foliage all around made the same sound as the rain itself. The respite had
allowed someone to light a tiny fire—no doubt someone had thought to bring
a bit of kindling in his pack—but it hissed and fumed in the damp, billowing
smoke over the gathered men as the wind changed. Jamie caught a sudden
lungful and coughed, squinting through watering eyes at the hulking dark
shape of Benjamin Cleveland, who was addressing a number of smaller
shapes with violent language and gestures of the same nature.
“Ian,” he said, wiping his face on his sleeve, “go and find Colonel
Campbell, aye? Tell him what’s afoot.”Ian shook his head, the movement visible only because he was wearing a
hat.
“No, Uncle,” he said. “Whatever’s afoot is going to happen in the next few
minutes.”
“Damn you for a lily-livered pig-son,” Cleveland said—fairly mildly—to
one of the smaller figures. “We’ve got no place to keep prisoners, and no
need to try ’em in any case. I know the smell of a Tory. We’ll string ’em up
and there’s an end to it!”
There was a shuffling and mumbling among the men, but Young Ian was
right; Jamie could feel the shift of sentiment among them. The doubters were
still trying to make a case for mercy, but were being overwhelmed by a rising
flame of anger, lit and encouraged by Cleveland himself, who was visible in
the fitful light, brandishing a large coil of rope.
Does he travel about with a dozen nooses, just in case of need?
 Jamie
thought, unnerved and growing angry himself. He shoved between two men
and got close enough to Cleveland to shout loud enough to interrupt him.
“Stad an sin!”
 he bellowed. Cleveland, as he’d hoped, turned toward him
in puzzlement.
“Fraser?” he said, squinting into the hazy dark. “That you?”
“It is,” Jamie said, still loud. “And I dinna mean to let ye make me a
murderer!”
“Why, if that troubles you, 
Mister
 Fraser,” Cleveland said with elaborate
courtesy, “you just turn round and trot back to your wife, and your
conscience won’t itch you a bit.”
That made most of the crowd laugh, though there were still dissenters
calling out, “Murder! He’s right! It’s goddamned murder, ’thout a trial!” 
The
breeze changed again and the cloud of smoke that had hidden the prisoners
fled away, showing a line of six men, each with his hands bound behind his
back, swaying to keep his balance. And then the clouds split for an instance,
and Jamie saw the prisoners’ faces.
“Holy Mary!” he said, loud enough that Young Ian, at his shoulder,
glanced at him, then at what Jamie was looking at, and said something that
was probably the Mohawk equivalent.
At the end of the line stood Lachlan Hunt, one of the tenants Jamie had
banished from the Ridge. Lachlan hadn’t let his wife go to plead for him; he
was among the men who had left. Jamie’s wame clenched into a ball.Lachlan had seen him, too, and was directing a wide-eyed look of terror at
him.
He hesitated, but not more than a few seconds.
“Stop!” he shouted, as loud as he could, and Young Ian backed him up.
“This man—” Jamie said, pointing at Hunt. “He’s one of my tenants.”
“He’s a hell-bound Tory, is what he is!” Cleveland riposted smartly, and
lunging forward, dropped a noose over Lachlan Hunt’s head. Jamie flexed his
shoulders and felt Young Ian draw up close behind him.
Before he could carry out his plan of butting Cleveland in his massive
belly and knocking him over, then jumping on him and enduring whatever
Cleveland might do to him long enough for Young Ian to get Hunt away into
the darkness, another voice rang out in anguish.
“Locky!” it called. “That’s my brother!” A young man was elbowing his
way through the crowd, which was beginning to be amused by this second
interruption.
“And I s’pose that’un is somebody’s grandpa, eh?” some wag shouted,
pitching a wet pine cone that hit the youngest prisoner in the chest. That
caused laughter, and Jamie managed a breath.
“Don’t matter who they are!” someone else yelled. “They’re Tories and
they’re gonna die!”
“Not without a trial!”
“Please, please—let me say goodbye to him!” Lachlan’s brother was
pushing urgently through the crowd—which, Jamie saw, was letting him.
There was even a murmur of sympathy; both prisoner and brother were
young men, no more than twenty.
Jamie didn’t wait; he elbowed Ian and slid sideways through the crowd.
The clouds had closed again, and the light beneath the chosen hanging-tree
was no more than scattered patches of lighter dark. The tiny fire expired in a
final puff of smoke, and Young Ian let fly with the sort of Indian yips and
howls that were calculated to startle and freeze the blood of all who heard
them. Jamie dived under the tree and grabbed Hunt by his bound arms,
propelling him violently away into the nearby forest.
Lachlan staggered, off-balance, but lunged along as well as he could, and
within moments they were out of sight of the fire and the stramash that was
starting there.
Jamie drew his dirk and sawed at the rope.“D’ye ken where we are?” he asked Hunt. There was a great deal of racket
back by the tree.
“No.” Locky Hunt’s face was no more than a dark oval, but the fear in his
voice was clear as day. “Please, sir … please. My—my wife …”
“Shut your gob,” Jamie said, grunting as he wrenched and sawed. “Listen.
That way”—he pointed, his finger directly under the man’s nose—“is west.
Medway Plantation is maybe three miles in that direction. It belongs to a
nephew of Francis Marion; he’ll help ye. I dinna ken where ye live these
days, but my advice is to go do it somewhere else. Send for your wife when
you’re safe away.”
“She—but she—the big man fired our cabin,” Hunt said, beginning to
weep from nerves, relief, and renewed fear.
“She’s no dead,” Jamie said, with a certainty he hoped was justified.
Cleveland was a brute, but so far as Jamie knew, he’d never killed a woman,
save perhaps by crushing her to death by lying on her. Not on purpose,
anyway … “She’ll have taken refuge wi’ someone nearby. Send a note to
your nearest neighbor, they’ll find her. Now go!” The last fibers parted and
the strands of the rope fell away.
Lachlan Hunt made more noises, babbling thanks, but Jamie turned him
and gave him a solid push in the middle of the back that sent him staggering
on his way. He didn’t watch to see how the man fared but hared back toward
the hanging-tree, where a good bit of what Claire called argy-bargy was
going on.
To his great relief, a good bit of the shouting was being done by Isaac
Shelby and Captain Larkin, who were taking vigorous issue with Cleveland’s
notion of sport. It had also commenced to rain again, which further dampened
enthusiasm for the prospect of hanging the Tory prisoners; the crowd was
beginning to melt away.
Jamie was beginning to feel that wee bit soluble himself, and when Young
Ian turned up at his elbow, he merely nodded, patted Ian’s shoulder in thanks,
and walked back through the dark to Claire, feeling very tired.145
The Mirror Crack’d
October 7, 1780
FOUR DAYS LATER, THE mountain came in sight, and with its
appearance, a jolt of expectation ran through the men. Jamie felt his own
blood rise and knew every other man felt it, too. It had been a long time since
he’d fought with an army, but he recognized the surge of strength and heat
that burned away tiredness and hunger. Thoughts of pain and loss were still
with him, but now seemed insubstantial. God willing, they’d reach the point
in battle where death ran with you and sometimes you 
could ride it. His
mouth was dry; he took a swig of tepid water and glanced at Claire, offering
the canteen.
She was white to the lips, but she managed a smile and reached for the
canteen. The horses had felt that charge of energy among the men, though,
and were snorting and jostling, tossing their heads, and she dropped the
canteen. It vanished at once in a trampling of muddy hooves. He thought for
a moment she meant to dive after it and grabbed her arm, holding on.
“Dinna fash,” he said, though he knew she couldn’t hear him through the
rising noise of the men. There was no advantage to silence, and many of the
younger ones were whooping and shouting incoherent threats at an enemy too
far distant to hear them. She nodded, nonetheless, and patted his hand.
He heard Cleveland’s hoarse bellowing up ahead, and the body of men
began to slow. Time to fall out and check weapons, have a quick piss, and
fettle themselves.
Jamie pulled up, raised his rifle to summon his own band, and swung down
from the saddle. Roger Mac was there; he lifted Claire down, her long, bare
legs a flash of white in the muddy ruins of her petticoats. Young Ian appeared
at Jamie’s shoulder. He’d painted his face at dawn, and Jamie saw Roger Macnotice it and blink. He wanted to laugh but didn’t, just clapped Young Ian on
the shoulder and jerked his head at the men, saying, “See to them, aye?
“Keep Claire with ye,” he said to Roger, and went to confer with the other
colonels.
They’d drawn up and dismounted near Campbell, who still sat his big
black gelding. John Sevier’s younger brother, Robert, and two other young
men had left camp in the dark to scout the situation, and Jamie had a brief
sense of falling, hearing them say the words that painted in Frank Randall’s
account and brought it vividly to life.
“You can tell Major Ferguson right off,” Robert Sevier was saying,
swiping a hand down his chest in illustration. “He’s got on a red-and-white-
check shirt and he wasn’t wearin’ a coat when we saw him. Shows up right
well amongst all those green Provincials.” He cocked his thumb and finger in
the semblance of a gun, closed one eye, and pretended to aim.
John Sevier frowned at him, but said nothing, and Campbell merely
nodded.
“All Provincials, are they?”
“No, sir,” said another young scout, quickly so as to keep Sevier from
sticking his neb in. “Near on half of ’em don’t have uniforms, at least.”
“But they do all have guns. Sir,” said the third scout, not to be left out.
“How many?” Jamie asked, and felt the words strange in his throat.
“A few more’n us, but not enough to make a difference,” Sevier replied,
but in Jamie’s mind there echoed another voice: Frank Randall’s.
The forces were nearly equal, though Ferguson’s troops numbered over a
thousand, as compared with the nine hundred Patriots attacking him.
A sort of murmur ran through the men: acknowledgment and satisfaction.
Jamie swallowed, a taste of bile in his mouth.
“There’s more of ’em, but they’re trapped up there.” Cleveland put the
sense of the meeting into words. “Like rats.” And he laughed and stamped a
large boot as though crushing a rat into bloody mush.
Likely what he does for fun,
 Jamie thought. He cleared his throat and spat
into the dead leaves.
It took no more than a few minutes to sort out whose men should take
which direction. Jamie’s band would go with Campbell and several others,
and he went back to gather the men and tell them how it would be.
ROGER HAD BEEN told off to mind me—or, as Jamie put it more politely,
to wait until the attackers reached the saddle of the mountain.
“Ye’ll do most good comin’ in when folk will need ye most,” he’d said to
us both, in the firm tone that meant he expected to be obeyed. My face must
have expressed what I was thinking, for he glanced at me, smiled
involuntarily, and looked down.
“Look after her, Roger Mac,” he said, then cupped my face in his hands
and kissed me, briefly. His hands and face were pulsing with heat and I felt a
sudden coolness when his touch left my skin.
“Tha gràdh agam ort, mo chridhe,”
 he said, and was gone.
Roger and I looked at each other with a perfect understanding.
“He told you, didn’t he?” I said, watching him disappear upward into the
brush. “About Frank’s book?”
“Yes. Don’t worry. I’m going after him.”
The brush above was crackling and snapping as though the mountain was
on fire. I could see men flickering through the leaves and trunks, reckless and
purposeful. It was happening.
“The curse has come upon me, said the Lady of Shalott.”
 I hadn’t thought
I’d spoken aloud, until I saw Roger’s startled look. Whatever he might have
said, though, was drowned by William Campbell’s shout.
“Whoop, boys, whoop! Shout like the devil and fight like hell!”
The mountainside erupted and a panicked squirrel leapt from a branch
above me and hit the ground running, leaving a spray of moist droppings
behind it.
Roger did the same—minus the droppings—climbing as fast as he could
through the trees on the slope, grabbing branches to help himself along.
I saw William Campbell, a little below where I stood, still mounted on his
big black horse. He saw me, too, and shouted, but I didn’t listen and I didn’t
stop, but hitched up my skirts and ran. Whatever happened to Jamie in the
next little while, I was going to be there.
Roger
“YE’LL HELP NOBODY
 
if ye’re dead, and ye may be useful if ye’re not. Ye
may be God’s henchman, but ye’ll follow my orders for now. Stay here until
it’s time.”Jamie had clapped him on the shoulder, grinning, then turned on his heel
and shouted to his men that it was time. Jamie had given Roger two decent
pistols, in holsters, with a cartridge box and powder horn. And a large, hand-
carved wooden cross on a leather thong, which he’d dropped over Roger’s
head last thing.
“So nobody will shoot ye,” he’d said. “Not from the front, anyway.”
Claire, tense and worried, had smiled involuntarily, seeing the cross, then
handed Roger a sloshing canteen.
“Water,” she said, “with a bit of whisky and honey in. Jamie says there’s
no water on the summit.”
The men had been ready; they swarmed out of the trees and bushes at once,
bristling with guns. Faces sweaty and gleaming under their hats, teeth
showing, eager for the fight. Roger felt that eagerness hum briefly in his own
blood, but his part in this fight would be later, among the fallen, and the
memory of the battlefield at Savannah chilled his heart, despite the heat of the
day.
To his surprise, though, the men were crowding up together before him,
taking their hats off, expectant looks on their faces. Jamie appeared suddenly
beside him.
“Bless us before the battle, 
a mhinistear,
 if ye will,” he said respectfully,
and took off his own hat, holding it to his breast.
Jesus. What on earth …
“Dear Lord,” he started, with not the faintest notion what might come next,
but a few words showed up, and then a few more. “Protect us, we pray, O
Lord, and be with us this day in battle. Grant us mercy in our extremities and
grant us the grace to show mercy where we can. Amen. Amen,” he repeated
more strongly, and the men murmured, “Amen,” and put their hats back on.
Jamie raised his rifle overhead and shouted, “To Colonel Campbell! At the
quick-march!” The militia drew together with a growl of satisfaction and set
off at once toward Colonel Campbell, who sat his black gelding on the rough
track at the base of the mountain. Jamie looked after them, then turned
suddenly and pressed his hand over the cross on Roger’s breast.
“Pray for me,” he said in a low voice, and then was gone.146
The Curse Is Come upon Me
Claire
THE SHOOTING STARTED before I had made it a hundred feet up the hill,
slipping on dead leaves and grabbing branches to save myself falling.
Panicked, I whirled round and ran downhill but slipped almost at once,
tripped on a rock and tobogganed a few feet on my stomach, arms flung out.
I slammed into a sapling of some sort; it bent and I rolled over it, ending
flat on my back. I lay frozen for a moment, gasping for breath, hearing the
battle begin in earnest.
Then I turned over, got to my hands and knees, and started crawling up the
mountain.
Jamie
IT WAS FAST and it was fierce.
Frank Randall had described it as a “just fight,” and he wasna wrong about
that, though maybe he hadn’t been thinking about wringing with sweat and
breathing air full of gun smoke.
He gave a sharp whistle, and the few of his men in hearing ran to his side.
“We’ll go up, but go canny,” he said, shouting over the crack of the guns.
“The Provincials have bayonets, and they’ll use ’em. If they do, fall away to
the side. Come back up somewhere else.”
Nods and they were pushing upward, pausing every few feet to fire and
reload, dodge to another tree, and do it again. It wasn’t only gun smoke now,
but the smell of battered trees, sap, and burning wood. It wasn’t bayonets yet.Claire
I’D HAD TO stop, a hundred feet lower than the summit. I stood plastered
against a big walnut tree, eyes closed, holding on hard. A ball slammed into
the trunk just above my hand and I jerked my arms back in panic. More balls
were humming through the trees, shredding leaves, making sharp little 
pocks!
as they struck wood. Occasional brief cries and grunts nearby indicated that
flesh was being struck, as well.
I’d dug my fingers so hard into the bark that sharp bits were wedged under
my nails, but I was much too scared to worry about it. They’d seen me move;
an instant later, shots struck the tree in a fusillade that sent bark and wood
chips flying; they stung my face and flew into my eyes. I pressed hard to the
tree, eyes shut tight and watering, using all my strength not to run downhill,
shrieking. I was shaking everywhere and couldn’t tell if it was sweat or urine
running down my legs and didn’t care.
It seemed to go on for a very long time. I could hear my heart, booming in
my ears, and clung to the sound. I was scared—very scared—but no longer
panicked. My heart was still beating; I hadn’t been shot.
Yet.
The memory of Monmouth shuddered through me. My eyes were burning
and filled with the dizziness of spinning leaves and an empty sky and I felt
my blood draining out, my knees giving way …
“Whoop! Whoop! One more, one more!” It was Campbell’s voice, behind
and below me. And in the next second, screams and bellows and shrieks
broke out and men rushed close past me, clanking and thumping and
bellowing when they could draw enough breath to do it.
Jesus, where’s Roger?
Jamie
HE RAMMED THE rod home and home again. Paused to gulp air, and
touched the lumpy shot pouch on his belt. How many left? Enough …
They were close enough to the meadow now as to be able to see the
enemy. He stepped out from the shelter of his tree and fired. Then he heard a
faint, sharp whistle. Ferguson, that was him. Randall said the wee man hadn’t
enough voice to call above the roar of battle, so he used a whistle to manage
his troops. 
Like callin’ in a pack of sheepdogs,
 he thought.A shout came from above, repeated and echoed across the meadow.
“Fix bayonets!”
Claire
THERE WERE SCATTERED shouts from above, distant. Then all of a
sudden there was another ragged roar from the besiegers and the forest was
moving, men running out from the shelter of their trees, leaping, crawling
upward around me, powder horns swinging and rifles in hand. I heard a shrill
whistle through the uproar, far above, and then another and another.
Ferguson, rallying his troops.
But now I was hearing a fresh outbreak of battle—far above me. A few
shots now, and the sort of yelling men do when they’re beyond words. A
shrill whistle and the spreading cry of “Bayonets!”
Still shaking, I forced myself to stand up. I wiped a sleeve across my face
and saw the forest blurred and shattered around me. Broken limbs dangled
from trees, and the air was thick with the smell of crushed plants and powder
smoke. And men were still running uphill, panting, flickering through the
trees; one knocked into me in passing and I fell back against the big walnut
tree.
“Auntie!” Young Ian appeared suddenly, grasping my arm. “What are ye
doing here? Are ye all right? What have ye done wi’ Roger Mac?”
I hadn’t managed more than a faint bleat in reply when I heard Colonel
Campbell’s voice bellowing somewhere below me.
“One more, boys! One more whoop!”
Answering whoops rose from every man near enough to hear him. Ian
disappeared up the hill into the rising smoke, leaving me swaying like one of
the broken tree limbs, hanging by a thread of bark.
Suddenly there was a crunch and slither of dirt as someone slipped and a
muffled curse, and I turned to look into the face of a woman. She was as
startled as I was; we stared at each other for an instant, and I registered
nothing 
but her eyes, black with terror. She ran past me, stumbling and
falling and rising in what seemed the same movement, and disappeared down
the mountain. I blinked, not sure I’d seen her at all. But I had; she’d ripped
her dress and left a strip of her yellow calico gown fluttering from a
dogwood. I looked around, dazed.“What the devil are you doing here?” Colonel Campbell was on foot now,
next to me, still in his shirtsleeves, face black with powder smoke. “Go down,
go down at once, ma’am!” He didn’t pause to see if I obeyed, but ran upward,
shouting. There were cries from above and a wash of men coming down, but
only a little way, then moving to the side, following an officer for another try.
Two crows came sailing down and landed in a nearby tree, eyeing me with
casual interest. One noticed the flapping yellow rag and hopped down,
pecking at it.
My mouth was dry, and when I raised a hand to wipe sweat from my
forehead, I realized that my face was imprinted with the pattern of the
walnut’s bark.
The whistle was shrieking above, then drowned by a tremendous shouting
—and the sound of shots again, in great number. The attackers had reached
the meadow.
Jamie
THE KERCHIEF ROUND his head was sopping, sweat and gun smoke stung
his eyes. He blinked hard to clear them, felt the clash and thud of loading in
his bones, the weight of the rifle in his hands, butt hard against his sore
shoulder. 
Green …
 The meadow was surging with men, speckled with clots
of green uniforms. He fired and one dropped.
Ferguson’s whistle screamed thin and high through the noise. The man was
still on his horse, trying to rally his men, though by now it was like rallying
fish in a net—they surged to and fro, bayonets still fixed, stabbing air, some
firing, but being driven closer in, jostling as they strove to find a target.
Why not?
He coughed again, smoke rasping in his chest, and spat. It was no more
than minutes now, and he kent from Randall’s book what would happen to
Ferguson. 
Spare him knowing what’s coming to him … Let it be a Scot, at
least …
 He hadn’t time to think more, before his sight fixed on the checked
shirt and his finger tightened on the trigger. He took a step sideways, barrel
following his target, and something snagged round his foot. He kicked at the
clinging shrub, impatient, and a thorn pierced his calf.
“Ifrinn!”
 He jerked, and looked down. The large snake that had bitten him
was writhing round his leg in panic, and he flung himself away, kicking out
in his own panic.The first bullet struck him in the chest.147
A Lot of Blood
IT SEEMED TO GO on forever, but I knew it was only minutes, would be
only minutes more. Shouts from above, yelling, shooting … the crash of fired
muskets and the higher-pitched crack of rifles … I felt each shot as though it
had hit me and shuddered against my tree.
I HEARD IT when the tide turned. An instant’s silence and more shooting
and yelling, but it was different now. Less noise, the shots were fewer … The
whistle fell silent, and the yelling increased, but it had a different tone.
Savage. Exultant.
I couldn’t wait any longer. I left the refuge of my tree and scrambled up
the mountainside, slipping and falling and scrambling on all fours.
I came high enough to be able to see what was going on. Chaos, but the
shooting had all but stopped. I made my way up higher, onto the meadow. I
was drenched in sweat, my legs shaking from the tension of the last hour and
my heart pounding like a steam hammer.
Where are you? Where are you?
There was a crush of men at one side of the meadow; the Loyalist
prisoners, half of them in green Provincial uniforms, the rest farmers like our
own men …
Our own—I tried to look in all directions at once, to see, if not Jamie
himself, someone I knew.
I saw Cyrus. The Tall Tree, looking as though he’d been struck by
lightning, his face black with powder smoke except where the sweat had
made runnels. He was standing up, though, looking about him in a dazed sort
of way.People were moving, everywhere, jostling, milling—one young man ran
into me, knocking me off-balance. I caught myself and began to say “I beg
your pardon” by reflex.
Then I saw that he had Jamie’s rifle.
“Where did you get that gun?” I said fiercely, and grabbed him by the arm,
squeezing as hard as I could.
“Who the hell are you?” He was shocked and offended, trying to pull
away. I dug my fingers into his armpit, and he yelped and jerked, trying to
get away.
“Where did you get it!” I screamed.
I was clinging like grim death and he screamed, too, writhing and cursing.
He kicked me solidly in the shin, but he loosed his hold on the rifle and I let
go his other arm and snatched it.
“Tell me where you fucking got this, or so help me God I will beat you to
death with it!”
His eyes showed white, like a panicked horse, and he backed away from
me, hands out in placation.
“He’s dead! He don’t need it no more!”
“Who’s dead?” I hardly heard the words; the blood had surged so hard into
my ears that they were ringing. But a big hand clasped me by the shoulder
and pulled me away from the boy. He promptly turned to flee, but Bill Amos
—for it was he—let go of me and with two giant strides he had hold of the
boy, picked him up with both hands, and shook him like a rag.
“What’s going on, Missus?” he asked, setting the boy down and turning to
me. The words were calm, but he wasn’t; he was trembling all over with a
mixture of bloodlust and reaction, and I thought he might just kill the boy
inadvertently; his big fist was squeezing the boy’s shoulder rhythmically, as
though he couldn’t stop, and the boy was squealing and begging to be let go.
“This—” I couldn’t hold the rifle; it slipped from my grasp and I barely
caught it, its butt jolting into the ground. “It’s Jamie’s. I need to know where
he is!”
Amos blew out a long breath and huffed air for a moment, nodding.
“Where’s Colonel Fraser?” he asked the boy, shaking him again, but more
gently. “Where’s the man you took this’n from?”
The boy was crying, head wobbling and tears making tracks through the
dirt and powder stains on his face.“But he’s 
dead,
” he said, and pointed a shaking finger toward a small
rocky outcrop near the edge of the saddle, maybe fifty yards away.
“He’s bloody 
not!
” I said, and slapped him. I shoved past him, hobbling—
his kick had bruised my shin, though I didn’t feel pain—leaving Bill Amos to
deal with whatever he felt like dealing with.
I found Jamie lying in a patch of dry grass, just behind the outcrop. There
was a lot of blood.
I FELL TO my knees and groped frantically through his heavy clothes, wet
with sweat—and blood.
“How much of this blood is yours?” I demanded.
“All of it.” His eyes were closed, his lips barely moving.
“Bloody fucking hell. Where are you hit?”
“Everywhere.”
I was deeply afraid he was right, but I had to start somewhere. I could see
that one leg of his breeks was sodden with blood. No arterial spurting,
though, that was good … I started feeling my way down his thigh.
“Dinna … fash, Sass …” He wheezed deeply. With tremendous effort, he
opened his eyes and turned his head enough to look up at me.
“I’m … no … afraid,” he whispered. “I’m not.” A bout of coughing seized
him. It was nearly silent, but the violence of it shook his whole body. He
wasn’t coughing 
up
 blood …
Why is he coughing? Pneumothorax? Cardiac asthma?
 His shirt was
sodden. If a ball had touched his heart but not penetrated …
“Well, 
I’m
 bloody afraid!” I snapped, and tightened my hold on his thigh,
digging my fingers into his unresisting flesh. “Do you think I’m just going to
sit here and watch you die by inches?”
“Aye.” His eyes closed, and the word was no more than a whisper. His lips
were white.
He sounded completely certain about it, and the fear that was swarming
over my skin burrowed suddenly inward and seized my heart with its claws.
His blood was spreading slowly, dark and venous. I was kneeling in the
blood-soaked mud and there were huge splotches of it on my apron, black-
red; it felt warm on my skin, though that must only be the heat of the day.
“You can’t,” I said, helpless. “Jamie—you can’t.”His eyes opened and I saw them look past and through me, as though fixed
on something far, far away.
“For … give me …” he said, his voice no more than a thread, and I didn’t
know whether he spoke to me or to God.
“Oh, Jesus,” I said, tasting cold iron on my tongue. “Jamie—please. 
Please
don’t go.”
His eyelids fluttered, and closed.
I COULDN’T SPEAK. I couldn’t move. Grief overwhelmed me and I curled
into a ball, still grasping his arm, holding it with both hands, hard, to keep
him from drowning, from going down into the bloody earth, away from me
forever.
Beneath the grief was fury, and the sort of desperation that lets a woman
lift an automobile off her child. And with the thought of a child and the reek
of blood, I was for a split second not kneeling in Jamie’s blood on a blistering
plain of surrender but on splintered floorboards by a sputtering fire, hearing
screams and smelling blood, with nothing to hold on to but a wet scrap of life
and that one phrase: 
Don’t let go.
I didn’t let go. I seized him by the shoulder and managed to roll him onto
his back, shoved the soaked coat back, and ripped his shirt down the middle.
The bullet wound in his chest was evident, slightly left of center, welling
blood. Welling, not spurting. And I didn’t hear the distinctive sound of a
sucking chest wound; wherever the ball was, it hadn’t—yet—penetrated a
lung.
I felt as though I were trudging through molasses, moving with unutterable
slowness—and yet I was doing a dozen things at once: yanking tight a
tourniquet around his thigh (the femoral artery was all right, thank God,
because if it wasn’t, he’d already be dead), applying pressure to the chest
wound, shouting for help, palpating his body for other injuries, one-handed,
shouting for help …
“Auntie!” Ian was suddenly on his knees beside me. “Is he—”
“Push on this!” I grabbed his hand and slapped it on the compress over the
chest wound. Jamie grunted in response to the impact, which gave me a small
jolt of hope. But the blood was spreading under him.
I worked doggedly on.“LISTEN TO ME,” I said, after what seemed a long time. His face was
closed and white and the rumble of the crowds reached me like distant
thunder from a clear blue sky. I felt the sound move through me and I fixed
my mind on the blue, vast and empty, patient, peaceful—waiting for him.
“Listen!” I said, and shook his arm, hard. “You think you’re going to die
by inches, but you’re not. You’re going to live by inches. With me.”
“Auntie, he’s dead.” Ian’s voice was low, rough with tears, and his big
hand warm on my shoulder. “Come. Stand up now. Let me take him. We’ll
bring him home.”
I WOULDN’T LET go. I couldn’t speak anymore, I hadn’t strength for it.
But I wouldn’t let go and I wouldn’t move.
Ian spoke to me now and then. Other voices came and went. Alarm,
concern, anger, helplessness. I didn’t listen.
BLUE. IT’S NOT
 
empty. It’s beautiful.
I FOUND FOUR wounds. A ball had gone clean through his thigh muscle
but missed both bone and artery. Good. Another had scored his right side,
below the rib cage, a deep furrow, bleeding profusely, but it hadn’t penetrated
his abdomen, thank God. Another had struck him in the left kneecap.
Fortunate as to minimal bleeding, and as to his walking in future, that could
take care of itself. As to the chest wound …
It hadn’t penetrated his sternum entirely or he’d be dead, I thought. But it
might
 have gone through and torn his pericardium or one of the smaller
vessels of the heart, its momentum killed by the sternum but still allowing
damage.
“Breathe,” I said to him, realizing that his chest wasn’t rising noticeably
anymore. 
“Breathe!”
I didn’t see any chest movement, but when I held my hand in front of his
mouth, I thought I could detect the faint movement of air. I couldn’t do chest
compressions, not with a cracked sternum and an invisible ball in or under it.“Breathe,” I said, under my breath, as I pressed a fresh dressing onto his
knee and wrapped it hastily with a length of bandage to give light pressure.
“Please, please, please breathe …”
Young Ian had materialized again at some point and was squatting beside
me, handing me things from my pack as I needed them. He seemed to be
saying the Hail Mary, though I couldn’t tell whether he was speaking Gaelic
or Mohawk. I wondered vaguely how I knew it was the Hail Mary and
realized slowly that I had the vision of a vast blue space in my mind. 
“Blue,
like the Virgin’s cloak …”
 I blinked away stinging sweat and saw Jamie’s
face, composed and tranquil. Was he seeing Heaven, and I seeing it through
his closed eyes?
“You are losing your mind, Beauchamp,” I muttered, and kept working,
willing the bleeding to stop. “Feed him honey-water,” I said to Ian.
“He canna swallow it, Auntie.”
“I don’t bloody 
care
! 
Give it to him!
”
A hand reached over Ian’s shoulder and took the canteen. Roger, face and
hands blood-smeared and his black hair come loose, hanging wet with sweat,
full of red and yellow leaves.
I might have sobbed, in the minor relief of having him there. He held the
canteen to Jamie’s mouth with one hand; the other reached out and touched
my face gently. Then his hand rested on Jamie’s shoulder and shook it, less
gently.
“Ye can’t die, mate. Presbyterians don’t do Last Rites.”
I might have laughed, if I’d had any breath to spare. My hands and arms
were red to the elbows.
I WOULDN’T LET go. I couldn’t speak anymore, I hadn’t strength for it.
But I wouldn’t let go and I wouldn’t move.
Ian spoke to me now and then. Other voices came and went. Alarm,
concern, anger, helplessness. Ian and Roger. I didn’t listen.
BLUE.
So beautiful.
It’s not empty.MY FACE WAS pressed against his chest, my mouth on his wounded
breastbone, the silver taste of blood and salt of sweat on my tongue. I thought
I could feel the slow—so slow—thump of his heart.
Lub … Dub ……… Lub …… Dub …
I thought of Bree’s racing heart, of tiny David’s small, busy thump beneath
my fingers, tried to feel my own heart in my fingertips, force all of that life
into his.
Don’t let go.
I WAS VAGUELY aware, from time to time, that things were happening
around me. People were shouting, a few shots, more shouting …
I heard Roger’s voice, but didn’t, couldn’t spare enough attention to know
what he was saying. I felt it, though, when he knelt by Jamie and laid a hand
on him. Something flickered through him and through me, and I breathed it in
like oxygen.
JAMIE’S SMELL HAD changed, and that frightened me badly. I could smell
hot dust and horses and hot metal and gun smoke and the muddy stink from
puddles of horse piss and the panicked sharp smell of broken plants and the
shattered tree trunks on the hillside below. I could smell Jamie’s sweat 
and
his blood—God, the blood, it had saturated my bodice and stays and the
fabric stuck to me and to him, a thin crust of hot stickiness, not the cut-metal
smell of fresh blood but the thick stink of butchery. The sweat was cold on
his skin, slick and nearly odorless, no vital reek of manhood in it anymore.
His skin was cold beneath the film of sweat and blood and I pressed myself
as hard against him as I could, holding tight to the shapes of his back, trying
to force myself into the fibers of his muscle, reach the heart inside the bony
cage of his chest, make it beat.
Suddenly I was aware that there was something warm and round in my
mouth, a metal taste, stronger than blood. I coughed, lifted my head enough
to spit, and found that it was a musket ball, warm from his body.
He was breathing still … only a faint waft of air on my forehead,
perceptible only because it cooled my own sweat.Breathe,
 I thought fiercely, and pressed my forehead against his chest,
against the small dark hole of the wound, seeing the bloodstained pink and
the air-starved blue of his lungs beneath. I reached for his heart, but had no
words, only the weight of its soft, slowing beat, the motion, like two small
heavy balls that I held, one in each hand, one heavier than the other, and
tossed them to and fro, to and fro, catching each one separately but close
together.
Lub-dub … lub-dub … lub—dub …
“Shouldn’t we … take her away?” A rough, uncertain voice somewhere far
above me. “I mean … he’s …”
“Leave her.” Young Ian. He sat down beside me; I heard the scuff of dirt
beneath his moccasins and the sigh of stretching buckskin on his thighs.
I drew a quick, sobbing breath, deep as I could, pulling air for both of us,
and Young Ian rested a hand on my shoulder, tentative, not sure what he
should do, but he was there.
There.
 A solid shape with no form, glowing with a fractured light; Ian was
hurt, but not badly, I could feel his strength pulse and fade, pulse and fade …
I felt the pulse of it through my flesh. For an instant, I was disoriented,
couldn’t find the limits of my own body. I felt Jamie’s slow surrender in my
belly and veins, Ian’s strong pulse in my heart and arteries.
Where am
 I
?
I concluded, dimly, that it didn’t matter.
Help me,
 I said silently, and yielded my own boundaries.148
Not … yet …
WE STAYED THERE, THE four of us, through the rest of that day, the night
beyond, and most of the next day. When I finally resumed contact with the
world, I was curled beside Jamie, a sheet of canvas flapping in a gentle wind
above us.
“Here, Auntie.” Young Ian’s hands slid under my arms, and he lifted me
gently into a sitting position.
“What …?” I croaked, and he put a canteen to my mouth. I drank. It was
cider and I had never tasted anything better. Then I remembered.
“Jamie?” I looked blearily round for him, but couldn’t make my eyes
focus.
“He’s alive, Claire.” It was Roger, squatting next to me, smiling.
Bloodshot and black-stubbled, but smiling. “I don’t know how you did it, but
he 
is
 alive. We were afraid to move you—the two of you, I mean, because
you wouldn’t let go of him.”
I looked around. We were still behind the rocky outcrop, shielded from the
battlefield, but I could hear—and smell—the cleaning-up. Grunts and talk
and the 
shoof
 of shovels and soft thud of dirt cast aside. Burying the dead.
But not us.
I put a hand on Jamie. He 
looked
 dead. I certainly 
felt
 dead. But apparently
we weren’t.
Jamie’s chest moved under my hand. He was breathing, and slight as the
movement was, I felt it as though the gentle wind moved through me.
“Do you think it’s safe to move him, Auntie?” Young Ian asked. “Roger
Mac’s found a farmhouse, not too far away, where ye can stay for a bit, until
ye’re both strong enough to travel.”
I wetted my cracked lips and leaned over Jamie.
“Can you hear me?” I said.His face twitched briefly, fell into stillness, and then—after an agonizingly
long moment—his eyes opened. Only a dark-blue, red-rimmed slit, but open.
“Aye,” he whispered.
“The battle’s over. You’re not dead.”
He regarded me for a long moment, his mouth slightly open.
“Not … 
yet,
” he said, in what I thought was a rather grudging tone.
“We’re going home,” I said.
He breathed for a minute, then said, “Good,” and closed his eyes again.149
Angry, Irascible, Difficult Sons of Bitches
Fraser’s Ridge
October 22, 1780
“I’M NO DYING IN my sleep,” Jamie said stubbornly. “I mean—should the
Lord choose to take me in my bed, I’ll go, of course. But if I’m going to die
by 
your
 hand, I want to be awake.”
My hands were shaking; I folded them under my apron, both to hide the
trembling and to control the urge to throttle him.
“You 
have
 to be asleep,” I said, as reasonably as I could manage, which
wasn’t all that reasonably. “Your leg has to be completely immobile, and I
can’t manage that if you’re awake. I don’t care 
how
 strong you think you are,
you can’t keep still enough, and even tying you to the table—which I fully
intend to 
do
”—I glared at him—“wouldn’t be enough to completely
immobilize you.
“So.” My hands had stilled, thank God, and I brought them out from under
the apron, picked up the ether mask, and pointed a finger at him. “Either you
lie flat right now and take it, or I get Roger and Ian to tie you down and 
then
you take it. But you’re getting it, like it or not.”
He immediately sat up and swung his feet off the table, apparently
intending to make a break for it, cracked kneecap or no.
“No, mate.” Roger grabbed him by an arm and a shoulder, and Ian,
slithering behind the table like a water moccasin, grabbed Jamie’s other arm
with one hand and forearmed him across the throat.
“Lie down, Uncle,” he said soothingly, tightening the choke hold and
pulling Jamie back against him. “It will be all right. Auntie Claire willna kill
ye, and if by accident she does, Roger Mac’s a proper minister now and he’ll
give ye a fine funeral.”Jamie made a noise somewhere between a gurgle and a growl, his face
going a dark, congested red as he struggled. I was actually pleased to see that
he had enough blood now to achieve such a color.
“Let him go.” I waved Roger and Ian off, and they reluctantly released
him. He eyed me, his chest heaving, but didn’t try to get away as I came
closer. I put my hand on his uninjured knee and leaned close to speak quietly
to him.
“If you lie down by yourself, I’ll put you out before they tie you,” I said.
“And I’ll untie you as soon as I’ve finished the surgery. I won’t let you wake
up bound. I promise.”
He was getting enough air now, and his face lost the look of incipient
seizure.
“Ye want to promise me I’ll wake up?”
He spoke gruffly, and not only because of the choking.
“I can’t promise that,” I said, as steadily as I could. I squeezed his knee.
“But I’ll lay you odds of a hundred to one that you will.”
He looked at me searchingly for a long moment, then sighed.
“Aye, well. I’ve been a gambler since I was wee. I suppose this is no time
to quit.”
Leaning back on his palms, he brought his legs back up on the table. The
effort to move the wounded one made sweat spring out on his forehead, but
he kept his lips tight pressed together and made no sound when Roger and
Ian took his shoulders and eased him down.
A boiled napkin lay on the counter behind me, displaying four narrow
strips of hammered gold. Bree had made them and had painstakingly bored
the tiny holes I would use to screw them to the bone—the steel screws
courtesy of Jenny’s watch, offered immediately when I asked.
This was going to be a tricky, painstaking bit of surgery, but I was smiling
behind my mask as I soaped and shaved, then swabbed the skin of his knee
with alcohol. The situation reminded me strongly of the day I had prepared to
amputate his snakebitten leg—this leg; I could still see the narrow groove the
bite had left, just above his ankle, nearly hidden by the furze of red-blond
hair. Today, I wasn’t afraid for his life, and I rejoiced in the knowledge that
what I was going to do to his knee wouldn’t hurt him while I was doing it. I
glanced up the table at him; he met my eye, and scowled at me.
I wiggled my eyebrows at him and scowled, too, mocking him. He snorted
and lay back, but his face relaxed. That was what I was happiest about; he’dfought me, and even though he’d been forced to give in, he wasn’t giving up
his right to be cranky about it.
Over the years, I’d seen a lot of sweet, amiable, biddable patients, who
succumbed within hours to their ailments. The angry, irascible, difficult sons
of bitches (of either sex) almost always survived.
The cotton gauze of the mask had grown damp in my hand, and I wiped
my hand on my apron. I nodded toward the ether bottle on the counter, and
Bree handed it to me, troubled eyes fixed on her father, who had folded his
hands across his belly and was staring doggedly at the ceiling, looking
disturbingly like a medieval knight in the crypt of some cathedral.
“All you need is a sword clasped to your chest and a little dog under your
feet,” she told him. “And maybe a suit of chain mail.”
He snorted slightly, but his face relaxed just a hair.
“Breathe slow and deep,” I said, in a low, soothing voice. The scent of
ether had risen like a ghost when I uncapped the bottle, and I saw Ian hold his
breath as it reached him.
Jamie’s eyes met mine and his muscles tensed as I fitted the mask over his
nose and mouth.
“Just breathe. You’ll feel dizzy for a moment, but only a moment.” The
clear drops fell one by one onto the gauze and disappeared. “Breathe in.
Count for him, Bree, backward from ten.”
She looked startled, but obligingly began, “Ten … nine … eight … seven
…” His eyelids fluttered and then popped open as he felt it.
“Breathe,”
 I said firmly. “… six … five …”
“He’s gone,” Roger said quietly, then realized what he’d said. “I mean—
he’s asleep.”
“… three, two, one.”
I handed Roger the bottle.
“Make sure he stays that way,” I said. “One drop every thirty seconds.”
I went to wash my hands in alcohol one final time and checked over the
instruments and supplies I’d laid ready, while Ian and Bree tied him firmly to
the table with rags and linen bandages. His fingers had relaxed and his hands
hung limp when they laid his arms at his sides. The light was good; the fine
hairs on his arms and legs glowed gold, and the seeping blood in his bandage
was the color in the heart of a rose. My own breath had calmed and my heart
beat slowly; I could feel it in my fingertips. Some saint was with me now. Iwanted to smooth the soft hair back from his brow, but didn’t want to break
what semblance of sterility I had, so left it.
Jamie was tied down as securely as a barrel of tobacco in a ship’s hold, but
Brianna took hold of his leg and steadied it, just to be sure. I nodded at her,
turned to my work, and spread the skin over Jamie’s kneecap as taut as I
could.
I picked up a pledget, and the sharp sting of alcohol joined the musky
ether, drowning the smell of the pines and chestnut mast from the window.
“Smells like a proper hospital, doesn’t it?” I said, and tied my own mask
tight over my face.
I SAW JAMIE safely awake, his knee bandaged and splinted, and a solid
dose of laudanum administered for pain. Leaving him asleep in the surgery
for now, I wandered down the hall toward the kitchen, feeling somewhat
sharp-set, though with a deep feeling of satisfaction. The surgery had gone
beautifully; he had good, dense bones that would knit well, and while
recovery would undoubtedly be painful, I was sure that he would walk easily
again, in time.
The house was quiet; my assistants had all scattered: Fanny was walking
out somewhere with Cyrus, and the rest of them had all gone up to the
Murrays’ cabin to drink apple cider and milk the goats. I was therefore
somewhat surprised to see Jenny in the kitchen, sitting alone on the settle,
gazing contemplatively at the big cauldron, steaming gently on the fire.
“Your brother’s doing well,” I said casually, and opened the pie safe to see
what was available.
“Good,” she said, absently, but then sharpened into attention. “I mean—
aye, that’s very good. Will he walk easy, d’ye think?”
“Not for some weeks, probably,” I said. “But he’ll certainly walk, and it
will get easier, the more he does it.” I found three-quarters of a dried-peach
pie and brought it back to the table. “Will you have a bit of this with me?”
“No,” she said automatically, but then noticed what it was. “Och. I will,
thanks.”
I sliced the pie, fetched milk from the cooling cistern Bree had built in the
corner of the kitchen floor, and set out the food. She rose slowly and came to
sit opposite me.“The Sachem came to my house this morning, to say it’s time for him to be
away back north,” she said.
“Oh?” I took a forkful of the pie—delicious. Probably Fanny had made it;
she was the best of the family bakers. Jenny said nothing, and while she had a
fork in her hand, she hadn’t yet stuck it into the pie.
“And?” I said.
No answer. I took another bite and waited.
“Well,” she said at last. “He kissed me.”
I raised an eyebrow at her.
“Did you kiss him back?”
“Aye, I did,” she said, sounding astonished. She sat for a moment,
contemplating, then looked at me sideways. “I didna mean to,” she said, and I
smiled.
“Did you like it?”
“Well, I’ll no lie to ye, Claire. I did.” She let her head fall back and stared
at the ceiling. “
Now
 what?”
“You’re asking me?”
“No, I’m askin’ 
me,
” she said, adding a small Scottish snort for emphasis.
“He’s goin’ north, back to his nephew. To tell him what-all he’s learnt about
the war, so he can decide whether to stick wi’ the British or …” Her voice
trailed off. “He’ll need to go before the weather turns.”
“Did he ask you to go with him?” I asked, gently.
She shook her head. “He didna need to ask and I didna need to answer. He
wants me, and I … well, if it was only him and me, that would be one thing,
but it’s not, and so it’s the other thing. I canna go and leave my family here,
especially when I ken all the things that might happen to all of ye. And then
there’s Ian …”
The softness in her voice told me that it was Ian Mòr she meant; her
husband, rather than her son.
“I ken he wouldna mind,” she said, “and no just because the Sachem told
me so,” she added, giving me a direct blue look. “But he sees Ian with me,
and I didna need to hear it; I 
know
 he’s with me. He always will be,” she said,
more softly. “One day, it may be different. Not that Ian will leave me, but …
it may be different. I said so, and the Sachem says he’ll come back. When the
war is over.”
When the war is over.
 I felt a huge lump in my throat. I’d heard that before,
long ago, caught in the jaws of another war. Spoken in that same tone oflonging, of anticipation, of resignation. Knowledge that if the war should
ever end—it never truly would end. Things would be different.
“I’m sure he will,” I said.150
And What of Lazarus?
Fraser’s Ridge
February 11, 1781
I FELT JAMIE WAKE beside me. He stretched, then made a horrible noise
and froze. I yawned and rose up on one elbow.
“I don’t know why it should be the case,” I remarked, “but with injuries of
the knee and foot, lying down actually makes them hurt more badly than
standing up.”
“It hurts when I stand up, too,” he assured me, but he shrugged off my
offer of a helping hand and gingerly swung his bad leg off the edge of the bed
with no more than a hiss of pain and a muffled “Mother of 
God.
” He used the
chamber pot and sat gathering his strength before he pushed himself up with
a hand on the bedside table and stood swaying like a flower in the breeze.
I hopped out of bed, fetched his stick from the corner where he’d thrown it
last night, and put it into his hand, wondering just what life had been like for
Mary and Martha after their brother, Lazarus, came back from the dead. Then
—watching Jamie struggle into his clothes—I wondered what it had been like
for Lazarus.
Whatever his state of mind when he died, the poor man would presumably
have left his body with the notion that he was finished with the world. Being
unceremoniously reinserted into said body was one thing—returning to a life
that you never expected to lead again was something else.
Jamie cast a bleak glance at himself in the looking glass, rubbed a hand
over his stubble, muttered something in Gaelic, rubbed the same hand
through his hair, shook his head, and made his way downstairs for breakfast,
his passage marked by the thump of his stick on every other step.Beginning to dress myself, I thought that in fact such a thing happened to a
hell of a lot of people, who perhaps hadn’t come as close to physical death as
Jamie had but had still lost the life they were accustomed to. I realized, with a
small shock, that I’d had exactly that experience myself—and more than
once. When I’d come through the stones the first time, yanked away from
Frank and a new life that we’d just begun, after the war—and then again
when I’d had to leave Jamie before Culloden.
I hadn’t revisited 
those
 memories in a long time. I didn’t want them back
now, either—but it was actually a small comfort to remember that they’d
happened … and that I’d survived being uprooted, losing everything I’d
known and loved—and yet, I’d bloomed anew.
That 
was
 a comfort, and I comforted myself further by considering Jenny,
who’d lost the greater part of her life when Ian had died, and then
courageously 
turned her back on what was left of it, to come to America with
Jamie.
The Provincial prisoners from the battle had been disarmed, rounded up,
and marched away; I didn’t know where. But the militias had all disbanded,
essentially as soon as the shooting stopped, men making their ways home in
small groups, looking for the pieces of their lives that they’d lost along the
way.
How long would it be, I wondered, before we might be compelled to do it
again? It was 1781. In October, the Battle of Yorktown would be fought—
and won. The war would be over—or as over as wars ever are.
There would be more fighting between now and then. Much of it in the
South, but not near us. Or so Frank’s book said.
“He’ll be all right, then,” I said to my reflection in the looking glass. Jamie
had healed well, physically; his knee would improve with use—and he was
back in the house he loved. Most of his militia had survived the battle with
mostly minor injuries, though we had lost two men: Tom McHugh’s second-
eldest son, Greg, and Balgair Finney, a single man in his fifties from Ullapool
who had lived on the Ridge less than a year. If Jamie was inclined to sit in his
study and stare pensively into the fire, or to set out for the still and turn back
—he hadn’t yet gone all the way there, and I didn’t know whether he couldn’t
bear to see it deserted and in disrepair, or couldn’t yet face the job of getting
it back into production—I had faith that he would come all the way back.
Little Davy had been a great help. The tiny boy had brightened everyone’s
heart, and Jamie loved to sit with him and say things in Gaelic to him thatmade Fanny laugh when she heard them.
Still … there was something missing in him. I glanced back at the unmade
bed. He hadn’t felt up to making love for more than two months after we’d
come home—little wonder—and while I had been able to rouse him
physically as he healed … there 
was
 something missing.
“Patience, Beauchamp,” I said to the mirror, and picked up my hairbrush.
“He’ll mend.” I normally brushed my hair by feel, but was still looking into
the glass as I raised the brush—and stopped.
“Well, bloody hell,” I said. My hair was white. Jamie had told me my hair
was the color of moonlight, once, but then it was no more than streaks of
white around my face. It was not entirely white now; the mass of curls that
foamed around my shoulders was still a mix of brown and blond and silver—
but the newer growth above my ears was a pure and simple white that
shimmered in the morning sun.
I set down the brush and looked at my hand, turning it back and forth. It
looked quite as usual: thin and long-fingered, with strongly marked tendons
and blue veins visible …
I remembered Nayawenne then, and what she’d said to me: “When your
hair is white … that is when you will find your full power.” I hadn’t thought
of it in some time and felt a tingle down my spine now. The memory of
holding Jamie’s soul on that mountaintop, calling him back to his body …
Roger had said to me, quietly, when no one was nearby to hear, that he
thought he 
had seen a faint blue light come and go in my hands as I touched
Jamie, flickering like swamp fire.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said, very quietly.
IN THE AFTERNOON, I went up to my garden. The air was still chilly, but
patches of bare earth were beginning to show through the melting snow, and
it was time to prepare trenches for the early peas and bean vines. Jamie came
with me, saying he could do with air, and we walked—slowly, to
accommodate his knee—up the slope.
The two lieutenants, Gilbert and Oliver, had dug good trenches for me the
year before—before all hell broke loose, and I said a brief prayer for them,
and for Agnes (
which one did she marry?
 I wondered), and for Elspeth and
Charles Cunningham. Were they all back in England now?—for sweet peas
and pole beans and edible peas, these all carefully saved from last year’sharvestings. Jamie obligingly dumped the manure into one trench and set
about the job of shoveling earth in and mixing it well with the manure,
merely hissing through his teeth when his bad knee twinged.
This trench ran behind the beehives. There were eleven hives now: One
swarm had divided before Kings Mountain and I had been in time to catch a
departing new queen and install her in a new hive with her followers, and
Young Ian had found a wild swarm and gone with Rachel and Jenny to
capture them and bring them back. All of them had survived the winter, and a
few bees would now and then come out and cruise slowly round the garden
before going back in. Jamie looked cautiously behind him, to make sure he
wouldn’t knock against the hives with his spade, then glanced at me in
surprise.
“I hear them!” he said. “Or at least I think I do …” He advanced
cautiously, putting his ear close to the woven straw of the skep.
“Yes, you do,” I said, amused at his expression. “Honeybees don’t die in
the winter and they don’t really hibernate, either—so long as they have
enough honey stored up to last them ’til spring. They cluster together and
shiver to generate warmth, but otherwise they just eat and … sleep, I
suppose.”
“I can think o’ worse ways to pass the winter,” he said, and smiled.
“Holdin’ your feet.”
The interesting question as to just what parts of him I would like to hold
while sleeping was obliged to wait, as we heard the rustlings and shuffle of
heavy footsteps coming up the path.
I wasn’t surprised to see John Quincy Myers—he routinely stopped at
Fraser’s Ridge when he came back from the Cherokee villages where he
usually spent the winter—but I was very pleased.
“How are you?” I asked, standing back to look up at him after greetings
and embraces had been exchanged. He had apparently left his pack at the
house and looked much as usual, but thin from the winter, like everyone else.
“Sprightly, Missus, sprightly,” he said, giving me a wide smile that had
one 
or two fewer teeth than it had when last seen. “And I see your bees are
thrivin’, too.”
“Yes, they seem to be—and thank you again for giving them to me. We
were just talking about what bees do in the winter. Eat and sleep, I imagine.”
“Oh, I’m sure they do that,” he said, and reached delicately to put his hand
on one of the hives. He smiled, feeling the faint hum on his skin. “But I thinkthey pass the time much as we do in the cold, tellin’ each other stories
through the long nights.”
Jamie laughed at that, but came cautiously closer, putting his hand on one
of the hives as well. “What sorts of stories d’ye think bees tell, 
a charaid
?”
“Tales of bears and flowers, I reckon. Though a queen maybe dreams of
other things.”
“If you mean laying thousands of eggs, that sounds more like a
nightmare,” I said. John Quincy laughed, but tilted his head to and fro in
equivocation.
“It’s not for a man to say, but I think she maybe dreams of flyin’ free and
high with a hundred drones in a cloud o’ mad desire. Oh—” He stopped,
feeling in his pouch. “I ’most forgot, Missus. I’ve summat here for you.” He
drew out a small package, wrapped in a piece of grimy pink calico.
“Who is it from?” I asked, taking it. It was light, no more than a few
ounces, and something crackled faintly inside.
“That, I don’t rightly know, Missus Claire,” he said. “’Twas given me by a
woman keeps a tavern down near Charlotte, in January. She said it was a
black man left it, sayin’ it was for the conjure-woman what lived at Fraser’s
Ridge, and would she kindly pass it on when someone was to be headin’ up
this way. I do suppose he meant you,” he added with a smile. “Ain’t that
many conjure-women in this neck o’ the woods.”
Puzzled, I opened the little parcel to find a sheet of thick paper, carefully
folded around a hard object. I unfolded it and a rock the size of a hen’s egg—
and roughly the same shape—fell out into my hand. It was a mottled gray in
color, with white and green splotches. It was smooth and felt remarkably
warm, considering the chilliness of the air. I handed it to Jamie and unfolded
the large sheet of paper it had been wrapped in. The note was written with
quill and ink, the writing a little straggly but quite legible.
I have left the army and returned to my home. My grandmother
sends this for you, in thanks. It is a bluestone from an old place and
she says it will heal sickness of spirit and of body.
I read this, astonished, and was about to tell Jamie that it must be from
Corporal—evidently now 
ex
-Corporal—Sipio Jackson, when he suddenly
reached over and took the paper out of my hand.
“A Mhoire Mhàthair!”John Quincy craned his neck to see, interested.
“I be damned,” he said. “That there’s your name, ain’t it, Jamie?”
It was substantially battered; it was torn at one corner, rubbed and dirty,
some of the ink had evidently got wet and run, and the red wax seal had
fallen 
off, leaving a round red stain behind—but there was no doubt at all
what it was.
It was a copy—the original copy, signed by Governor William Tryon—of
the grant of ten thousand acres of land in the Royal Colony of North
Carolina, to one James Fraser, in recognition of his services to the Crown.
And sewn to it with thick black pack-thread was the letter from Lord George
Germain.151
A Message in a Bottle
Aboard the
 
Pallas
JOHN GREY WAS ALLOWED to exercise on deck twice a day—for as
long as he liked, while they were at anchor. He was accompanied throughout
by a powerfully built monoglot sailor whose sole apparent purpose was to
keep him from leaping overboard and swimming for it and whose one
language was neither English, French, German, Latin, Hebrew, nor Greek.
He thought it might conceivably be Polish, but if it was, the knowledge
wouldn’t help him.
The rest of the time, he was not only confined to his cabin but attached to it
by means of a shackle round his ankle, this equipped with a long chain, this
in turn attached to a ring set into the bulkhead. He felt like a limpet.
Reasonably adequate meals were provided, as was a chamber pot and a
small pile of books, including several treatises on the evils of slavery. If these
were intended to reconcile him to his presumably eventual fate, they had
missed their mark by several miles, and he had pushed them out of the small
port before settling down with a translation of 
Don Quixote.
He’d been held captive before, but not often, thank God—and never for
very long, though the night he’d spent—at sixteen—tied to a tree on a dark
Scottish mountain with a broken arm had seemed endless. 
Why think of that
now?
 He’d largely forgotten it in the confusion of circumstance that had
attended his acquaintance with a man he’d thought he’d never see again, and
good riddance. But Jamie Fraser was not a man to be easily forgotten, damn
him.
He wondered briefly what Jamie would think of his present circumstance
—or worse, of the circumstances of his eventual death—but pushed that outof his mind as pointless. He didn’t bloody mean to die, so why waste time
envisioning it?
The one thing he was reasonably certain of, regarding Richardson and that
gentleman’s singular motives, was that he, Grey, wouldn’t be killed until
Richardson managed to locate Hal, as his life had value—to Richardson—
only as a lever to affect Hal’s actions.
As to those … He scratched absently at his jaw. Richardson didn’t trust
him with a razor; his beard was growing out and itched considerably.
Hal 
had,
 now and then, made intemperate remarks about the conduct of the
war, and had, more than once, threatened to go to England and denounce
Lord North to his face about the waste of lives and money. “There are things
that need to be said, by God—and I’m one of the few who can say them” was
the last such remark Grey had heard from his brother … when was it? Six
weeks, at least, perhaps longer.
But John was morally sure that Hal had gone north to find Ben—a
conviction supported by the fact that Richardson had so far apparently failed
to find him in any of the southern ports. He knew as much from the comings
and goings of Richardson’s shore agents; his cabin was directly below the big
stern cabin, and while he couldn’t make out many words, the tone of
frustration—with the occasional stamp of a boot overhead—couldn’t be
mistaken.
How long might it take Hal to find Ben? he wondered. And what the devil
would happen when he did? Knowing Hal, the only circumstance in which he
would 
not
 find his errant son was if the damned boy actually 
was
 dead now,
whether in battle or from illness—he remembered William’s description of
Dr. Hunter’s vaccinating the populace of New Jersey for smallpox.
The wind had changed. It blew into the tiny room, lifted his hair, and
prickled his skin. He closed his eyes instinctively and turned his face toward
the port. Then he realized that it wasn’t the wind that had shifted; the boat
had moved. He glanced up, then went to the door of his cabin, where a small
latticed opening at the top provided occasional light from the hatchways. He
pressed his ear against the opening and strained his ears. No. There was no
sound of order and rapid feet and the rumble and snap of unfurling sails.
Thank God, they weren’t about to up anchor and leave.
“I suppose it’s just caught a hatful of wind, as my old grandmother used to
say about a stiff breeze,” he muttered, trying to ignore the spasm of alarm thathad clenched his belly for a moment when he thought the ship might be about
to sail.
Richardson had moved the ship several times, though not far. Grey had
recognized the harbor at Charles Town, but there were two other, smaller
ports that he didn’t know. Now they were back in Savannah; he could see the
stumpy steeple of the small church near his house.
He’d tried not talking to himself, fearful that he might go mad, but he
found that the effort not to was making him clench his jaws, so he allowed
himself the odd remark. He also talked to the might-be Pole, which amounted
to the same thing, but was less socially reprehensible.
Still, he found himself staring absently out of the port for increasing
lengths of time, eyes following small boats, flights of pelicans, or now and
then a fleeting sight of porpoises, sometimes one or two, sometimes dozens,
who proceeded in a remarkably graceful fashion, leaping rather than
swimming, but so smoothly that they seemed still part of the water.
He was engaged in this sort of mindless abstraction when he heard a key
turned in the lock behind him and whirled round to see fucking Percy
Wainwright.
Who, to add insult to injury, stood staring at him for a moment,
openmouthed, and then dissolved in laughter.
“What?”
 John snapped, and Percy stopped laughing, though his mouth
still twitched. He hadn’t seen Percy in weeks. Evidently Percy had served his
purpose, and was allowed ashore.
“I’m sorry, John,” he said. “I didn’t expect—I mean …” He giggled. “You
look like Father Christmas. I mean—a very 
young
 Father Christmas, but—”
“God damn your eyes, Perseverance,” John said crossly. He touched his
beard, self-conscious. “Is it really 
white
?”
Percy nodded and edged closer. “Well, not 
entirely
 white; it’s just that
your hair is so fair anyway that it, um, blends in, rather.”
John made a gesture of irritation and sat down.
“What are you doing here, anyway? I take it you haven’t come to liberate
me.” Someone had accompanied Percy; he’d heard the key click in the lock
again when the door closed behind his visitor.
“No,” said Percy, suddenly sobered. “No. I would if I could, John. Please
believe me.”
“If it helps you to sleep at night, I believe you,” John said, with as much
vitriol as he could put into the words, and had the bleak satisfaction of seeingPercy’s face fall. John sighed.
“What the devil do you want, Perseverance?”
“I—well.” Percy steeled himself enough to look up and meet John’s eyes
directly. “I wanted to say two things to you. First … that I’m sorry. 
Truly
sorry.” John stared at him for a moment, then nodded.
“All right. I believe that, too, for what it’s worth. Which is not all that
much, as I’ll likely be dead soon, but still. And the second.”
“That I love you.” The words came softly, seeming to be addressed to the
tabletop rather than John, but he heard them and was both shocked and
annoyed to feel a small lump in his throat. He looked down, too, not
answering. The sounds of the river and the marsh and the distant sea washed
through the tiny room, and he could feel the blood pulsing in his fingertips
where they rested on the rough wood.
I’m alive. I don’t know how to be anything else.
 He cleared his throat.
“Why do you suppose pelicans don’t call out?” he said. “Gulls scream and
cackle like witches, all the time, but I never hear the pelicans make any sort
of noise.”
“I don’t know.” Percy’s voice was stronger now, though he also had to
stop to clear his throat. “I—that’s all I wanted—all I 
needed
 to say to you,
John. Have you … anything to say to me?”
“God. Where would I start?” But he didn’t say it unkindly. “No. Or—no,
wait. There’s one thing.” The notion had just come to him, and he doubted
that it would be of any help; Percy was a coward and always would be. But
maybe … He straightened up and leaned toward Percy, the chain rattling on
the floor.
“Richardson doesn’t allow me paper or ink—probably thinking I’ll try to
toss a message to some passing boat below. I can’t write to anyone—last
words, I mean, or farewell, or what-have-you. I gather you have some
freedom, though.” He’d seen, from his port, Percy being rowed ashore now
and then, presumably doing errands for Richardson. “If you can, will you at
least go to my house—it’s Number Twelve Oglethorpe Street—”
“I know where it is.” Percy was pale, but his face had settled on its bones.
“Of course you do. Well, if you meant what you just said, then for the sake
of any love you’ve ever had for me—go and tell my son that I love him.” He
badly wanted to shout, 
“For God’s sake, tell Willie what’s happened! Tell
him to go to Prévost and get help!”
 But Percy was terrified of Richardson
—
and everything else in the world,
 he thought with an exhausted pity—andto ask him to risk something like that was likely to make him run away, get
drunk, or cut his own throat.
“Please,” he added, gently.
It was a long moment, and he imagined he heard the wingbeats of the
pelicans passing soberly over the river below, but Percy nodded at last and
stood up.
“Goodbye, John,” he whispered.
“Goodbye, Perseverance.”152
Titus Andronicus
WILLIAM CAME BACK TO the house after yet another unfruitful search of
the docks and the taverns on the roads leading out of Savannah, to find
Amaranthus pacing to and fro in the front garden.
“
There
 you are,” she said, in a tone mingling accusation and relief. “A
man’s come; I saw him at Mrs. Fleury’s tea, but I don’t know his name. He
says he’s a friend of Lord John’s and he knows you. I’ve put him in the
parlor.”
He found the man who’d been introduced to him at Mrs. Fleury’s as the
Cavalier Saint-Honoré in the parlor. He’d picked up one of Lord John’s
treasured Meissen plates from the sideboard, and was running a finger gently
round the gilt edging. Yes, it was the same man, a Frenchman; he’d seen him
briefly at Madame Prévost’s luncheon, too.
“Your servant, sir. 
Puis-je vous aider?
” William asked, in as neutral a
voice as he could manage. The man turned round and his face changed as he
saw William, going from exhaustion and strain to something like relief.
“Lord Ellesmere?” he said, in a thoroughly English accent.
William was too tired and in much too bad a temper to make either
inquiries or explanations.
“Yes,” he said brusquely. “What do you want?” The fellow was much less
soigné
 than when last seen; minus his wig, his hair was short and curly,
frosted with gray and matted with sweat, and his linen was soiled, his
expensive suit crumpled.
“My name is—Percy Wainwright,” the fellow said, as though not quite
sure that it was. “I am … I 
was
 … well, I suppose I still am, come to think …
I’m Lord John’s stepbrother.”
“What?” By reflex, William grabbed the Meissen plate before the fellow
could drop it, and set it back on the sideboard. “What the devil do you mean,stepbrother? I’ve never heard of a stepbrother.”
“I don’t suppose you would have.” A faint grimace that might have started
as a smile faded, leaving Wainwright’s face pale and exhausted.
“The family no doubt did their best to expunge me from memory, after …
well, that’s of no account. There was a rupture, and a parting of ways—but I
still consider John my brother.” He swallowed, swaying a little, and William
thought the man was unwell.
“Sit down,” he said, grabbing one of the small armchairs and turning it
round, “and tell me what’s going on. Do you know where Lord John is?”
Wainwright shook his head.
“No. I mean … yes, but he’s not …”
“Filius canis,”
 William muttered. He glanced round and saw Amaranthus,
lurking curiously just outside the door, and jerked his chin at her as though
she were the maid. “Get us some brandy, please.”
He didn’t wait for it to arrive, but sat down opposite Wainwright. His
stomach had curled up into a ball, tight with apprehension and excitement.
“Where did you last see him?” he asked, hoping to restore Wainwright to
coherence by means of simple, logical questions. Rather to his surprise, it
worked.
“Aboard a ship,” Wainwright said, and straightened up a little. “An—an
Indiaman, called the 
Pallas.
 A Greek name, I mean—a god of some kind?”
“The god of battle,” Amaranthus said, coming in with a glass of brandy on
a tray. She eyed Wainwright narrowly, then glanced at William, lifting a
brow. Should she stay or go? He gestured briefly to another chair and turned
back to Wainwright.
“A ship. All right. Where is this ship?”
“I don’t know. They—they move it. They were lifting anchor as I—as I
left. I didn’t abandon him!” he cried, seeing William’s frown. “I—I would
never have left him, but I could do him no good, and I thought—well, he told
me, in fact. He told me to go and to find you.”
Amaranthus made a small hum, expressing doubt. William shared it, but
no choice but to go on and hope the man could be encouraged to make more
sense.
“Of course,” he said, trying to be soothing. “And what did he tell you to
say when you did find me?”
“He didn’t … say … exactly. I mean, there wasn’t time for a message, they
were getting ready—”“More brandy?” Amaranthus asked, getting her feet under her.
“Not yet.” William raised a hand and she sat down, her eyes fixed warily
on Wainwright, who was looking more wretched by the moment. All three of
them were silent, while Lord John’s clock ticked peacefully on the
mantelpiece, the cloisonné butterfly within its dome slowly raising and
lowering its blue and gold wings. At last Wainwright looked up from his
tight-folded hands.
“It’s my fault,” he said. His voice trembled. “I didn’t know, I swear it. But
—” He licked his lips and squared his shoulders. “Lord John has been
kidnapped and is in the hands of a madman. He is in great danger. And yes,
please, more brandy.”
“In a moment,” Amaranthus said, sitting forward on the edge of her seat.
“Tell us who this madman 
is,
 if you please.”
Wainwright looked at her and blinked.
“Oh. His name is Richardson. Ezekiel Richardson.”
“Jesus fucking 
Christ
!” William was on his feet and had jerked
Wainwright out of his chair by his shirtfront in an instant. “What the devil
does he want with my father? Tell me, God damn it!”
“Oh,” said Amaranthus, rising. “So he really 
is
 a madman? Maybe you’d
best put Mr. Wainwright down, William; he can’t talk like that.”
William reluctantly did so. The blood was pounding through his temples,
and he felt as though his head would explode any minute. He let go of
Wainwright and stepped back, breathing as evenly as he could.
“Tell me,” he said again. Wainwright was trembling all over now, and
sweating heavily, but he nodded, jerky as a puppet, and began to talk.
It took several minutes to get it all out, but Wainwright gradually calmed
as he spoke and at last fell silent, staring at the green figured carpet under his
feet. William and Amaranthus exchanged glances over his bowed head.
“So this gentleman—well, this 
person,
” Amaranthus said, mouth pursed as
though to spit, “wants the duke 
not
 to go to England and tell Lord North
things about the war, and so he’s kidnapped Lord John and is threatening to
kill him unless your uncle acquiesces?” She sounded incredulous, William
thought. Richardson’s letter 
had
 been hard to believe, but to hear the facts
like this … Wainwright was nodding.
“That’s it,” he said, dully. “He—has his own reasons for wanting the war
to continue, and he thinks Pardloe might be able to convince the prime
minister otherwise.”“Well, he wouldn’t be the only one with an interest in the war continuing,”
William said, beginning to get hold of himself. “War is an expensive business
—and that means the men who supply it are making a lot of money. I can
think of two or three who might want to stop the duke from spreading notions
to the contrary around England. But Richardson—” He eyed Wainwright
narrowly, but the man gave no sign of deliberate deception—or of anything,
really, save profound distress.
“I told you, I know this Richardson,” William said abruptly, turning to
Amaranthus. “And God help me, I think he likely 
is
 mad. Some of the things
he’s done …” He shook his head.
“Wait here,” he said to Wainwright, and put out a hand to Amaranthus.
“Come with me for a moment.”
THE HOUSE WAS quiet; Moira had gone to market and Miss Crabb was
lying down. Even Trevor was asleep, thank God. Still, William guided
Amaranthus out into the garden, just in case. Sight of the little grape-bower
made him think vaguely that neither of them had mentioned his proposal
since their return, but the thought vanished like smoke.
“What do you think?” he asked, glancing back over his shoulder at the
house.
“I think there must be more truth to the letter this Richardson sent than we
even thought. Mr. Wainwright seems more or less sane, but I don’t know
about Captain Richardson—is that his rank, captain?”
“Well, it was when he was on 
our
 side,” William said with a shrug. “He’s
turned his coat now, and I think the Americans may have given him a major’s
commission, or even a colonelcy of some kind; they poach officers from
European armies with rank because they haven’t got any money. The
Americans, I mean.”
“So this Richardson is a turncoat 
and
 a madman? The Americans seem not
to be very choosy, do they?”
“I gather they made James Fraser a general, if that tells you anything.”
Her eyebrows shot up in surprise.
“I do hope 
he
 isn’t mad,” she said, and looked at William speculatively. “I
don’t believe that treason shows up in the blood, necessarily, but I’m
reasonably sure madness is inheritable. Look at the King, I mean.”“No,” William said. “Mr. Fraser may be a good many things, but he’s not
mad. And I agree with you about Mr. Wainwright. He may be telling the truth
about being Papa’s stepbrother; my grandmother Benedicta married a
widower, and he may well have had a son. But his being Papa’s stepbrother is
just an explanation for his concern, isn’t it?”
“You mean he might have another reason for coming to find you?”
Amaranthus leaned to the side, looking round William toward the house.
“Maybe.” William dismissed this with a wave of the hand. “But the basic
facts are—according to him 
and
 the letter, now—these: one, Papa is actually
in the hands of Richardson, who is bloody dangerous. Two, Richardson
apparently is holding him hostage in order to compel Uncle Hal to do—or
rather, 
not
 do something. And three, no matter whether it’s possible for
anyone whatever to compel Uncle Hal to do anything whatever—he bloody
isn’t here to do it, anyway.”
“Well, but that’s good, isn’t it?” Amaranthus objected. “Presumably, if the
only reason this Richardson is keeping your father is to make the duke do
what he wants, then Lord John is safe, as long as the duke can’t be found.
Isn’t he?”
“Mmphm,” William said, in dubious agreement. “I don’t know;
Wainwright says my father’s in danger, and he must have reason for thinking
that. Regardless, I have to find him, and as quickly as possible. If Richardson
is truly mad, then he’s unpredictable; he might take a sudden whim and toss
Papa overboard in the middle of the sea—or sail away to the West Indies.”
The thought struck him like an ice pick in the heart. In the shock of
Wainwright’s appearance, he’d momentarily forgotten the most important
thing the man had said.
“He said they were preparing to move it just as he lef—” He seized her
arm so suddenly that she yelped. “I have to go to the docks! If they haven’t
sailed—”
“But they have! He said they were lifting the anchor—they’ll be gone by
now!”
“Come on, I need to find out where that ship is—or was!” He let go of her
arm and, turning, ran toward the house, Amaranthus hard on his heels.
William hit the corridor at a dead run, scaring Moira, who was coming
down it with her huge shopping basket overflowing with fish and loaves of
bread. She leapt out of the way but lost her grip on the basket. William heard
feminine cries behind him but didn’t stop.The door to the parlor was standing ajar and he was vaguely conscious of a
smell as he shoved it open. Brandy. And … vomit.
The source of both was Percy Wainwright, who was lying on the floor,
curled up like a hedgehog, his back heaving as he retched. He’d thrown up
profusely already, but the smell was overlain by the stronger reek of spilled
brandy.
“Jesus,” William said, swallowed, and knelt to grab Wainwright by the
shoulder. “Moira!” he shouted, seeing the man’s face. “Amaranthus! Get a
doctor! Bring some water and salt, quick!”
Wainwright was conscious, but his face was clenched like a baby’s fist, all
lumps and lines. His lips were blue—actually blue. William hadn’t seen that
before, but he knew it wasn’t good.
“What happened?” he asked urgently, trying to unfold Wainwright and get
him into a more comfortable position. “What’s the matter with you?”
Wainwright heard him. He brought one trembling hand to his chest,
pressed hard in the middle.
“It’s … it won’t … I can’t …”
William had seen Mother Claire take someone’s pulse, more than once,
and he hastily pressed his fingers at the side of Wainwright’s neck. He didn’t
feel anything, moved his fingers, nothing … there. He’d felt a single throb.
And then another. One more—then a light, rapid tapping—but this was
nothing like the way a heart should beat.
“Here’s water and the saltcellar.” Amaranthus spoke behind him,
breathless. “Moira’s gone for Dr. Erasmus. What’s wrong with him?”
“Oh, God, he must have drunk the brandy!” The pulse—if that’s what it
was—was getting slower, and Wainwright’s body twisted, mouth gaping
open, looking for air. “His heart, I think, maybe … Here, give me it!” He
took the carafe from her hand and sloshed some over Wainwright’s face,
making him open his eyes, then poured a little into his open mouth. It ran out
at the side, and so did the next try.
“Salt?” Amaranthus said, very doubtfully.
“You give it to soldiers with heatstroke,” William said, and having no
other possibility to hand, grabbed the saltcellar and spooned salt onto the
back of Wainwright’s tongue, trying to wash it down with water.
That worked, to the point that it did make Wainwright come to himself
sufficiently as to swallow, but within a few moments a new spasm seized himand he belched everything up in a spew of salt, water … and blood. Not a 
lot
of blood, but the sight alarmed William beyond anything he’d seen so far.
“Brandy,” he said urgently, and sat back on his heels. It was the most
popular remedy for almost anything, maybe … He spotted the bottle on the
floor and grabbed it, hearing Amaranthus’s cry even as his fingers touched
the round black glassy curve.
“Not 
that
 one!” she said, and bent to snatch it from his hand. It slipped and
rolled across the rug, spilling the last of its aromatic reddish drops and
displaying its label: 
Blut der Märtyrer.
Wainwright made a soft gurgling noise that faded into a sigh, echoed by
the faint sputter of his loosened bowels.
There was a deep silence in the room, but beyond it, William heard the
faint cries of distant gulls.
“Jesus,” he said softly. “The ship will have sailed by now.”153
Special Delivery
I WAS IN THE garden, sowing turnips and talking to the bees, who were
beginning to float through the air in ones and twos, following the elusive
scents of early dogwood and redbud, when I heard the faint rumble of a
wagon coming up the road to the dooryard. Then I heard an unmistakable
yodeling hail, borne on the breeze.
“That’s John Quincy!” I said to the bees, and laying down my trowel I
hurried to the house, rubbing dirt from my hands with my apron.
It was indeed John Quincy, beaming with delight.
“Brung you-all a special delivery, Missus,” he said, and pulled the canvas
off the load in his wagon, revealing the excited faces of Germain, Joanie, and
Félicité, where they had been hiding, packed in amongst his boxes and
barrels like heads of cabbage.
“Grand-mère!”
 “Grannie!” “Grandma!” The children leapt out of the
wagon and rushed to me, all talking at once. I was hugging everyone,
overwhelmed by the gangly, long-legged bodies of the girls and the sweetly
grubby scent of unwashed children. Germain stood back, smiling shyly, but
then Jamie came round the corner of the house and shouted, “Germain!” and
Germain broke into a run and leapt into his grandfather’s arms, nearly
knocking him flat.
Jamie grunted from the impact, laughed and kissed him, then looked up at
John Quincy, the question clear in his eyes. 
Where are the rest of them?
What’s happened?
“Fergus and Marsali send ye their kind love,” John Quincy assured him,
interpreting his look. “And they’re all well. They thought as how it might be
healthier for the little’uns to have some mountain air, though, so when I
passed through Wilmington, they asked would I bring ’em on. Fine company
they’ve been, too!”“Healthier,” Jamie repeated, eyes still fixed on John Quincy, who nodded.
Germain’s arms were still locked around Jamie’s waist, his face buried in
Jamie’s shirt. He patted the boy’s back. “Aye. I expect so. Come along in and
hae a bite and a whet. There’s fresh buttermilk and the girls have made beer.”
GERMAIN HAD CHANGED. Children 
do,
 of course, and with astonishing
rapidity, but he had taken that abrupt step across the chasm into puberty
while he was away, and seeing the new edition was something of a shock. It
wasn’t only that he was taller—though he was, by a good four inches—it was
that the bones of his face now framed a man’s eyes, and those eyes kept
careful watch on his sisters, and on any threat to them.
We’d made a fuss of everyone and brought them and John Quincy in to
eat. The girls kissed me, then flung themselves on Jamie with cries of joy,
questioning and exclaiming in horror at the bandage round his knee and the
raw scar on his arm, the healed and half-healed ones on his chest …
“
Grand-père
 will be fine,” I said firmly, luring them away with molasses
cookies. “All he needs is rest.” I flicked my eyebrows upward, indicating that
he might decamp to the bedroom, but he smiled and shook his head.
“I’ll do, 
a nighean.
 And surely ye dinna think I’d leave whilst ye have a
bowlful of sweeties in your hand?”
Fanny poured milk for everyone, smiling—with a special smile for
Germain, who went pink in the face and buried his nose in his cup—and I
passed out cookies.
“I thank ye kindly, Missus,” John Quincy said, and nibbled his cookie like
a mouse, his teeth not allowing for more robust eating. “Germain, did ye give
your grandpa and grannie what you brought for ’em?”
“Oh!” Germain clapped a hand to the small leather bag he carried, with a
strap across his chest. He gave Jamie a slightly guilty look, but reached into
the bag and handed the letter to me, as I was closest. It was written on good
rag paper and sealed with green wax.
“For you and 
Grand-père,
” he said, frowning as his voice soared and broke
in the middle of the last word. 
“Grand-père,”
 he repeated, in a voice as deep
as he could make it. I kept my face as grave as possible, and broke the seal.
Milord, Milady—There was an Event last Month, here in Wilmington, that disturbed
us greatly. I will not describe this because while I trust all my
Children entirely, it is not at all uncommon for the Seals of Letters to
be broken by Accident. Leave it that two Men were killed, and in a
way that caused us great Uneasiness. It is somewhat ironic that we
left Richmond, feeling it Unsafe, and returned to the familiar Ground
of North Carolina.
I wished Marsali and the Children all to return to you, and if
Things become worse, she promises that she and the Twins will go to
the 
Ridge. But for now, she says that she will not leave me—and I
cannot leave undone the Work of Freedom to which I am called. You
put the Sword into my Hand, milord, and I will not lay it down.
Votre fils et votre fille,
Fergus Claudel Fraser
Marsali Jane MacKimmie Fraser
“Oh,” I said softly. Germain’s lips were pressed tight and his eyes were
shiny. “Germain,” I said, and kissed his forehead. “We’re 
so
 glad to see you.
And what a wonderful job you’ve done, seeing your sisters safely all this
way.”
“Mph,” he said, but looked somewhat happier.
TWO DAYS LATER, we were up in our bedroom in midafternoon, me
attempting to read 
Manon Lescaut
 in French while preventing Jamie from
executing a quiet sneak to avoid what he referred to as the third level of
Purgatory.
“Have any o’ the bairns told ye what Fergus’s unpleasant event was,
Sassenach?” Jamie paused in the midst of a set of the exercises I had set for
him, and I frowned at him.
“You’re just trying to get out of the lunges,” I said. “I 
know
 it hurts. Do it
anyway, if you ever expect to walk without a stick again.” He gave me a
long, level look, then shook his head.
“When pain and anguish wring the brow, A ministering angel thou,”
 he
muttered.
I laughed.“O, Woman, in our hours of ease,”
 I quoted back, “
uncertain, coy, and
hard to please.
 Where the devil did you get that one?”
“Roger Mac,” he said, gingerly bending his bad knee while easing his
weight onto it. 
“Ifrinn!”
“Someone—or several someones—shoot you full of holes and fracture
your sternum and you don’t make a peep,” I observed. “Ask you to stretch a
few muscles …”
“I was busy dying,” he said through gritted teeth. “And if ye think it’s
simple to talk wi’ a fractured sternum … Oh, God …”
“Just three more,” I coaxed. “If you promise to do your arm rotations and
push-ups next, I’ll go and talk to Fanny. Germain’s spent a lot of time with
her since he came back; if he’s told anyone, it will be her.”
He made a noise that I took for agreement, and I sponged his face with a
damp towel and went to find Fanny. She was luckily in the root cellar, and
alone.
“Oh,” she said, when I explained my curiosity. “Yes, he did. I asked him,”
she added honestly. “He said he didn’t mind telling me, but he didn’t want
his little sisters or the other girls to find out. I’m sure he didn’t mean you,
though,” she assured me.
War was everywhere, and so it was no surprise to hear that Fergus’s new
printshop in Wilmington had suffered the same sort of petty vandalism and
anonymous threats shoved under the door as had happened in Charles Town.
Nothing worse had happened, though, and the town as a whole was fairly
quiet.
The family took good care to bolt their doors at night and latch their
shutters, but they felt safe in the daytime.
“Germain and Mr. Fergus were working the press, he said, and his mam
and the girls had gone out. Two men came in, and Germain went to the
counter to see what they wanted.”
One man had said he wanted to see the proprietor, well enough. But the
other had a short fowling piece under his coat and Germain saw it. He didn’t
know what to do, but stuttered out that he’d fetch his father. He’d turned to
go back to the press, when the first man quickly opened the hatch in the
counter and pushed Germain to the floor. Both men ran through toward the
back room where Fergus was working, but Germain managed to cling to the
leg of the second man and shriek at the top of his lungs.“He said he was looking straight up into the barrel of the gun,” Fanny said,
her eyes wide with the telling. “He thought he’d be kilt any moment, and I
suppose he might have been, save Mr. Fergus shot out of the back room with
a ladle full of hot lead from the forge and flung it at the first man.”
Not unreasonably, the man had bellowed in pain and panic, turned and
tried to run, blind, had tripped over Germain, still on the floor, and crashed
into the second man, who was trying to raise his gun.
“Mr. Fergus grabbed hold of the gun with his one hand, Germain said, and
they fought over it and the other man was crawling about the floor screaming.
Then the gun went off and blew a hole in the ceiling, and there was plaster
and pieces of wood everywhere. Germain was too scared to move, but his
father had a big pistol in a holster and got it out and shot the man right in the
head.” Fanny swallowed, looking a little ill. “And … then he told Germain to
go in the back room and he did, but he looked out and saw his father kneel
down and shoot the other man in the head, too. He said Mr. Fergus’s gun was
a special two-barreled 
canon,
” she added, obviously impressed by this detail.
“Because he only has one hand.”
“Oh, dear Lord.” I felt almost as shocked as though I had seen it myself—
the printshop splattered with blood and broken plaster, Fergus white-faced
and shaking with reaction, and Germain frozen with shock.
“Germain and his papa had to haul the bodies out the back door into the
alley before his mama and the girls came back. He said his little brothers
were screeching in their cradle, but they couldn’t stop to do anything about
it.”
They had put the bodies under some rubbish and then swept the shop and
cleaned things as well as they could, and when Germain’s mama came home
with the girls, his papa told Germain to take the girls to the ordinary and
bring back food for supper. Mr. Fergus must have told Germain’s mama what
happened, because she was gone when he came back, and then she came in a
little while later and said something quiet to Mr. Fergus, and Germain heard a
wagon in the alley that night and when he peeked out in the morning, the men
were gone.
“Germain thinks it was the Wilmington Sons of Liberty who came and
took the men away,” Fanny said seriously. “His papa knows all of them.”
“I … would suppose so,” I murmured, feeling somewhat thankful that at
least Fergus and Marsali weren’t completely without support and protection.
That knowledge did nothing for the ball of ice that had formed in my chest.“I cannot leave undone the Work of Freedom to which I am called.”
“Oh, Marsali,” I said, under my breath. “Oh, dear.”
I WOKE TO the whisper of falling snow, and the strange gray snow-light
seeping through the shutters. Peeping out, I saw the world of the forest—dark
conifers and the sprouts of spring plants alike—robed in a pure and delicate
white. It was a spring snow and would be gone in hours—but for the
moment, it was beautiful, and I put my hand against the cold windowpane
and breathed its freshness, wanting to be part of it.
Jamie was still asleep, and I made no move to wake him; Roger would tend
the livestock this morning, assisted by the younger children. I tiptoed out of
the room and made my way down to the kitchen, where Silvia and Fanny
were sitting at the table, nibbling toast before beginning to make breakfast.
Bree was dozing in the corner of the settle, Davy at her breast, making
smacking noises as he nursed.
I yawned, blinked, and nodded, but didn’t join them. I’d made beef tea the
day before and thought that perhaps a nice hot cuppa would hearten Jamie on
his rising.
He’d had a bad night; one of those nights that everyone over the age of
forty has now and then, when the body is beset by cramping muscles, aching
joints, and sudden jactitations that jerk you from the edge of sleep as though
you’ve been tossed off a gallows. And in his case, doubtless the sudden
searing of his mostly healed wounds as he twitched and turned.
He was awake when I came upstairs, sitting on the edge of the bed in his
shirt, rumpled, stubbled, and apparently still half asleep, his shoulders
slumped, hands hanging between his thighs.
I set down the two cups I’d brought and ran a hand gently over his tousled
hair.
“How do you feel this morning?” I said.
He groaned and opened his eyes a little more.
“Like someone’s stepped on my cock.”
“Really? Who?” I asked lightly.
He closed his eyes again. “I dinna ken, but it feels like it was someone
heavy.”
“Mmm.” I put a hand to his forehead; he was warm, but warm from bed,
not feverish. I fetched a cup of beef tea and put it into his hand. He breathedin the steam, then took a sip, but set it aside and stretched himself slowly,
groaning.
I eyed him for a moment, then knelt down on the floor in front of him and
took hold of the hem of his shirt. “Let me see about that,” I said.
His eyes opened all the way and fixed on me. “Ye do ken what a metaphor
is, Sassenach …” he began, making an abortive effort to catch my hands, but
my touch, very warm from the teacups, made him exhale and lean back a
little.
“Hmm …” I rubbed a little with both hands, slowly. “I 
think
 your
circulation is in order …. Any bruising?”
“Well, not 
yet,
” he said, sounding mildly apprehensive. “Sassenach. Would
ye—”
I pushed the shirt back and bent down, and he stopped speaking abruptly. I
reached farther under, making him spread his thighs by reflex, and saw the
small curly hairs rise.
“Would ye let go my balls, Sassenach?” he said, stirring restively. “It’s not
that I dinna trust ye, but—”
“I’m checking for any sign of an incipient hernia,” I told him, and ran two
fingers well up, probing gently into the deep heat of the flesh between his
legs. His thighs were lean and chilly, but …
“Oh, I’ve got an incipience,” he said, squirming a little. “But I’m sure it’s
no a hernia. 
Now
 what the devil are ye doing?”
I’d let go. Turning, I reached over to the small bedside table where I’d left
a scatter of things—things turned out of my apron pockets at night and not
always retrieved in the mornings. The bluestone Corporal Jackson had sent
me was there, and I picked it out of the litter, rubbing it between my hands to
warm it. There was a little bottle of sweet oil on the table, too, and I dribbled
a bit onto the stone. Jamie was watching this process, still apprehensive.
“If ye mean to stick that up my arse, Sassenach,” he said, “I’d be very
much obliged if ye didn’t.”
“You might enjoy it,” I suggested, and took hold of him with one hand,
applying the warm, oiled stone in a therapeutic manner with the other.
“Aye, that’s what I’m afraid of.” But he’d relaxed a little, leaning back on
his hands. And then relaxed a little more, sighing, his eyes closing again. I
went on with the slow massage but reached out with my other hand and
picked up one of the cups, taking a mouthful of the still-hot beef tea. It tastedwonderful, soothing and delicious. I swallowed, set down the cup, and put
my mouth on him.
His eyes flew open and his hands clenched on the bedclothes.
“Hmmm?” I said.
He said something in Gaelic under his breath, but it wasn’t a word I knew.
I laughed, but silently, and knew he felt the vibration; his hand was resting on
my back, large and warm.
Something had happened between us, on the battlefield, and while most of
it had gone, I could still feel the echoes of his body in a deeper way than I
had before. I felt the blood rise in him, pulsing, warming his skin, and the air
he breathed, deep and pure in my own lungs.
Suddenly his hands were under my arms, and he lifted me, urgent.
“Inside ye,” he said, his voice husky. “I want to be inside ye.”
I scrambled up in a flurry of skirts, and he lay back on the bed. A brief
scuffle and then that sudden, solid, gliding joining that was never a shock and
always a shock. Both of us sighed and settled into each other.
I lay on him moments later, feeling his heart beat under me, slow and
strong. I breathed in and smelled the deep, bitter tang of him.
“You smell wonderful,” I said. I felt drowsy and deeply happy.
“What?” He lifted his head and turned it, sniffing down the collar of his
shirt. “Jesus, I stink like a dead boar.”
“You do,” I said. “Thank God.”154
Never Fear to Negotiate; Never Negotiate
from Fear
I WAS SMASHING LUMPS of asafetida resin with a hammer when Jamie
stuck his head into my surgery.
“Jesus, Sassenach.” He pinched his nose between two fingers. “What the
devil is that? And why are ye pounding it with a hammer?”
“Asafetida,” I said, letting out the breath I’d been holding and taking a step
backward. “First you extract the resin from the roots of the 
Ferula
 plant,
which is relatively simple—but the resin is very hard and you can’t grate it,
so you have to smash the lumps with a hammer—or stones, if you haven’t a
hammer. Um …” It occurred to me that the hammer I had was in fact his, and
I reversed it in my hand, offering it to him hilt-first like a surrendered sword.
“Do you want it back?”
He took the hammer, inspected it at arm’s length for damage, then shook
his head and handed it back.
“It’s all right. Wash it before ye bring it back to me, aye? Is that the stuff
they call devil’s dung?”
“Well, yes. But I’m told that the people where it grows use it as a spice. In
food, I mean.”
He looked as though he wanted to spit, but refrained. “Who told ye that?”
“John Grey. It probably tastes better when cooked,” I said hurriedly. “Did
you come in here for something, or were you just looking for your hammer?”
“Och. Aye, I was sent to ask will ye come be a witness.”
“To what?” I was already rubbing charcoal dust over my hands to kill the
stink.
“I’m no altogether sure. Right now, it’s a wee stramash, but it 
might
 be a
wedding, if they’ll quit cryin’ themselves down to each other.”I didn’t waste time asking for details, but quickly rinsed away the charcoal
and dried my hands on my apron as I followed him down the hall to the
parlor.
Rachel, Ian, Jenny, and Silvia Hardman were there, along with Prudence,
Patience, and Chastity, and so were Bobby Higgins and his sons, Aidan,
Orrie, and Rob. The Hardmans and the Higginses were drawn up like
opposing armies, Silvia and her daughters on the settee with Bobby facing
them from the depths of Jamie’s big chair, Aidan standing by his side and
Orrie and 
Rob sitting—insofar as one can use such a word when describing
young males under the age of six—on the carpet at his feet.
Rachel, Jenny, and Ian stood at the end of the settee. Everyone turned to
look when we came in, and I sensed at once a tumultuous atmosphere in the
room. It wasn’t as though they were quarreling, but clearly there was some
tension.
Jamie touched the small of my back and guided me to Bobby’s side of the
room, where he himself took up a station behind the big chair.
“We’re fettled,” he announced. “What was it ye were sayin’ as I left,
Friend Silvia?”
She gave him a narrow look and drew herself up with dignity.
“I said to Friend Higgins,” she said evenly, “that he should know that I
have the name of a whore.”
“So I was told,” Bobby said, diplomatically not saying who told him. He
looked at her and touched the faded—but still stark—white brand on his
cheek. “I’m a convicted murderer. I think maybe you should be more
bothered than me.”
A pink tinge crept into Silvia’s cheeks, but she didn’t look away.
“I didn’t need telling,” she said, “but I thank thee for thy consideration.
While as a Friend, I must naturally deplore violence, I understand that thy
circumstances were such as to cause thee to believe that thee did no more
than thy duty.”
Bobby looked down briefly, but his eyes came back to hers.
“That’s true,” he said quietly, and leaning forward he reached out to cup
his hand lightly around Chastity’s soft cheek. “I reckon you were doing
yours.”
Her mouth opened, but no words came out, and I saw that her eyes were
bright with unshed tears. She managed a jerky little nod, and Patience andPrudence emitted little hums of approval, though they sat bolt upright, hands
neatly folded in their laps.
“I’m a soldier no more,” Bobby said. “I’ll willingly swear—if swearing
doesn’t displease you, I mean—not to take up arms again, save to hunt for
food. And I, um, reckon you don’t mean to … er … return to your former
circumstances?”
Silvia glanced at Jamie, her long upper lip drawn down over the lower one.
“No, she doesn’t,” Jamie said firmly. “Never.”
Bobby nodded.
“So,” Bobby said, sitting back and looking at her very straight. “Will thee
marry me, Friend?”
She swallowed, eyes very bright, and leaned forward, but Aidan forestalled
her reply.
“Please do marry him, Mrs. Hardman,” he said urgently. “He can’t cook
anything but porridge and beans with burnt bacon.”
“And thee thinks I can?” she said, the corner of her mouth twitching.
“She’s not a good cook, either,” said Prudence, as one required to be
truthful. “But she 
can
 bake bread.”
“And 
we
 know how to make stew out of turnips and potatoes and beans
and onions and a pork bone,” Patience put in. “We wouldn’t let thee starve.”
Silvia, quite pink in the face by this time, cleared her throat in a monitory
sort of way.
“If thee can shoot an animal for the pot, Friend Higgins, I believe I can
butcher and roast it,” she said. “You can always cut off the burnt bits.”
“Grand!” said Aidan, delighted. “So it’s a bargain, is it?”
“Well, it might be, if you’ll stop talking,” Bobby said, giving Aidan a look
of mild exasperation.
“Daddy?” said Chastity brightly, holding out her arms to Bobby. Silvia
went bright red, and everyone laughed. She put a hand over Chastity’s mouth.
“I will,” she said.155
Quaker Wedding, Redux
JAMIE REMEMBERED THE FIRST Quaker wedding he’d attended,
vividly. It had been in Philadelphia, in a Methodist church, and the
congregation had consisted largely of Friends—the sort who were for liberty
—plus a couple of English soldiers in full-dress uniform, though Lord John
and the Duke of Pardloe had tactfully left their swords at home. The service
had been unique, and he thought the same was likely to be the case today.
The most striking thing about this one was the number of children present.
There were two benches at the head of the Meeting House, with the entire
Higgins family seated on one, and all of the Hardmans on the other. Bree and
Roger sat down front, Brianna with wee Davy in her arms. Fanny, Jem,
Amanda, Tòtis, Germain, Joanie, and Félicité (so aptly called Fizzy) were
squirming on the bench in front of Claire and himself, presumably on the
theory that a soft but menacing clearing of the throat on his part would ensure
restraint on theirs. He hummed a bit, low in his chest, to make sure his voice
was in good order, and saw Jem and Germain stiffen slightly. Good.
His breastbone still hurt when he took a deep breath, but he 
could
 take a
deep breath, and he thanked God for that.
He’d walked all the way to church. Slowly, and his left knee hurt like the
devil, but his heart was light. He was alive, he could walk, Claire was beside
him, and death was once more a matter that he needn’t fash himself about.
Bobby Higgins abruptly stood up, and the congregation hushed instantly.
“I thank you all for comin’ here today,” he said, but it came out squeaky
and he cleared his throat audibly and repeated it, nodding to the congregation.
His face was flushed—he was very shy, and no orator—but he stood steady
and held out his hand to Silvia, who was pale but poised. She stood, took his
hand, and turned to the congregation herself.
“As Robert says, we thank thee for coming,” she said simply.“I’ve not done this before,” Bobby said to her. “You’ll maybe need to
guide me.”
“It’s not difficult,” Patience Hardman said, encouragingly.
“No,” Prudence agreed. “All thee has to say is that thee marries her.”
“Well, but he has to say he’ll feed her—well, us—doesn’t he?” Prudence
put in. “And protect us?”
“He might say that,” Patience agreed dubiously. “But he doesn’t 
have
 to. ‘I
marry thee’ is enough. Isn’t it, Mummy?”
Silvia had her eyes squinched shut and was rapidly turning as red as her
husband-to-be.
“Girls,” she murmured. 
“Please.”
The ripple of amusement among the congregation died away. Bobby and
Silvia looked at each other, away, faces flaming, then back. Aidan McCallum
stood up from the bench and walked up beside his stepfather. Aidan was
thirteen and nearly as tall as Bobby.
“It’s all right, Da,” he said, and turning round he beckoned to his younger
brothers, who scrambled up beside him. He beckoned to the Hardman girls,
who looked at one another in question, then came to a silent agreement and
stood up, too.
“We’re going to marry you,” Aidan said firmly to the girls. “All of us are
marrying all of you. Will you— Oh, sorry, will 
thee
 all marry us all?”
“We will!” Patience and Prudence said together, beaming. Patience bent
down and murmured to Chastity, who turned her cherubic, beaming face on
Rob, said loudly, “I mawwy thee!” and, toddling over, clutched him round
the middle. “Kith me!” she added, and standing on tiptoe, planted a loud
“Mwah!” on his cheek.
It was some time before order was restored.
Jamie’s half-healed sternum hurt amazingly, and he was not the only
member of the congregation who had laughed themselves to tears. He found
that he couldn’t stop, though. Claire handed him a clean handkerchief and he
buried his face in it, remembered grief and present joy and fear and peace all
spilling out like cold, pure water.
EVERYONE CAME DOWN the hill to the New House, where we’d
unpacked the baskets the women had brought and laid out the rudiments of
the wedding feast before leaving for the Meeting House. Now the kitchenwas organized—mostly—chaos, as we rushed to slice fruit and meat and pie
and bread, to shake the butter from its molds and ladle bowls of jelly and
ketchups and sauces and drizzle honey over the roasted yams and chestnuts.
Jamie, Roger, and Young Ian had brought down three barrels of the two-
year-old whisky, and Lizzie and Rachel had made enough beer to drown an
army of thirsty moose; I hoped it would be enough.
I caught a glimpse of Mandy by the window, her curls tied up with a blue
silk bow, earnestly poking bits of food into Chastity’s mouth like a mother
robin feeding her brood, though Chastity was quite old enough to eat with a
spoon by herself. I smiled and looked round for the other girls, only to find
them under my nose, earnestly shoveling succotash into several large wooden
bowls, chattering like magpies.
“You’re so lucky,” Fanny was saying, envy in her voice. “
Three
 brothers!
I’ve never had so much as one!”
Prudence and Patience were quite beside themselves, pink with excitement
under their new starched caps, and both laughed at this.
“We will share them with thee, Frances,” Patience assured her. “Especially
Rob.”
“And we will be thy sisters,” Prudence added kindly. “Thee shall not lack
for family.”
I saw Fanny’s face change and she looked down to hide it, realizing only
then that she had accidentally dropped a spoonful of butter beans and corn
onto the table, instead of into the bowl.
“God 
damn
 it!” she said. Prudence and Patience gasped, and I stepped
forward, meaning to make intervention, but Patience blinked, suddenly
catching sight of something, and I turned to see what she was looking at.
The Crombies had not come to the wedding, feeling that people marrying
each other without benefit of clergy was, if not ungodly, at least slightly
immoral. Roger had pointed out to them that a Quaker ceremony was
essentially the same thing as handfasting, which as Highlanders they abided.
To which Hiram had riposted that handfasting was necessary when there was
no minister to be had, in order to prevent outright sin and illegitimate
children, but as the Ridge had a minister at present, how was it that Mr.
MacKenzie was not personally offended at this refusal of his services?
Rachel had sent Ian up to tell the Crombies that they were more than
welcome to come to the wedding feast afterward, even if they didn’t feel theycould sanction the meeting at which the marriage occurred, but I’d doubted
that any of them would.
And most of them hadn’t. Cyrus, however, was now hovering in the
kitchen door, his eyes fixed resolutely on Fanny, despite the rich blush on his
cheeks. He was dressed in his best Sunday clothes, with what had to be
Hiram’s ancient but well-tended dark-blue plaid over his shoulder, and his
hair braided formally over each ear.
“Er …” I took the spoon from Fanny’s hand and nodded toward Cyrus,
who had a small package wrapped in a linen napkin in one hand. “Why don’t
you take Cyrus to give his congratulations to the happy couple?”
Fanny was as scarlet as Cyrus by this time, but she tidied her cap, brushed
down the front of her good white dress with the blue and yellow embroidery,
and went to meet him with every evidence of self-possession.
“Ooh,” said Patience, with respect. “Is he Fanny’s … 
suitor
?”
“Does Friend Jamie approve of this?” Prudence asked, frowning at them.
“Fanny’s too young for such things, is she not?”
“She’s got her courses,” Patience said, with a shrug. “She told me.”
“But he’s so tall. How could they—”
“It’s a little early to be calling Cyrus anything like that, I think,” I said
firmly. “They’re friends, that’s all. Here, give me a hand with these trays of
fried fish; they’re to go down to the big table under the spruce tree.”
I helped them out to the porch, then stood for a bit, looking over the
festivities. Silvia and Bobby sat in chairs beside each other under the big
white oak, and I saw Fanny leading Cyrus down through the multitudes to
talk to them. It was too early for people to be drunk, but a number of them
would be in another hour or two. People were eating at trestle tables and on
the grass, on the porch and the steps, and the delectable smells of roast pork
and cinnamon cake, laced with whisky fumes, perfumed the air.
My stomach rumbled suddenly, and Jamie, who had come out of the house
behind me, laughed.
“Have ye no eaten anything at all yet, Sassenach?”
“Well … no. I was busy.”
“Well, now ye’re not,” he said firmly, and handed me the plate of buttered
corn, fresh roast pork, and yams with chestnuts he was holding. “Sit down
and eat, 
a nighean.
 Ye’re run off your feet.”
“Well, but there’s still—” I swallowed a mouthful of saliva. “Well, maybe
—”He took my elbow and led me to my rocking chair, this temporarily empty.
I sat, suddenly grateful for the throb of relief that shot up from my ankles to
the back of my neck. Jamie put the plate on my lap and thrust a fork into my
hand.
“Ye’re no going anywhere, Sassenach, until ye’ve eaten that, so dinna be
telling me otherwise. Jem! Bring your grannie some nut bread and some of
the peach cobbler—wi’ a good bit o’ cream on it.”
“I—that’s—well … if you 
insist
 …” I smiled up at him, forked up a bite of
honeyed yams, and closed my eyes, giving myself up to ecstasy.
I opened them, hearing a slight change in the rumble and chatter of the
crowd.
Had the rest of the Crombies come after all? But no—it was a rider on a
gray horse, a single tall man in a tricorne and a dark greatcoat that flapped
like wings as he rode, coming up the wagon road and doing so at the gallop.
“If that’s effing Benjamin Cleveland …” I began, getting my feet under
me. Jamie stopped me with a hand on my shoulder.
“No, it’s not.” Something in his voice brought me slowly to my feet. I set
my plate down beneath the rocking chair and moved next to Jamie. He was
steady enough, but his right hand was folded hard round the head of his stick,
the knuckles white.
People were turning to look at the rider, distracted from their
conversations. Jamie stood stock-still, his face unreadable.
Then the rider came right to the edge of the porch and reined up and my
heart leapt as I saw who it was. William snatched off his hat and bowed from
the saddle. He was breathing hard, his dark hair was pasted to his head with
sweat, and there were hectic patches of red across his broad cheekbones. He
gulped air, his eyes fixed on Jamie.
“Sir,” he said, and swallowed. “I need your help.”